B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

580CHAPTER CLI

580EXPANSION: MULTIPLICATION OF STAKES OF ZION—THE JUBILEE CONFERENCE

580DURING this apostolic presidency—1877-1880—the settlements of the saints throughout the intermountain west were greatly multiplied, and those before established were strengthened by the arrival of new settlers. This was especially true of Arizona locations. In November, 1877, a colony of Latter-day Saints arrived on the San Pedro, in Cochise county, southeast Arizona, and became the founders of St. David and other settlements in that valley. This will be remembered as the valley through which the Mormon Battalion marched, and in which they had their bull fights with the wild cattle of that region in 1846. [^1]

SETTLEMENTS MULTIPLIED IN ARIZONA

About two years later "Mormon" settlers were sent to the Gila river valley, Graham county. They were organized into a ward—26th of September, 1880, known as Smithfield, Joseph K. Rogers, was made bishop. [^2] The number of settlers in this vicinity increased very rapidly; and three years after this first organization four bishop's wards were organized. [^3] The same year—1883—a stake organization was effected known as St. Joseph stake, which included the settlements in the San Pedro valley. Christopher Layton, formerly of Davis county, Utah, was made president, and David P. Kimball, son of the late Heber C. Kimball, and James H. Martineau were his counselors. [^4]

581Early in 1878 the first Latter-day Saint settlers arrived at Mesa, Maricopa county, Arizona, in the Salt River valley, fifteen miles southeasterly from Phoenix, the state capital. Settlements were multiplied in the immediate vicinity of Mesa, and in 1882 they were organized into a stake of Zion. [^5]

On January 27th, 1878, the Latter-day Saints who had settled on the Little Colorado, in Navajo county—under the leadership of Major Lot Smith—by that time grouped into four settlements [^6]—were organized into a stake of Zion, with Lot Smith as president and Jacob Hamblin and Lorenzo H. Hatch as counselors called the Little Colorado stake. Three of the settlements were organized into wards, a bishop being appointed in each, the fourth was made a "branch with a presiding elder." This was the first stake organization effected in Arizona. This Major Lot Smith, now made president of the stake, was the Major Lot Smith of the United States train-burning episode in the "Echo Canon War," and also when young a member of the Mormon Battalion. Before the expiration of the year,—viz., 27th December—President John Taylor directed that the settlements forming further up the Little Colorado, in Apache county, be organized into a stake. A line running southward from Barados (now Holbrook, on the Sante Fe railroad), was to be the dividing line between the two stakes thus proposed. The western division was to be the Little Colorado stake, and the eastern division, Eastern Arizona stake of Zion. [^7] The division of the stakes on these lines was not carried out at that time; the Little Colorado stake consisted of the wards already mentioned at its organization, continued for several years, while the Eastern Arizona stake had within its jurisdiction, for a number of years, the settlements on Silver Creek, in the southeast corner of Navajo county, and also the settlement of St. Johns near the headwater of the Little Colorado, and other minor settlements in Apache county. [^8] In 1887 the directions of President Taylor with reference to the division of these settlements into two stakes were carried into effect. The name of the Eastern Arizona stake, however, was changed at the time of this reorganization—July 23rd, 1887—to St. John's stake, David K. Udall, bishop of St. John's, being chosen president, with Elijah Freeman and Wm. H. Gibbons as counselors. Elders Francis M. Lyman and John H. Smith of the council of the twelve effected the organization. [^9] Later, viz., December 18th, the settlements on the west side of the line running south from Holbrook, on upper Silver Creek, Woodruff ward, and the fragments of settlements formerly constituting the Little Colorado stake,—by now discontinued—were organized under the name of the Snowflake stake of Zion, Jesse N. Smith, formerly of the Eastern Arizona stake being made president. Elder John H. Smith of the council of the twelve effected the organization. [^10]

SETTLERS vs. LARGE STOCK COMPANIES

The settlers in the St. Johns and Snowflake stakes met with great difficulties: first, on account of the nature of the country itself, its variable periods of drought, sometimes long continued, when the parched earth yields little on the ranges for the stock, and makes the supply of water for irrigation purposes uncertain; then came flood periods, that time and again destroyed reservoir dams, and washed out miles of irrigating canals: second, with the great stock companies of the section and period. This was the region of some of the great cattle and sheep companies, occupying the public domain with their herds, sometimes by lease from the government, sometimes by mere usurpation. The cattle and sheep companies and their employers waged fierce war upon each other for possession of the range, and both were opposed to the incoming of the settlers as trespassers upon their preserves. The stock companies often infringed upon the settlers' rights, disturbed their peace, run off their stock and resorted to occasional violence to discourage the saints from settling in the country. [^11] Being "Mormons," the outlaw element of the community felt that they could trespass upon their rights with impunity, and the civil officers gave them none too warm a welcome into the territory. The colonists, however, persisted in their efforts to form and maintain settlements in the face of all these discouraging circumstances. The fighting of the great cattle and sheep companies for possession of range privileges came to an end; the building of more substantial reservoirs mastered the flood problems and the drought periods at the same time, and the saints by the uprightness of their lives, their industry, perseverance, and enterprise proved their value as citizens in the commonwealth, until the prejudices which gave them a cold reception on their advent into Arizona, and slight courtesy from the older settlers gave way to more enlightened policies of friendship; and today [1930] peace and confidence and respect are accorded to the Latter-day Saints of Arizona.

THE SETTLEMENTS IN COLORADO

Colonization EffortsHCDuring this period also settlements were extended into San Luis Park, the "South Park" of Fremont's maps of 1842-4, in the central southern part of Colorado, Conejose county. Converts to the faith in the southern states becoming quite numerous and being desirous of finding a suitable place to which they might be gathered and have the benefit of the church organizations, Elder James Stewart, later prominent, as we have seen, in the Mexican Mission, was appointed in March, 1878, to explore for a location for such a purpose. This resulted finally in the purchase of some Mexican claims in Conejose county, in the San Luis Park, and to this place the converts from the south began to arrive in May of the same year, [^12] forming their settlement at Los Cerritos on the Conejose, a tributary of the Rio Grande. They were joined by a number of settlers from southern parts of Utah—many from San Pete county—and by other companies from the southern states which continued to arrive intermittently through the next ten or twelve years. In 1883—June 10th—the settlements were organized into a stake of Zion called the San Luis stake, with Silas S. Smith, cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as president, and Richard R. Camp and William M. Christensen as his counselors. [^13]

ORGANIZATION OF THE IDAHO SETTLEMENTS

Colonization EffortsHCSettlements were likewise extended into Idaho, in this period of apostolic presidency, [^14] chiefly along the Bear river in Oneida county, 1879. These were Preston,—named in honor of Wm. B. Preston, later the presiding bishop of the church—and Riverdale; and later Marsh valley, in Bingham county; since then "Mormon" settlements have been extended throughout southern and central Idaho, until the Latter-day Saints number now [1930] 89,547 population in Idaho, divided into twenty-five stakes of Zion. [^15]

WYOMING SETTLEMENTS AND STAKES OF ZION

Colonization EffortsHCSettlements were also begun in Wyoming in this period, on Salt river, Uintah county; this under the supervision of Elders Brigham Young—son of the late President Brigham Young—and Moses Thatcher, both of the council of the apostles. They dedicated the valley as a gathering place for the saints on the 29th of August, 1878, when the name "Salt River valley," was changed to "Star valley." [^16] The chief settlement was named Afton, and was organized as a ward in 1887, with Charles D. Cazier as bishop. [^17] For a number of years the settlements in Star valley were included in the Bear Lake stake of Zion, but in 1892 the Star Valley stake was organized with George Osmond, president, and Wm. W. Burton and Anson V. Call as his counselors. [^18]

Colonization EffortsHC585Bunkerville and Mesquite wards were added to the Nevada group of settlements in Lincoln county, in the southeastern part of that state. This in 1879 and 1880 respectively. [^19]

EXTENSION OF SETTLEMENTS IN UTAH

Colonization EffortsHCSettlements were also extended in various outlying regions in Utah. These were chiefly in the eastern part of the territory, on streams direct or indirect tributaries of Green river; such as Cottonwood, Ferron, and Huntington Creeks; and in the extreme southeastern part of the territory in the San Juan valley. Bluff, on the San Juan, is the chief city of this region, and was settled chiefly by people from Iron county, in 1880. [^20] Four years later the settlements in this region were organized into the San Juan stake of Zion, with Francis A. Hammon as president. [^21]

Colonization EffortsHC586Settlements in extreme northeastern part of Utah were made on the Ashley fork of Green river in 1879. Two years later these settlements were made ecclesiastical wards—Ashley and Mountain Dell, with Jeremiah Hatch and Thomas Bingham, as their respective bishops. Other settlements were formed, notably Vernal, which became the county seat of Uintah county. These and other neighboring settlements were finally organized into the Vernal stake of Zion, but not until 1887; Samuel R. Bennion was made president with Reuben S. Collett and James Hacking as counselors. [^22]

Indian AffairsHCTHE CHURCH IN CONTACT WITH THE INDIANS

Indian AffairsHCOne of the results of the establishment of settlements in outlying sections of Utah, and more especially in Arizona, was to bring the Latter-day Saint settlers into contact with the Indian tribes of those regions, which, in consequence of their sympathy with the red men and their desire to help them as remnants of some of the tribes of Israel, resulted at least in greatly improving the relations between Indians and whites generally. Among those prominent in this Indian missionary service was Elder Anthony W. Ivins, already mentioned in connection with his activities in the Mexican Mission, later, 1907—October—made one of the twelve apostles, and now, 1930, first counselor in the presidency of the church. In 1878, in company with the venerable apostle and Utah Pioneer, Erastus Snow, Elder Ivins performed a mission to the Navajo and Pueblo Indians in Arizona and New Mexico. [^23] In this same year, Llewellyn Harris visited a village of the Zuni Indians in New Mexico. "About four hundred of these Indians who were suffering with the smallpox were healed under his administration." [^24] Among others that were active among the Arizona and New Mexico Indian tribes was Wilford Woodruff, of the council of the apostles. He was assisted by Major Lot Smith and Ira Hatch; also by Elders Ammon M. Tenney and Peter C. Christophersen. Reporting his labors during 1879-80, at the preliminary meetings to the general church conference of April 6th, 1880, Elder Woodruff said:

Indian AffairsHCWILFORD WOODRUFF'S REPORT OF LABORS AMONG THE INDIANS

Indian AffairsHC"I spent a good deal of my time last season—1879-80—in visiting our Lamanite brethren, the American Indians, and I will here remark that while in Apache county I learned it was reported that the 'Mormons' were accused of having supplied arms to the Utes who have been at war with the whites, and that we urged them on to fight. [^25] A greater libel than this was never perpetrated. The Latter-day Saints have done more to bring the American Indians [i. e. in the locality referred to], to peace than all the efforts of the United States put together. Until the elders of Israel went among the Indians no man's life was safe, no matter who he was; but since we have been amongst them they are the friends of the white man; they are peaceable; many of them have turned their hearts to the cultivation of the earth, and today many tribes of them will not steal the cattle and the horses of the white men. We have become acquainted with many of the tribes in that part of the country, [i. e. in Arizona and New Mexico]. We have had many opportunities of becoming acquainted with both the Navajoes and Apaches, who have been wandering, warlike tribes, and no white man's life or scalp was safe with them until the 'Mormon' elders went among them and taught them the gospel and peace and the benefits of cultivating the earth. Now any white man can go among them in safety, if he will behave himself, attend to his own business, and not interfere with the families of the Indians. This will apply to the Navajoes and Apaches, with the exception of a remnant of Apaches who are not under the control of Petrone and Pedro, the war and peace chiefs, [respectively]. This remnant, under Vutone, is still on the war path. The Navajoes return to the whites any strayed or stolen horses or cattle. The Navajoes visit the 'Mormon' settlements in peace, where they are fed and treated kindly, taught to cultivate the earth, and instructed in the principles of peace and to prevent war. 'We have visited the Oribas, Moquis, Zunis, Lagoonis, and Islatas.'

Indian AffairsHC588'The Islatas,' continued Elder Woodruff, 'have their own laws, rules, and regulations such as courts, police, etc. They are a wealthy people, and stand at the head of many of the surrounding villages. They have traditions among them concerning their past and future history, which they are looking for the fulfillment of. Their record gives a history of their final restoration to civilization, industry, prosperity and the gospel of Christ, and their deliverance from oppression and war. This must be the future destiny of a remnant of them, or the promises of their forefathers must fall unfulfilled.'" [^26]

Indian AffairsHC588Elder Woodruff also mentions three other villages he and his associates visited, viz., Hano, Cheehomva, and Walpe, the last named had about one thousand inhabitants. The Islata village, about twelve miles south of Albuquerque, he reported as having three thousand population; also that Elder Ammon M. Tenney had visited this village three years before; also Elder Tenney had assisted in baptizing one hundred and fifteen Zuni Indians.

Indian AffairsHCINDIAN MISSION IN IDAHO AND WYOMING

Indian AffairsHCA few years later, 1883, an important Indian mission was performed among the tribes in the northwest, by Moses Thatcher, Bishop Preston and others. "They traveled via Beaver canon, [eastern Idaho, en route to Jackson's Lake, Wyoming] the Yellowstone river, and across the Stillwater and Rosebud rivers, visiting the Crow Indians of the latter place, delivering to some of the chiefs the message of peace and advising obedience [i. e. to the United States government] and industry. They crossed the country mainly on an Indian trail to the Wind river, Washakie agency, where a council was held and similar advice given to the leading men. The party returned in September, having traveled some twelve hundred miles." [^27]

Indian AffairsHC589Thus the church sought in this period of apostolic presidency not only to extend the borders of Zion by the establishment of new settlements, the founding of new stakes of Zion, and the strengthening of those already founded, but in doing this part of the work they also coupled with it the performance of their mission of mercy and peace to "the remnants of the land," the tribes of American Indians, with whom their colonizing activities brought them in contact.

FIFTY YEARS OF THE NEW DISPENSATION—THE JUBILEE CONFERENCE

The crowning glory of this period of apostolic presidency over the church was realized in the semi-centennial annual conference of the church, begun on the sixth of April, 1880; but which was preceded by two days preliminary meetings—4th and 5th of April—held in the Assembly Hall, Salt Lake City, and which were no less interesting and quite as important as the meetings of the regular conference held in the great tabernacle. The preliminary meetings were really part of the conference, a fact evidenced by the full report of the meetings being included in the published report of the great Jubilee Conference.

590All the members of the presiding quorum of the church—the twelve apostles—were present, except one, George Q. Cannon, who was in Washington, as delegate from Utah to the national congress. One of the features of the conference was that each of the apostles on the closing day of the conference—the third day—bore solemn testimony to the divinity of God's great Latter-day Work—the coming forth and verity of the New Dispensation of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ and the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Only one of the members of the original quorum of the twelve apostles, organized in February, forty-five years before the Jubilee, was now a member of the quorum. This was the venerable Elder Orson Pratt, who was very active throughout the conference, offering the opening prayer and delivering two addresses, during the meetings. He was identified with the whole history of the church; with all its principal colonizing movements; with most of its missionary operations.

"It is a great delight to me," said he, in one of his conference addresses, "to look forth upon the large congregations of the Latter-day Saints who are assembled from time to time in these mountains, in the capacity of a general conference. In all these assemblies and conferences I remember the early rise of this church. I remember when we were a small people, when we could assemble ourselves in a very small room, and that in general conference. I remember the first conference that I attended, on the 2d day of January, 1831, consisting perhaps of some seventy or eighty members in all, assembled in the house of Father [Peter] Whitmer, [Fayette, Seneca county, N. Y.] whose sons were chosen to be especial witnesses in relation to this great latter-day work. I remember our trials, our difficulties, our gathering, our persecutions, our afflictions, more or less, from that day until the present time. Then I was but a boy nineteen years of age; now I am over sixty-eight, and in a few months more, fifty years will have passed over my head since I was first baptized into this church. How thankful I ought to be that I am still living! How thankful I ought to be that I am still numbered with this people. How thankful I ought to be that I have the opportunity and privilege of administering in your public congregations, preaching the words of eternal life, lifting up my voice in humble testimony concerning the great work which the Lord our God has been doing during the last fifty years." [^28]

591But two of the original first council of seventy survived as members of the council. These were Joseph Young, brother of the late President Brigham Young, and Levi W. Hancock. Both participated in the conference.

THE SPIRIT OF JUBILEE—THE BURDENS LIGHTENED

The discourses delivered during the conference were spirited, hopeful, and breathed assurances of the triumph of the work of God, and prophetic of future achievement that should be larger than in the past. But more important than what was said, was what was done at this conference. The church authorities acted in the spirit of the old Israelitish Jubilee, [^29] if not precisely in its form and letter. In the first place there was an accumulated indebtedness on the part of the community to the Perpetual Emigration Fund of $704,000 in principal; with accumulated interest of $900,000; the whole amounting to $1,604,000. One-half of this sum, $802,000, was stricken from the account, and forgiven to the poor who had been struggling with the difficulties of life, and who had not been able to meet their engagements to the fund. "Not half the amount that was due by them," explained President Taylor, "but the whole;" and to those who are forgiven the debt, it will be blotted out, and the remainder will be left to those to pay who are able to and have not done it. "And we shall expect that those who have not met their engagements," said he, "to meet them; * * * for in former times they did not release the rich (from debt), it was the poor." This was carried into effect by the local authorities in the respective wards and stakes designating the parties worthy to be forgiven their debt to the fund.

592There had been an acknowledgment of tithing indebtedness by persons at different times who had not been able to pay the tithes when due, or who thought they were not able to pay at the time, and accounts had been entered on the books against them according to their acknowledgment of such indebtedness. These accounts amounted to $151,798. It was proposed that one half of this sum, $75,899, be relinquished to those unable to meet their several accounts, and who were worthy people. "Those that are really worthy may be released," said President Taylor, meaning thereby to release them to the full amount of their indebtedness, as in the case of the emigration fund; "and those that are not worthy," said he, "ought to pay it."

The year 1879 had been a year of great drouth in nearly all the settlements occupied by the saints, and consequently many had sustained loss of stock as well as of grain and other agricultural crops. It was therefore proposed that there should be a donation of one thousand cows to be distributed among the deserving poor, and five thousand sheep. The church was to give three hundred of the cows, and two thousand of the sheep, the others to be supplied by the respective stakes of Zion according to their means and population, the distribution to be made under the local authorities of the respective wards and stakes. [^30] It was stipulated by President Taylor that the cows were to be "young" and "good milk cows;" and the sheep were to be "healthy sheep."

593Another calamity occasioned by the drought of 1879, was the scarcity of seed wheat. It was proposed by the conference that the Female Relief Societies of the church, that for some years had been storing up grain against a time of scarcity, should release the 34,761 bushels they had on hand in various parts of the church territory, and loan it to the brethren needing it for seed, the bishops in the respective districts becoming responsible for its being returned to the societies loaning it at the next harvest. "Is it to be loaned without interest," asked a voice from the congregation. "Why of course it is;" answered President Taylor, "we don't want any nonsense of that kind; it is the time of Jubilee!"

593As the church had thus been liberal in releasing those indebted to the Perpetual Emigration Fund and to the tithing dues, so were individuals urged to be lenient towards those indebted to them individually. "If you find people owing you who are distressed," said President Taylor, "if you will go to work and try to relieve them as much as you can, under the circumstances, God will relieve you when you get into difficulties. I will tell you that, in the name of the Lord. Let us act on a kind, generous, brotherly principle, doing good one to another and carrying out the principles of the everlasting gospel in our lives."

"Free the worthy, debt-bound brother if you can," said the apostolic circular letter of instructions to the presidents of stakes and bishops of wards, directing them in the management of these several things to be by them carried into effect—"Free the worthy, debt-bound brother if you can. Let there be no rich among us from whose tables fall only crumbs to feed a wounded Lazarus." "We need not remind you," said the same circular, referring to the remittance of delinquent tithing, "that neither favoritism nor prejudice should influence any one in these matters, but only an earnest desire to make the yoke easy and the burden light." [^31]

594Such throughout was the Christian spirit of this Jubilee Conference, conducted under the apostolic presidency. At the next general conference of the church—the semi-annual conference, held in October, the first presidency was reorganized with John Taylor as president and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors, and the church by then had entered upon another phase of her many-sided experiences.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Washington Press Dispatch, 8th June, 1875. Deseret News, weekly, of June 16th. Also local item, Ibid, p. 313. Also Bancroft's Works, vol. xvii. History of Arizona and New Mexico, pp. 702-3. His term of governor ran from July, 1875, to 1878. He was succeeded by General Lew Wallace. Afterwards, viz., in 1882, he was apopinted chief justice of the territory.
[^2] See Axtell's account of himself in a speech at Ogden, Feb. 20th, 1875, Deseret News, weekly, of March 3rd, where the speech is given verbatim. A burlesque account of the speech is found in Salt Lake Tribune for Feb. 21st, 1875.
[^3] Asked by the Salt Lake Herald why the prominent non-"Mormons" of Salt Lake City, and especially why the federal officers were so lacking in courtesy as not to go to Ogden to welcome Governor Axtell on his arrival, the Salt Lake Tribune, organ of the anti-"Mormons," including the federal officials, replied that Governor Axtell withheld all knowledge of his movements from his brother officials, "preferring to receive hospitality from a prominent Mormon [i. e. Captain Hooper], and his friends. * * * They have too much self-respect to run a breathless race with the church leaders in extending hospitality to a man who studiously ignores their existence and was guilty of the gross breach of official etiquette of communicating with a Mormon ex-delegate, who championed polygamy in the halls of congress, instead of making his movements known to the secretary of the territory and then acting governor." (Salt Lake Tribune of Feb 10th, 1875). A month later, when Judge McKean sentenced Brigham Young to one day of imprisonment for alleged contempt of court, and a petition was circulated asking that the governor exercise executive authority and release him, the same anti-"Mormon" organ said: "Whether the document reached the Axtellian office or not, we cannot say, but the petitioners received the information from a reliable source that the favor asked for is one of the few things which the Prophet's Jack [meaning Governor Axtell] has not the power to grant, any more than he can drag down the Christian women of Utah to the level of 'best society' [i. e. 'Mormon' society]. So the pardon scheme collapsed." (Editorial, Salt Lake Tribune of March 13th, 1875).
[^4] Compiled Laws of Utah, 1876, Title III of Elections, etc., chapter i, section 25>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>.
[^5] San Francisco Chronicle, special dispatch, Feb. 5th, 1875, quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 10th.
[^6] Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 10th.
[^7] Salt Lake Tribune of Feb. 11th, 1875. The comment on this act continued through a number of editorials in which such statements as these occurred: "One of the conditions agreed upon by Mr. Axtell with delegate Cannon and his corrupt and venal patron [United States Senator] Sargent, as the price of office, was that his first official act on his arrival in Utah should be to issue his certificate to the alien churchman and mail it to him at Washington. * * * We require no further evidences of Governor Axtell's hostility to the cause of progress in Utah and the best interest to its citizens. He may show his perverse tastes by surrounding himself with the Nauvoo Legion on his arrival in this territory [this because General Wells, then mayor of the city, and John R. Winder, were of the Hooper party that met the governor at Farmington and accompanied him to the city—they had been officers of the Nauvoo Legion], he may utter his stale platitudes about the persecution of the innocent Mormon leaders; * * * but when he hastens to abuse the power unwisely committed to his hands and before the dust is brushed from his garments by commissioning men whose lives are notoriously flagitious, and whose avowed purpose is to maintain and perpetuate ecclesiastical rule, we candidly inform the gentleman that such official turpitude will not be calmly submitted to, and that he will excite a felling in the minds of the loyal citizens of Utah which will render the political atmosphere so warm as to be uncomfortable." (Tribune of Feb. 12th, 1875). Such attacks, only worse, continued so long as the governor's brief term of office in Utah lasted.
[^8] Deseret News, weekly, of July 28th, 1875, speech at Ogden on leaving the territory for his new post of duty in New Mexico.
[^9] From verbatim report in Deseret News, weekly, of March 3rd, 1875. This speech was sneeringly and inadequately reported by the Salt Lake Tribune, see impression of Feb. 21st, 1875.
[^10] As the Deseret News said, when a press dispatch announced that Axtell had been superseded, and referring to the anti-"Mormon" ring—" "They have misrepresented him without stint, lied about him shamefully and persistently, and announced from the first their intention of effecting his removal if possible. The sole reason for all this vicious and brutal opposition was that he did not rush eagerly into their open arms, be hail fellows well met with them at once, and with gusto swallow all their lies about the 'Mormons,' and adopt the violent, bitter, and baseless prejudices of the 'ring' against them. Because the governor dared to meet some of the prominent church leaders socially, his detractors said: 'Governor Axtell finds himself received by the polygamous saints, but in his efforts to harmonize the two religious elements has been spewed out with nausea by Gentile society. No man can serve two masters, neither can the sons of darkness be found worthy to mingle with the children of light.'" (Salt Lake Tribune, editorial, May 27, 1875).
[^11] Salt Lake Tribune, June 9th, 1875.
[^12] See Leading Facts of New Mexican History, vol. ii, p. 419, where an extended biographical note and character sketch is given of Governor Axtel. The work is written by Ralph Emerson Twitchel, vice president of New Mexico Historical Society, 1912, two volumes.
[^13] The New York Herald quoted in Deseret News of July 7th, 1875
[^14] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 118, note.
[^15] See chapter cxlvi.
[^16] The governor's first message, in full, Jan. 11th, 1876, will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 19th, 1876; and his second message, Jan., 1878, is published in full, Deseret News, weekly, Jan. 23, 1878.
[^17] Editorial in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 27, 1878.
[^18] Deseret News, weekly, for Jan. 19, 1876.
[^19] Chapter cxl, this History.
[^20] Compiled Laws of Utah, 1876, Penal Code; and Deseret News, weekly, editorial, Dec. 24>, 1879.
[^21] The message in full will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, of January 19, 1876. This message bore the date of 11th Jan., 1876. His second message, dealing with the same subject, Jan., 1878. The decision of the supreme court in the Reynolds cases is dated Jan. 6, 1879.
[^22] "The last was the very point that the prosecution desired to establish, its object, compared with which the conviction of the accused [John D. Lee], was but a minor consideration, the real purpose being to get at the supposed inner facts of the case. The district attorney refused therefore to accept the confession, on the ground that it was not made in good faith." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 565. See also Baskin's Reminiscences, ch. x). Mr. Baskin assisted Prosecuting Attorney William C. Carey, who was United States district attorney for Utah at the time, and it is quite clear from the chapter, of the Reminiscences here cited, dealing with the massacre and Lee's trials, that the chief effort of the prosecution at the first trial was to implicate Brigham Young in the perpetration of the crime. "Excerpts of Lee's Confession" referred to above and rejected by the prosecution, appears in The Lee Trial, published in Pamphlet form by the Salt Lake Tribune reporter, 1875. Also in the San Francisco Call of July 21st, 1875; and the San Francisco Bulletin, same date. Bancroft says that The Lee Trial by the Tribune reporter, seems "unduly anxious to cast the onus of the charge [i. e. of responsibility for the tragedy] on the first presidency [i. e. of the 'Mormon' church]. (See History of Utah, p. 565, note 47). Lee after his conviction and while awaiting the execution of his sentence made another "confession," which was intrusted to one of his attorneys, W. Bishop, for publication. After Lee's execution it was published under the title, Mormonism Unveiled, M. E. Mason, publisher, St. Louis, 1891. It is an autobiography and covers the whole of Lee's life up to the time of his death, and includes his account of the massacre. It is a volume of 413 pages. The publishers state that several pretended Lives and Confessions of John D. Lee had been published, but claim that theirs, the Ms. of which was obtained from Mr. Bishop, is the only genuine one. (pp. v, vi. See also Introduction by Bishop).
[^23] Baskin declares that the three Gentile jurors voted for conviction, that the "Jack-Mormon" and the eight "Mormons" voted for acquittal, (Reminiscences, p. 138).
[^24] In the list of attorneys for the defense at the first trial of Lee, it is represented by Baskin that Messrs. Sutherland and Bates were "attorneys for the first presidency," and cites in evidence that Mr. Bates later employed him to bring suit for the collection of fees due to his firm ($5,000). The claim being thrown out on demur proceeding, Bates instructed Baskin to bring suit against Brigham Young for the amount alleged to be due; but before the suit could be planted, "I ascertained," says Mr. Baskin, "that he [Bates] had entered into a written marriage contract with a 'doctress' and they had left the territory." (Reminiscences, p. 114). Since the church or its leading officials, were the parties really attacked in that first trial, it could not be out of place for them to be safeguarded, at least, by the presence of counsel at the trial. Bancroft also says that "Sutherland and Bates represented the first presidency." (History of Utah, p. 565, note 46).
[^25] Report of the second Lee trial in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 20, 1876, p. 544.
[^26] Their names are as follows: Wm. Greenwood, John E. Pace, A. M. Farnsworth, Stephen S. Barton, Valentine Carsen, Alfred J. Randall, James S. Montague, A. S. Goodwin, Ira B. Elmer, Andrew A. Correy, Charles Adams, Walter Granger." (Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 20, 1876, p. 544; also see Mormonism Unveiled, p. 302, et seq.).
[^27] A full account of the trial will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept., 20th and 27th respectively, 1876.
[^28] See Compiled Laws of Utah, 1888, vol. ii, Title vii, of Judgment and Execution, chapter i, sec. 5131>. The same privilege is carried over into the state law. (See Compiled Laws of Utah, 1907.)
[^29] In the Denver Republican of 30th April, 1882, appears a long article by former United States district attorney for Utah George C. Bates, in which he alleges that up to the last moment arrangements were made for the escape of Lee from execution. He alleges that arrangements were made for Lee to make a confession that would implicate the "Mormon" church leaders; that a "fake" execution was to be performed, the executors firing blank cartridges and Lee after a mock burial was to be performed, the executors firing blank cartridges and Lee after a mock burial was to be allowed to escape. Bates it seems had fallen into intemperate habits in the later years of life, and deteriorated in character. His slanderous inventions about the escape of John D. Lee from execution by the connivance of the United States marshal, William Nelson, et al, was promptly refuted by Mr. Nelson in a letter to the Denver Republican on the 3rd of May, 1882. He declares the Bates article to have been grounded on personal malice, and unworthy of belief; and rebukes the editor of the Republican for publishing "such scandalous and baseless charges against anybody on such worthless authority." (Mr. Nelson's letter will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of May 24, 1882. Yet in the Hand Book on Mormonism, published in 1882, by Conyer, this same man, Bates, then debauched and fallen, is quoted as to social conditions among the "Mormons." See Hand Book on Mormonism, p. 22).
[^30] See Proceedings of Utah Legislature, 1880. The bill was signed by Acting Governor Arthur L. Thomas, Feb. 12 1880. Castle Dale was made the county seat. Every county is noted as an agricultural and mineral district, rich in natural wealth and resources.
[^31] Salt Lake Daily Herald of Feb. 13, 1880.
