B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 5 ( 1930)

595CHAPTER CLII

595POLITICAL EVENTS—UTAH'S GOVERNORS—AXTELL—EMERY—MURRAY

595POLITICAL events in Utah subsequent to the close of Governor George L. Woods' administration, December, 1874, as related to the history of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, now claim our attention.

GOVERNOR SAMUEL B. AXTELL

Governor Woods—a pronounced anti-"Mormon," as will be remembered, was succeeded in office as governor of Utah by Samuel B. Axtell, of California. Governor Axtell arrived in Utah on the 2nd of February, 1875; but his incumbency was to be of brief duration. He was superseded by George W. Emery, appointed on the 8th of June following, so that Axtell held the position of governor of Utah for about four months. His removal from office was not because he was out of favor with the administration at Washington—Grant's, second term—for at the time he was relieved from his position as governor of Utah, Mr. Axtell was appointed governor of the territory of New Mexico, [^1] for which place he took his departure from Salt Lake City in mid-July of the year that witnessed his advent into Utah.

Governor Axtell obtained his appointment to the governorship of Utah through the influence of United States Senator Sargent from California. Axtell had lived in California about a quarter of a century; where, for a number of years, he had been "a pick and shovel miner." Six years he had served as county attorney, in one of the new counties, and afterwards represented one of the most populous districts of the state in congress for two terms. [^2] Here he formed a close friendship with Captain Wm. H. Hooper, Utah's delegate in congress, at the time; and became both interested in, and informed respecting Utah affairs.

When he arrived in Utah he was met by Captain Hooper and a party of friends in a special car at Farmington, and escorted to the city. He came to the territory at the time the McKean judicial crusade was at its height, and when anything like conservatism in relation to Utah affairs was out of the question; for no sooner was such a disposition manifested than it evoked the most violent attacks from the anti-"Mormon" "ring" and its organ, the Salt Lake Tribune, which was then supporting the judicial crusade to which reference is made above. In evidence of this it only needs to be pointed out that the fact of Governor Axtell being met by his old friend Captain Hooper, with whom he had served in congress, and by him accompanied to Salt Lake City, as already described, was made cause of offense by the Utah anti-"Mormon" "ringites," and was sufficient to discredit the newly arrived governor with them, [^3] and led at once to his being denounced as a "Jack-Mormon"—(i. e., one not a member of the church but in sympathy with the "Mormons").

597The governor's first official act brought down upon him a storm of vilification and denunciation that can only be characterized as outrageous. It was the law of the territory at the time, respecting elections, "that so soon as all of the returns are received, the secretary, in the presence of the governor, shall unseal and examine them and furnish to each person having the highest number of votes for any territorial office, a certificate of his election." [^4] In the election of November, 1874, both Governor Woods and Secretary Black refused to perform this function and give a certificate of election to Hon. George Q. Cannon. They presumed to go beyond the election returns and the mandatory clauses of the statute and pass upon the qualifications of the candidate, as to his citizenship and eligibility. They refused to give Mr. Cannon a certificate on the plea that "no proofs could be produced of his citizenship, and because of reported frauds at the late election." [^5] Governor Axtell, however, when appealed to, gave the certificate of election to Mr. Cannon. [^6] Commenting upon this act the Salt Lake Tribune said:

597"If Governor Axtell has any more surrenders to make to his loving brethren of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we would advise him to be quick about it. These cussed Gentile courts with their perverse addictions to the enforcement of the law will be apt to step in and spoil his little game * * * Sargent [United States senator from California] procured Axtell's appointment as governor to build up the dilapidated walls of the kingdom. His excellency has set up one stone but it won't stick." [^7]

598Yet Governor Axtell could not be regarded as an especially pro-"Mormon" governor. He simply aimed to be an impartial one; and, as he often expressed it in public speech and otherwise, "his interpretation of the duty of a governor was to be the governor not of a part, but of the whole people." [^8]

598In a speech delivered at Ogden shortly after his arrival in the territory he said:

AXTELL'S VIEWS ON THE PURPOSE OF GOVERNMENT

"I come to Utah, appointed by the government of the United States as the chief executive officer of the territory; and so far as I am capable of judging of my own motives, and so far as I know my own determinations, I have not come as the favorite of any particular faction or set of men. I am determined to be a governor, not of a section, but of the whole people. Whether I can win your love or friendship, I do not know; but I intend to try to do my duty, and I believe that I can act so as to deserve the respect of all good men and women of this territory.

There are certain great, cardinal principles which should guide the politics of the nation. Among these are the right of local self-government; the idea that governments are instituted amongst men for the good of the governed; that governments derive all their just powers from the consent of the governed; that they are expected to aim to make men and women happy, to preserve life and property and personal liberty; that for this purpose governments are instituted, and that they are worthless if they fail to accomplish this end; that we owe, all of us, obedience to the law, and allegiance to the government. And allow me to say that as a representative of the federal government of this country, I earnestly believe that it is for the good of every man, woman, and child of this territory, and in all the United States, that the laws of the land should be strictly obeyed; and I have that confidence in the great man who presides at Washington to believe that he will see the laws enforced, and the law officers and their courts sustained, and their decisions carried into effect, whether in Louisiana or Utah, if it requires that a soldier should stand on every square foot of land in this territory. The laws must be obeyed.

599It is well understood what I mean. There is, in this country, perfect toleration for the religious sentiments of all men, and freedom to worship God according to the dictates of their own consciences, in obedience to the law. I mean the written law, the law enforced by the courts, that bears equally upon all, that knows no favoritism and no distinction." [^9]

599The plain allusion here to polygamy and the enforcement of the existing laws against it, precludes the idea that Governor Axtell had any intention of condoning that statutory offense, or of championing the "Mormon" view of things in any partisan spirit. Yet because he would not unite with the "ringites" in their anti-"Mormon" crusade, they heaped opprobrium upon him to the extent of their vicious abilities, and these were not lacking in either evil scope or power. [^10]

599When General Garfield made a visit to Utah during the brief incumbency of Mr. Axtell as governor, and was the guest of the latter and some prominent churchmen, when the governor accompanied the general to Ogden the Tribune in a news item under the caption—"Lost Their Man"—said:

"Bishop Axtell at the command of his Master Brigham, accompanied General Garfield, to see the stalwart Babylonian fairly on his way homeward. The shrewd statesman (Garfield) allowed himself to be dined and wined by the gushing Mormon priesthood, including the latest acolyte, Bishop Axtell; but he kept his eyes open and goes back home with a pretty clear comprehension of the whole unclean outfit. The hook they designed to fix in his jaws missed its hold and the victim failed to reach the basket."

600So the abuse continued to the end, for when announcement of Axtell's removal came, the organ of the "ringites" went into hysteric delight expressed through display headlines in their organ, the Salt Lake Tribune. [^11] They are reproduced here as showing the spirit of the times—the bitter spirit in which the controversies were carried on:

600"Utah Relieved from the Great Incubus at Last.

600Axtell Removed and George W. Emery appointed Governor.

600The 'Bishop' to take a Mission to the Land of the Greaser."

600And on the local page these were the headlines:

600HALLELUJAH!

600"Bishop Axtell to step down and aside!

600The Federal Government has not yet abandoned us.

600The chief obstacle to Utah's Progress obliterated.

600Now let the Glorious Work go on with Renewed Vigor.

600There's Millions in it for the citizens of Utah.

600REJOICE! REJOICE! REJOICE!"

GOVERNOR GEORGE W. EMERY—GRANT APPOINTEE

The fortunes of Governor Axtell much improved in New Mexico, where both as governor of the territory and chief justice, he was very satisfactory. He had a very honorable career, and is spoken of in the History of New Mexico as a man of high principles and absolutely without fear. [^12]

It was said by the Washington correspondent of the New York Herald, that Mr. Axtell was made governor of Utah "with the understanding that he would carry out the president's [Grant's] policy with regard to Mormonism," that subsequently his "official course indicated that he was directly oposed to the president's policy," and consequently he was removed to make room "for one who, this time, is known to be in accord with the president in the government of the Mormon territory;" and that as governor, Mr. Emery "will undoubtedly be supported by the administration as its exponent in the conduct of the affairs of the territory of Utah." [^13] This statement so far as it relates to Mr. Emery is supported by what that gentleman said to Mr. Orson F. Whitney, who declares in his History of Utah that Governor Emery while on a visit to Utah in 1893 stated to him that his course in Utah as governor was conformable not only to his own feelings, "but to advice given him by President Grant while at Salt Lake City." "The president had transferred Governor Axtell to Arizona," continues Whitney, "to appease the clamor of the anti-'Mormons,' but it was not his wish that Axtell's successor should take them as his advisors. 'Deal justly between man and man, avoiding all extremes' was the substance of Grant's counsel to his friend." [^14]

601This represents quite a different Grant from the bitterly prejudiced, Parson-Newman-dominated Grant of a few years before, and gives warrant to full belief in the statement of Governor Emery—before noticed in these pages [^15]—that Grant considered after his visit to Utah, that he had previously been deceived by his advisors in respect of Utah conditions.

Governor Emery undoubtedly followed the advice of President Grant in his administration of Utah affairs: for while in his social intercourse he mainly consorted with the Gentile element, he refused to join in any crusade against the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and the territory had a period of comparative peace during his administration. In his two biennial messages Governor Emery recommended a number of practical legislative measures respecting the improvement of the irrigation, education, and election laws; also as to civil procedure and a criminal code, compilation of the laws of the territory, etc. [^16] Some of these suggestions were acted upon, resulting in a very great improvement in the civil affairs of the territory.

BENEFICIAL LEGISLATION

Among the beneficial laws enacted were the amendments to the election laws, by which the markings of ballots was abolished, and the absolute secret ballot secured. The old law, in operation since 1853, provided that when a voter presented his ballot neatly folded to the judge of election, the judge should "number and deposit it in the ballot box;" "The Clerk," said the law, "shall then write the name of the elector, and opposite it the number of his vote." This, on the part of the framers of the law, and those who in later years accepted their views, was in the interest of the honesty of elections, since in the event of a contested election it would be possible to ascertain if the votes cast were the votes of bonafide electors—a thing held to be necessary where there was always so large a transient population as in Utah, owing to its being the half-way halting place for emigrant trains during the pre-railroad period. [^17] On the other hand, it was held that the marked ballot system was regarded as "Espionage, enabling the officer of the election, if so disposed, to tell how each person voted." It was also urged that the right of suffrage should carry with it "the right to exercise that suffrage * * * without the possibility of being called to account for his choice of candidates, or experiencing unpleasant consequences." So argued Governor Emery in his message of January, 1878, before cited. Two years before, when urging the adoption of the secret ballot, and referring to the old ballot-marking law, he said: "This law is regarded as inimical to republican government, and in the interest of the church, so potent in Utah, and leaves its members no choice but to vote the ticket prepared for them. I recommended the law be so amended as to secure a secret ballot." [^18] The passage of the new law disarmed criticism both within and without the territory. Minority party representation among the judges of election was provided for, and also the preelection registration of voters, (1878).

603During Emery's term of office a civil practice act was passed (1876), also a new penal code (1876). In respect of the penal code, because Governor Emery approved it, he was quite generally berated by the press of the country as he was accused by his enemies with having been a party to the repeal of the law "punishing adultery, seduction, fornication and lewd and lasvicious cohabitation"—the local law under which McKean et al had tried to punish men for polygamous cohabitation (with what result has been already seen). [^19] The facts in the case were that a penal code was adopted from the California statutes, but few changes being made in that text, and the new act receiving the approval of leading lawyers in Utah, Gentiles as well as "Mormons," it was passed by the legislature and approved by the governor. But it did repeal the old statute referred to, hence the outcry against Governor Emery. Of course the new law defined and punished such sexual crimes, lewdness and indecency as the California statute provided for. Among these are named crimes against the person and against public decency and good morals; these are grouped in Title IX., and treat of rape, abduction, carnal abuse of children, seduction, abortion, the crime against nature, indecent exposure, obscenity, prostitution, houses of ill fame, offenses against public morals; but it must be conceded that in express terms there was no specific clause against adultery, incest, or fornication. [^20]

Conflict over PolygamyHCPROPOSED MEASURES AGAINST POLYGAMY

Conflict over PolygamyHCIn both his biennial messages Governor Emery urged the passage of legislation against polygamy, but in this he could get no support from the representatives who believed in the rightfulness of the principle and practice which they were asked to legislate against and make a crime. He approached the subject with a frank appreciation of its difficulties. In his message of 1876, when making his recommendation on this head he said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC604"I am sensible how delicate my duty becomes under existing circumstances, when the gentlemen whom I have the honor of addressing, with a single exception, believe in and many practice it [i. e. polygamy] from a sense of professed religious right. It appears to me and must be apparent to all, that the law should be expunged from the statutes, or made operative. It will be gratifying, if this body shall enact such legislation as will prevent its extension, and will adopt such measures as look to a fair and impartial settlement of this subject, as it affects the past. We should remember gentlemen, that Utah is not a secluded portion of the United States, that this territory was acquired from a foreign power, like other parts of the country, with money, and by the valor of American arms, that the distance and the deserts have been annihilated by the construction and operation of the Pacific railways that today we are as much an integral part of this great republic as any other section, and that we are bound, as good citizens, to obey the laws of our common country, whether they are in accordance with our views of justice or not, otherwise we ignore the constituted authority, and place ourselves beyond the pale and protection of government."

Conflict over PolygamyHC604It will be observed that the governor in this kindly expressed, and beyond doubt, well meant message, ignores the American principle of the right of community self-government, and the right of the free exercise of religion, and the decision of the supreme court of the United States, had not, as yet, handed down its decision upon that subject as related to the practice of the Latter-day Saints of plural marriage. [^21]

THE TRIAL AND EXECUTION OF JOHN D. LEE

It was during Governor Emery's administration that both the first and second trial of John D. Lee for participation in the Mountain Meadows Massacre, took place; also his execution for his part in that crime. The first trial began in the 2nd judicial district, at Beaver City, southern Utah, on July 23rd, 1875, Jacob S. Boreman, judge. The trial had been set for the 12th of that month originally, but owing to the absence of some witnesses, and also owing to the fact that the accused man had promised to make a full confession and thus turn state's evidence, the trial did not begin until the date given above. It is said that in this confession the prisoner detailed minutely the plan and circumstances of the crime; but he traced the source of it to no higher authority in the "Mormon" church, than to the local leaders of the church in Iron county, John M. Higbee and Isaac C. Haight. He represents both as taking a prominent part in the tragedy, which he declared was committed in obedience to "military orders." The "confession" was a great disappointment to the prosecution, since it involved none of the higher and general officials of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, whom the prosecution assumed were guilty of issuing the orders for the massacre. [^22]

606The jury at the first trial was composed of eight "Mormons," three non-"Mormons" and one "Jack-Mormon." The jury disagreed, [^23] and Lee was remanded for a second trial. This began on the 13th of September, 1876, and continued until the 20th, Judge Boreman again presiding. The prosecuting attorney at this trial was Summer Howard, assisted by Presley Denney, deputy United States attorney. Lee was represented by Wells Spicer, J. C. Foster, and W. W. Bishop. [^24]

The attitude of the prosecution was changed at the second trial of Lee. The United States district attorney, Sumner Howard, in opening the case before the court declared it to be his intention "to try John D. Lee, and not Brigham Young and the Mormon church, who were not indicted. He intended to try John D. Lee for acts committed by Lee personally." [^25] The jury selected was composed entirely of members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. [^26] The evidence was convincing, the defense submitted no testimony; and when the case was submitted to the jury, after more than four hours' deliberation, they brought in a verdict of guilty of murder in the first degree. [^27] The court overruled a motion for a new trial. The case was then appealed to the supreme court of the territory and argued by Hon. Frank Tilford and Sumner Howard for the people, and by W. W. Bishop for Lee. The courts sustained the judgment and sentence of the trial court, and directed said court to fix a day for carrying the judgment into effect. The prisoner chose shooting as the method of his execution—the law of the territory granting to those condemned to capital punishment the choice of execution by hanging or shooting. [^28] The court fixed the 23rd of March, 1877, as the day for carrying out the sentence. To make the execution as spectacular as possible it was determined by the United States officials to carry out the execution on the site of the prisoner's awful crime, the Mountain Meadows. Accordingly on the day fixed by the court, he was taken to this place; and in the presence of a military guard, and a number of United States civil officers he was shot to death, and thus paid the penalty of his crime, so far as suffering the penalty of death could pay it. [^29]

607The awful crime committed at Mountain Meadows, has been already fully considered in these pages (Chapters c, ci) and precludes the necessity of further treatment here.

GOVERNOR EMERY HONORED BY THE STATE LEGISLATURE

To the people of Utah, all things considered, George W. Emery was a satisfactory governor; but to the anti-"Mormon" party he was not sufficiently pronounced in support of their opposition to the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and though a candidate to succeed himself as governor of Utah he failed to secure the appointment. The Utah legislature in compliment to him, and after the close of his term of office, named Emery county in his honor. [^30] "An honor and mark of respect," said the Salt Lake Herald, "bestowed upon none of his predecessors. This little courtesy is significant as showing that the efforts of a federal official here to do right are appreciated." [^31]

GOVERNOR ELI H. MURRAY

The office of governor of Utah was given to one Eli H. Murray, a Republican of Louisville, Kentucky, who had been more or less summarily removed from the United States marshalship of Kentucky. He was said to be the "handsomest man in the state." [^32] There were "forty applicants" for the position a short time before Murray was appointed. [^33] He was President Hayes' personal selection, and the appointment was made "against the wishes of every cabinet officer." [^34] The matter of complaint against Governor Murray for alleged irregularities in connection with the United States marshalship of Kentucky is effectively considered in a future chapter when Murray's case for reappointment is before congress.

Eli H. Murray who was nineteen years old when the war between the states broke out, joined the Union army as a private, but rose rapidly in the service until at the close of the war he had reached the rank of brigadier general. He had served six years as United States marshal of Kentucky; and by profession was a lawyer. Accompanied by his wife and two children the governor arrived in Salt Lake City on the last day of February, and the next day took the oath of office before Chief Justice Hunter.

The people of Utah were not left long in doubt as to where Governor Murray would stand in local Utah controversies. Indeed there never was any doubt from the time the circumstances attendant upon his appointment were known. The fact was that President Hayes had personally determined upon a hostile policy towards the Church of the Latter-day Saints, one more result of that fierce anti-"Mormon" agitation of the late "seventies" already noticed. That such was his determination became evident when in his message to congress in December following—1880—he made such recommendations of special legislation for Utah as made all other procedure in respect of the "Utah" or "Mormon" question pale into insignificance. This was nothing less than the abolishment of the territorial government and the substitution of government by a governor and a legislative commission appointed by the president of the United States, and confirmed by the senate; "or a government analogous to the provisional government established for the territory northwest of the Ohio, by the ordinance of 1787. If the territorial government was to be continued then the president recommended that "the right to vote, hold office, and sit on juries be confined to those who neither practice nor uphold polygamy." These recommendations of the message followed a recital of conditions supposed to exist in Utah that justified them. The recital, however, was neither accurate nor just, since it took no notice of the constitutional rights of the Utah community to local self-government, nor of those circumstances which drove the Latter-day Saints to that defensive policy which gave some color to the charge of "church dominance" in political affairs. [^35]

610PROPOSED CONGRESSIONAL ANTI-"MORMON" LEGISLATION

A fierce anti-"Mormon" spirit was also manifested in congress about this time. In the congressional session of 1879 anti-"Mormon" measures were introduced so rapidly that one trod upon another's heels, so fast they followed. Here in brief, is the record: In the house Mr. Thomas L. Young, on the 2nd of December, introduced a measure the purpose of which was to make plural marriage "a continuous offense." Heretofore it was the polygamous marriage that was declared to be the crime, not the cohabitation following. On December the 15th, Mr. Willits introduced three bills on this same subject. The first provided for the exclusion from juries, in cases of trials for bigamy or polygamy, all persons who practiced that order of marriage, or "believed in its rightfulness." The second Willits bill was similar to Mr. Young's, referred to above, with the addition that in sustaining a charge against any person for polygamous living, no proof of marriage would be necessary; "proof of the mere acknowledgment of the party on trial of the relationship would be sufficient." The third bill provided that no polygamist, nor any person who believes in the rightfulness of that kind of marriage shall be permitted to vote or to hold any political office. "No provision was made for the exclusion from any right or privilege of citizenship of any person who might be living with any number of women without marriage," was the caustic "Mormon" criticism of this bill. Later, namely, on January the 20th, 1880, the same gentleman, Mr. Willits, added yet another bill, prescribing the registration oath to be taken by the applicant for registration, to the effect that he did not practice, or believe in the practice of polygamy. It aimed at the disfranchisement of the Latter-day Saints of Utah. In February—the 11th—Mr. Garland introduced in the house a bill which incorporated nearly all the features of the previous bills, but provided for legitimizing of all children, the issue of plural marriages, born "before the first day of November, 1879." On the 10th of December, 1879, Mr. Julius Caesar Burrows introduced an amendment to the Constitution of the United States providing that: "Polygamy shall not exist in the United States or any place subject to their jurisdiction: congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation." [^36]

611PRESIDENT HAYES' VISIT TO UTAH, 1880

611The recommendation on the part of President Hayes was all the more disappointing because during the late summer of 1880,—September 5th, 6th—the president with Mrs. Hayes, Mr. Ramsey, secretary of war, General Sherman, together with other ladies and gentlemen visited Salt Lake City, and it was hoped that his coming into contact with the people might correct the president's judgment on Utah affairs. It may well have been, however, that this visit, under the conditions prevailing when it was made, and the president's association with the anti-"Mormon" party while in the city—deepened his prejudices, and led to his determination to make the recommendations of his subsequent message to congress.

611The arrival of the Hayes presidential party occurred on Sunday, so that on the part both of the president's party and of the people among whom they had come, there were laid the necessary restraints of the day. Still there was a meeting of the president's party by special train of prominent leaders of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, among whom were President John Taylor and wife, Hon. George Q. Cannon, Utah's delegate to congress, D. H. Wells and wife, and many others, as well as Governor Murray's party, which met the president at Weber Station, east of Ogden.

612The city council (of "Mormon" personnel, of course) as usual when a distinguished guest was expected, made arrangements to receive the president with civic honors, and tendered to him the hospitality of the city. The usual committees on reception, arrangements and resolutions, etc., including gentlemen of all parties, and the military officers of Camp Douglas, were appointed, and the president's party was notified of these arrangements by wire at Washington. Failing to get response from that point the same word was sent to Chicago, only to be answered from there that by "prior arrangements" the president was to be the guest of the governor, but expressing the hope that the state and municipal authorities were "acting in concert." Unfortunately they were not doing this; for Governor Murray had organized a reception committee "composed of only one class" into which no "Mormon" was admitted, and sought to take possession of the presidential party. Prominent "Mormon" citizens of Salt Lake, however, set these annoyances and slights aside, and honored the chief executive of the nation during his visit in Utah.

612Relative to the unfortunate failure on the part of the federal officers of Utah to accord participation in the reception of the president's party while in Salt Lake, a dispatch, very misleading, was sent to the eastern press, as follows:

612"Salt Lake.—The mayor and council secured a special train for Ogden and arranged to receive Hayes, notifying him on August 25th. Governor Murray organized a reception party, excluding Mormons. Last evening the mayor received a telegram from the president that he would be the guest of Governor Murray. The municipal authorities are very indignant and resolved not even to call on the president, claiming that they had been insulted. Only Gentiles and rabble among the Mormons will show themselves. Hayes arrives Sunday, leaves Monday evening."

612On this the Deseret News made the following comment:

"That is after the usual style of press dispatches. We are happy to say that there is no 'Mormon' rabble, and we are of the opinion that while the municipality cannot consistently join in any public demonstration, many influential citizens in a private capacity will call on the president and make his acquaintance. We hope the visit of the president and party will be pleasant and agreeable, and that among other memorable events occurring on his trip to the western coast will be his brief sojourn in the capital of Utah territory." [^37]

613The special train of the "Mormon" party was coupled to the president's train, and en route for Salt Lake City there were pleasant greetings and exchanges of visits including a reception of the ladies of the "Mormon" party by Mrs. Hayes in the president's car. There were greetings by the people at the stations where the train was halted en route from Ogden, and at Salt Lake City with their teachers and other citizens thousands of Sunday School children lined the streets from the depot to the Walker House where the president's party was entertained. From the portico of the hotel Governor Murray introduced to the waiting crowds the president, Mrs. Hayes, Secretary Ramsey and General Sherman. All excused themselves from any attempt at speech-making beyond a few words of acknowledgment of courtesies received and expressions of pleasure at being in the city. General Sherman, however, who had several times before visited the city, and was accounted a very good friend of her people, went a little beyond this and ventured to say:

GENERAL SHERMAN'S WORDS OF CHEER TO THE PEOPLE

"An old philosopher remarked, before any of us were born, that he who made two blades of grass to grow where only one did before was a public benefactor. Now, the people who have made the pears and apples, and the peaches and the wheat and clover and the grass to grow, when but a short time ago there was nothing but the sagebrush to be seen, are entitled to our thanks as public benefactors."

613Then came the following declaration:

613"The president will in due time on all proper occasions recognize your kindness to him—not here but elsewhere; for he takes notes of everything as he goes along, and he is so familiar with the history of this people, that when the time comes that he can say a kind word for you, he will do it. (Great applause)."

This, in view of what the president did say of the people of Utah three months later, in his message to congress, and the recommendations he made in respect of revolutionary measures as to their territorial government, and the proposed striking down of their political rights, sounds like irony, though the sincerity of General Sherman in making the remark is beyond question.

614To the above remark already quoted the general added: all that I want to say this Sunday afternoon is this: Go on as you have begun, make homes for yourselves and your children and be half as good as you know how to be, and you will be good enough for this or any other valley." Which remark was greeted with applause. [^38]

DEPARTURE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL PARTY

On departing from Salt Lake three special cars were coupled to the president's train of four cars in which rode a party of prominent citizens, chiefly dignitaries of the Church of the Latter-day Saints and men prominent in business in Utah. Shortly after leaving Salt Lake City President Hayes entered the rear cars and after shaking hands with all, took a seat near President John Taylor and remained conversing with him until the train neared Ogden.

614"The conversation was on a variety of topics, secular and religious, mostly pertaining to Utah, and at the close President Hayes on rising to leave shook hands warmly with President Taylor, assured him that he had much enjoyed the interview, and for himself and associates declared that the impressions received during their visit to Utah had been of the most favorable character, and as such would long be remembered. Mrs. Hayes also left her car and entering the others at the rear of the train, held extended conversations with several of the 'Mormon' ladies." [^39]

One reflection here obtrudes itself upon the mind: If the Latter-day Saints were the ignorant, uncouth people they were so frequently represented to be, why is it that Gentile, federal officialdom, during these middle days of territorial existence, here and earlier being treated, was at such pains to elbow them away from the prominent visitors, and especially away from the presidential visitors to the territory? One would think that the true policy of Gentile officialdom would have been to have encouraged contact of distinguished visitors with both people and their leaders, that "Mormon" ignorance, coarseness and even brutality might have objective demonstration to the consciousness of the visitors. Then, as in the President Hayes case, how often the "elbowing-away policy" defeated itself!

615A NON-"MORMON" FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION

615Returning to Governor Murray and his attitude in relation to the dominant church it may be said again that the people were not left long in doubt as to where he would stand with reference to local parties and questions in Utah. A Gentile celebration of the 4th of July was planned under the direction of the governor in which no "Mormon" was invited to participate. There was a parade, [^40] small but witnessed by many spectators; an open air meeting was held at Washington Square, at which the governor presided, and made the opening speech; Parley L. Williams, a young Salt Lake lawyer, was the orator of the day, and delivered a set speech.

Governor Murray in his introductory speech dealt chiefly in innuendo, but was sufficiently clear to be understood, and sufficiently coarse to be insulting to the people. "Those who believe in the divine right of kings, those who would keep their fellow men in ignorance and bondage," began the first thinly veiled attack upon the Latter-day Saints of Utah—"those who would rob the fruits of honest toil, those who would subordinate state to church, grumblers, and traitors, do not and cannot enjoy Freedom's Day." After this the governor grew bolder:

616"The tree of liberty planted in 1776 has grown with our days, and strengthened with the years, until its spreading branches reach from sea to sea, broad enough to shelter all patriots, native born or naturalized. Further shall I say, and rich enough in timber to construct scaffolds and coffins for all those who may treasonably conspire to break down our constitution and to violate its written laws. The people of this country propose to remain free forever. No state will be wiped out. No star obliterated from our national flag. Upon the other hand, no new state will be formed, no new star placed upon the folds of our flag, until the people it represents come with the badge of freedom upon their breasts. Free to think for themselves. Free to act for themselves. Free from all kingly and priestly dictation in civil affairs—a liberty loving, law-abiding people who, with 'their lives, their fortunes and their sacred honor,' will defend this government, our precious blood-bought heritage—the pride of a loving, loyal people. Utah shall be free—and then, and not till then, a state. The shackles that bind so many of her good and too confiding people to the superstitions of a dead past, will, by their own acts, their own words, be broken." [^41]

616In order to put in contrast with this "Gentile celebration" the "Mormon" way of doing a similar thing, a very elaborate celebration of the 24th of July was determined upon for this eventful year, 1880, by the Latter-day Saint community. Invitations were sent to the federal officials to participate in the celebration of Utah's Pioneer Day, and notes of acceptance were generally received by the invitation committee from these gentlemen. The one from Governor Murray was especially gracious. "The Pioneers, in opening up the great west and this beautiful valley," said he, "made a definite demand on history for honorable mention. Their deeds of daring about the campfires of wandering want, challenge the sympathetic admiration of all who read the story. * * * I accept the invitation, and will be pleased to join you in my own carriage, at such hour as you may name." [^42]

Notwithstanding this acceptance on the part of Governor Murray and other federal officials, and notwithstanding nothing had occurred to offend them, or justify their withdrawal from their acceptance, none of them took part in the celebration or even appeared on the scene unless as spectators; and it could not be other than a concerted action on their part, after consultation had upon the subject, to stay away, lest the "Mormons" should appear in too favorable a light before the country. [^43]

617The "Mormon" celebration of Utah's Pioneer Day was a marked success. In a way it was a continuation of the Year of Jubilee. The preceding April 6th had marked off the fiftieth anniversary of the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which as we have seen in preceding pages had been fittingly and spiritedly celebrated in Jubilee Conference; and perhaps this celebration of the 24th of July that year took on some of the coloring of that semi-festive year. The procession itself was three miles in length. At its head were five wagons in which rode the surviving band of the Pioneers of 1847, the first wagon, drawn by eight horses—preceded by two horsemen—carrying the surviving leaders of the company. [^44]

The whole procession was said to be a "grand and beautiful display." The historical events in the Church of the Latter-day Saints were featured, as also their present organizations and activities; there were also featured the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers, the drama, and other arts, education, agriculture, manufactures, the trades, the pony express of 1860-1861, [^45] the telegraph, the press. Then followed contrasted representations of Utah in 1847 and in 1880. The first was a "veritable log cabin—occupants in primitive attire, with rude furniture and surroundings; the second an elegant specimen of the architecture of today, superbly finished, furnished, and adorned," occupied by persons in tasteful attire.

618Particularization of one of the floats of the parade will give the coloring and the keynote of the whole parade and of the whole celebration. This the float representing "Education." This was a splendidly decorated car, containing five ladies personifying respectively religion, history, geography, science and art.

618"The first (religion) occupied a platform in the middle of the car. She was dressed in white, with a silver star on her forehead, he elbow resting on the Bible, and in her hand was a palm leaf. History was apparelled in gold, and stationed at one of the corners surrounded by books with a scroll and stylus in her hand. In another corner dressed in green, with a globe at her side, sat geography. Science also occupied a corner, as did art, the former robed in blue, holding a telescope and surrounded by other scientific instruments; the latter was in pink attire, with palette, easel, sculpture, lyre, etc., around her. Near by were four children, two looking at a picture book, and on the other side two larger children studying natural history and botany. Behind it were carriages containing small children with books in hand, and the inscriptions 'Our Schools,' and 'The Road to Greatness.' School trustees and teachers, and the committee on education followed in vehicles bearing banners with the sentiments, 'A Free People Must be an Educated People;' and, 'Our Nation's Prosperity Lies in the Education of Her Children.' While it is said that 'this car was one of the finest displayed,' still the whole pageantry was drawn upon this high order of doing things. And a number of the subjects were much more elaborately treated, especially the Drama and the 1620 Pilgrim Tableau car."

618The parade was followed by services in the great tabernacle, in keeping with the grandeur of the pageantry of the parade.

One of the most striking features of the occasion was the enumeration by the venerable historian of the church—Orson Pratt—of the countries in which the mission work of the church had been introduced, with a brief account of the work accomplished in each country; after which representatives of all these countries—twenty-five in number— clad in native costume, arose and formed in line on the platform, facing the audience, and displaying their national ensigns; whereupon President John Taylor arose and said:

619"I wish to state to the congregation that the Lord commanded his servants to go forth to all the world to preach the gospel to every creature. We have not yet been to all the world, but here are twenty-five nations represented today, and thus far we have fulfilled our mission, and it is for us to continue our labors until all the world shall hear us, that all who are desirous may obey, and we fulfill the mission given us. The nationalities then resumed their seats, and the choir rendered the grand and beautiful anthem, 'Glory to God in the Highest.'" [^46]

619"Notwithstanding the immense crowds that thronged the broad streets," said the Deseret News in its description of the occasion, "the utmost order prevailed, and good humor; gratitude to God, respect for the occasion, and that love of peace and harmony characteristic of the people of Utah, calming and regulating the exuberance of feeling natural at such a time. The weather was lovely. The sky clear, the sunshine warm and brilliant, a light breeze stirring and the air balmy and healthful. * * * Pioneer Day in the year of our Lord 1880, and in the Jubilee Year of the church, will be a marked period in this people's history." [^47]

619Such the occasion and the spirit of it—the celebration of the 24th of July, 1880, the thirty-third anniversary of the entrance of the Pioneer band into Salt Lake valley, and the Jubilee Year of the organized existence of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Washington Press Dispatch, 8th June, 1875. Deseret News, weekly, of June 16th. Also local item, Ibid, p. 313. Also Bancroft's Works, vol. xvii. History of Arizona and New Mexico, pp. 702-3. His term of governor ran from July, 1875, to 1878. He was succeeded by General Lew Wallace. Afterwards, viz., in 1882, he was apopinted chief justice of the territory.
[^2] See Axtell's account of himself in a speech at Ogden, Feb. 20th, 1875, Deseret News, weekly, of March 3rd, where the speech is given verbatim. A burlesque account of the speech is found in Salt Lake Tribune for Feb. 21st, 1875.
[^3] Asked by the Salt Lake Herald why the prominent non-"Mormons" of Salt Lake City, and especially why the federal officers were so lacking in courtesy as not to go to Ogden to welcome Governor Axtell on his arrival, the Salt Lake Tribune, organ of the anti-"Mormons," including the federal officials, replied that Governor Axtell withheld all knowledge of his movements from his brother officials, "preferring to receive hospitality from a prominent Mormon [i. e. Captain Hooper], and his friends. * * * They have too much self-respect to run a breathless race with the church leaders in extending hospitality to a man who studiously ignores their existence and was guilty of the gross breach of official etiquette of communicating with a Mormon ex-delegate, who championed polygamy in the halls of congress, instead of making his movements known to the secretary of the territory and then acting governor." (Salt Lake Tribune of Feb 10th, 1875). A month later, when Judge McKean sentenced Brigham Young to one day of imprisonment for alleged contempt of court, and a petition was circulated asking that the governor exercise executive authority and release him, the same anti-"Mormon" organ said: "Whether the document reached the Axtellian office or not, we cannot say, but the petitioners received the information from a reliable source that the favor asked for is one of the few things which the Prophet's Jack [meaning Governor Axtell] has not the power to grant, any more than he can drag down the Christian women of Utah to the level of 'best society' [i. e. 'Mormon' society]. So the pardon scheme collapsed." (Editorial, Salt Lake Tribune of March 13th, 1875).
[^4] Compiled Laws of Utah, 1876, Title III of Elections, etc., chapter i, section 25>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>.
[^5] San Francisco Chronicle, special dispatch, Feb. 5th, 1875, quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 10th.
[^6] Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 10th.
[^7] Salt Lake Tribune of Feb. 11th, 1875. The comment on this act continued through a number of editorials in which such statements as these occurred: "One of the conditions agreed upon by Mr. Axtell with delegate Cannon and his corrupt and venal patron [United States Senator] Sargent, as the price of office, was that his first official act on his arrival in Utah should be to issue his certificate to the alien churchman and mail it to him at Washington. * * * We require no further evidences of Governor Axtell's hostility to the cause of progress in Utah and the best interest to its citizens. He may show his perverse tastes by surrounding himself with the Nauvoo Legion on his arrival in this territory [this because General Wells, then mayor of the city, and John R. Winder, were of the Hooper party that met the governor at Farmington and accompanied him to the city—they had been officers of the Nauvoo Legion], he may utter his stale platitudes about the persecution of the innocent Mormon leaders; * * * but when he hastens to abuse the power unwisely committed to his hands and before the dust is brushed from his garments by commissioning men whose lives are notoriously flagitious, and whose avowed purpose is to maintain and perpetuate ecclesiastical rule, we candidly inform the gentleman that such official turpitude will not be calmly submitted to, and that he will excite a felling in the minds of the loyal citizens of Utah which will render the political atmosphere so warm as to be uncomfortable." (Tribune of Feb. 12th, 1875). Such attacks, only worse, continued so long as the governor's brief term of office in Utah lasted.
[^8] Deseret News, weekly, of July 28th, 1875, speech at Ogden on leaving the territory for his new post of duty in New Mexico.
[^9] From verbatim report in Deseret News, weekly, of March 3rd, 1875. This speech was sneeringly and inadequately reported by the Salt Lake Tribune, see impression of Feb. 21st, 1875.
[^10] As the Deseret News said, when a press dispatch announced that Axtell had been superseded, and referring to the anti-"Mormon" ring—" "They have misrepresented him without stint, lied about him shamefully and persistently, and announced from the first their intention of effecting his removal if possible. The sole reason for all this vicious and brutal opposition was that he did not rush eagerly into their open arms, be hail fellows well met with them at once, and with gusto swallow all their lies about the 'Mormons,' and adopt the violent, bitter, and baseless prejudices of the 'ring' against them. Because the governor dared to meet some of the prominent church leaders socially, his detractors said: 'Governor Axtell finds himself received by the polygamous saints, but in his efforts to harmonize the two religious elements has been spewed out with nausea by Gentile society. No man can serve two masters, neither can the sons of darkness be found worthy to mingle with the children of light.'" (Salt Lake Tribune, editorial, May 27, 1875).
[^11] Salt Lake Tribune, June 9th, 1875.
[^12] See Leading Facts of New Mexican History, vol. ii, p. 419, where an extended biographical note and character sketch is given of Governor Axtel. The work is written by Ralph Emerson Twitchel, vice president of New Mexico Historical Society, 1912, two volumes.
[^13] The New York Herald quoted in Deseret News of July 7th, 1875
[^14] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 118, note.
[^15] See chapter cxlvi.
[^16] The governor's first message, in full, Jan. 11th, 1876, will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 19th, 1876; and his second message, Jan., 1878, is published in full, Deseret News, weekly, Jan. 23, 1878.
[^17] Editorial in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 27, 1878.
[^18] Deseret News, weekly, for Jan. 19, 1876.
[^19] Chapter cxl, this History.
[^20] Compiled Laws of Utah, 1876, Penal Code; and Deseret News, weekly, editorial, Dec. 24>, 1879.
[^21] The message in full will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, of January 19, 1876. This message bore the date of 11th Jan., 1876. His second message, dealing with the same subject, Jan., 1878. The decision of the supreme court in the Reynolds cases is dated Jan. 6, 1879.
[^22] "The last was the very point that the prosecution desired to establish, its object, compared with which the conviction of the accused [John D. Lee], was but a minor consideration, the real purpose being to get at the supposed inner facts of the case. The district attorney refused therefore to accept the confession, on the ground that it was not made in good faith." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 565. See also Baskin's Reminiscences, ch. x). Mr. Baskin assisted Prosecuting Attorney William C. Carey, who was United States district attorney for Utah at the time, and it is quite clear from the chapter, of the Reminiscences here cited, dealing with the massacre and Lee's trials, that the chief effort of the prosecution at the first trial was to implicate Brigham Young in the perpetration of the crime. "Excerpts of Lee's Confession" referred to above and rejected by the prosecution, appears in The Lee Trial, published in Pamphlet form by the Salt Lake Tribune reporter, 1875. Also in the San Francisco Call of July 21st, 1875; and the San Francisco Bulletin, same date. Bancroft says that The Lee Trial by the Tribune reporter, seems "unduly anxious to cast the onus of the charge [i. e. of responsibility for the tragedy] on the first presidency [i. e. of the 'Mormon' church]. (See History of Utah, p. 565, note 47). Lee after his conviction and while awaiting the execution of his sentence made another "confession," which was intrusted to one of his attorneys, W. Bishop, for publication. After Lee's execution it was published under the title, Mormonism Unveiled, M. E. Mason, publisher, St. Louis, 1891. It is an autobiography and covers the whole of Lee's life up to the time of his death, and includes his account of the massacre. It is a volume of 413 pages. The publishers state that several pretended Lives and Confessions of John D. Lee had been published, but claim that theirs, the Ms. of which was obtained from Mr. Bishop, is the only genuine one. (pp. v, vi. See also Introduction by Bishop).
[^23] Baskin declares that the three Gentile jurors voted for conviction, that the "Jack-Mormon" and the eight "Mormons" voted for acquittal, (Reminiscences, p. 138).
[^24] In the list of attorneys for the defense at the first trial of Lee, it is represented by Baskin that Messrs. Sutherland and Bates were "attorneys for the first presidency," and cites in evidence that Mr. Bates later employed him to bring suit for the collection of fees due to his firm ($5,000). The claim being thrown out on demur proceeding, Bates instructed Baskin to bring suit against Brigham Young for the amount alleged to be due; but before the suit could be planted, "I ascertained," says Mr. Baskin, "that he [Bates] had entered into a written marriage contract with a 'doctress' and they had left the territory." (Reminiscences, p. 114). Since the church or its leading officials, were the parties really attacked in that first trial, it could not be out of place for them to be safeguarded, at least, by the presence of counsel at the trial. Bancroft also says that "Sutherland and Bates represented the first presidency." (History of Utah, p. 565, note 46).
[^25] Report of the second Lee trial in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 20, 1876, p. 544.
[^26] Their names are as follows: Wm. Greenwood, John E. Pace, A. M. Farnsworth, Stephen S. Barton, Valentine Carsen, Alfred J. Randall, James S. Montague, A. S. Goodwin, Ira B. Elmer, Andrew A. Correy, Charles Adams, Walter Granger." (Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 20, 1876, p. 544; also see Mormonism Unveiled, p. 302, et seq.).
[^27] A full account of the trial will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept., 20th and 27th respectively, 1876.
[^28] See Compiled Laws of Utah, 1888, vol. ii, Title vii, of Judgment and Execution, chapter i, sec. 5131>. The same privilege is carried over into the state law. (See Compiled Laws of Utah, 1907.)
[^29] In the Denver Republican of 30th April, 1882, appears a long article by former United States district attorney for Utah George C. Bates, in which he alleges that up to the last moment arrangements were made for the escape of Lee from execution. He alleges that arrangements were made for Lee to make a confession that would implicate the "Mormon" church leaders; that a "fake" execution was to be performed, the executors firing blank cartridges and Lee after a mock burial was to be performed, the executors firing blank cartridges and Lee after a mock burial was to be allowed to escape. Bates it seems had fallen into intemperate habits in the later years of life, and deteriorated in character. His slanderous inventions about the escape of John D. Lee from execution by the connivance of the United States marshal, William Nelson, et al, was promptly refuted by Mr. Nelson in a letter to the Denver Republican on the 3rd of May, 1882. He declares the Bates article to have been grounded on personal malice, and unworthy of belief; and rebukes the editor of the Republican for publishing "such scandalous and baseless charges against anybody on such worthless authority." (Mr. Nelson's letter will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of May 24, 1882. Yet in the Hand Book on Mormonism, published in 1882, by Conyer, this same man, Bates, then debauched and fallen, is quoted as to social conditions among the "Mormons." See Hand Book on Mormonism, p. 22).
[^30] See Proceedings of Utah Legislature, 1880. The bill was signed by Acting Governor Arthur L. Thomas, Feb. 12 1880. Castle Dale was made the county seat. Every county is noted as an agricultural and mineral district, rich in natural wealth and resources.
[^31] Salt Lake Daily Herald of Feb. 13, 1880.
[^32] "Murray is known as the 'handsome man of Kentucky.' He was removed from his position as (United States) marshal of Kentucky." (New York Tribune, Washington special dispatch, of Jan. 19, 1880). Referring to his reputation for manly beauty, a Salt Lake paper said: "We trust his excellency will have something more than this to recommend him to the position of governor. 'Pretty men' are not appreciated in the west." (Deseret Evening News, Jan. 20, 1880).
[^33] Salt Lake Herald, Dec. 12, 1879.
[^34] Washington Special to New York Tribune, cited above, note 32.
[^35] See Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. vii, pp. 605-6.
[^36] For all of above measures see Congressional Record, passim, for December, January, February, 1879-80, and Millennial Star, vol. xlii, pp. 330-3.
[^37] Deseret News, weekly, of September 8th, 1880.
[^38] Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 8, 1880.
[^39] Ibid, Sept. 7th, 1880.
[^40] The parade was not altogether creditable. A current published account of it said: "It was the first non-'Mormon' Fourth of July celebration ever attempted in Utah. The procession was small, but was witnessed by a large number of people. * * * Linked in with federal officials, preachers, reformers and Christian regenerators of the 'deluded Mormons' were the most notorious of the 'Cyprians' of this western region, in open barouche, placed in line of the invited guests, between the carriages of those whom we have named and the vehicles of other well known citizens! The officers who represent this 'civilization' ahead, and in their wake a display of prostitutes, beer drays, liquor wagons, cigar trucks, etc., a fitting illustration of the history of official work for the reformation of the 'Mormons'!" (Deseret News, weekly, July 7, 1880).
[^41] Deseret News, weekly, of July 7th, 1880.
[^42] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 107, where the governor's letter of acceptance is given in full.
[^43] Such the suggestion of Whitney. "It certainly would have been in striking contrast to their partisan celebration [i. e. of the 4th of July], and would have placed the 'Mormons' in a more favorable light than their opponents desired them to appear. 'Mormon exclusiveness' had ever been a favorite anti-'Mormon' theme, and anything which tended to show that the saints were not as black as they were painted was foreign to the interests of those who felt it their political and religious duty to make war upon them." (Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 107).
[^44] These were Orson Pratt, Erastus Snow, John Brown, Wilford Woodruff, C. C. Rich, Joseph Young, Thomas Bullock, Albert Carrington, H. K. Whitney, Aaron Farr, Zebedee Coltrin, T. O. Angel, and Thomas Grover; the horsemen on lead were Jacob Weiler and John Pack. (See pamphlet, Celebration Pioneer Day, 1880, p. 6).
[^45] Riding in this division were four of the original riders, viz., Nels Empey, W. F. Fisher, Erastus Egan, and George Hanks.
[^46] Celebration of Pioneer Day, pamphlet, p. 28.
[^47] The Herald article is reproduced in Millennial Star, vol. xxxv, pp. 117-8.
