Página web, deCitavi 4.1convertida a PDF 28/08/2013 12:20 p.m., es posible que haya diferencias con respecto aloriginal.

THE MESSAGE OF AMULEK

"And nowbehold,Iwilltestifyunto youofmyselfthat thesethingsare true.Behold,Isay unto you thatIdoknow thatChristshall come amongthechildren of men, to take upon him the transgressions of his people, and that he shall atone for the sins of the world; for the Lord God hath spoken it"(Alma 34:8).

Around 74 B.C. the prophet Alma went on a mission to preach the gospel to his people and during his travels he visited the Zoramites who were practicingacorrupted formofGod's true religion. Withhiscompanion, Amulek,hetaught them aboutthecoming Messiahand how Hewould be sacrificedtoatonefor thesinsof theworld. Whenhewasthrough speaking, Amulekthenstoodandaddressedthepeople, statingthathewouldadd his own testimony to what Alma had just said. However, what he then taught them gives us a deeper understanding of the plan of salvation, whoit applies to, what its conditions are, who it does not apply to, and what we must do to qualify for it.

In verse 8 he begins by saying that the things he's about to say comes from his own knowledge rather than what he has been taught by Alma. Assuch he is bearing his own personal testimony to the truthfulness of what he is about to tell his people. Immediately after making that declaration hethen makes a statement that sets the stage for the rest of his remarks. If we miss the point he is about to make then we tend to miss the point of hismessage. Therefore, it's important that we have a clear understanding of his opening statement.

Hestartsbysaying "that Christ shallcomeamongthechildrenofmen."Thisisthemessagethat all theprophetshavegivenand Alma hadjust finished quoting the ancient scriptures to explain this very point. But Amulek then explains why Christ is going to come among the children of men.He says that he will "take upon him the transgressions of his people and that he shall atone for the sins of the world."

The word "and" is used in a sentence to connect two separate things or thoughts. For example, Alma and Amulek went about preaching the gospeltotheZoramites.What this tellsus isthat thereare twopeoplewho areworking together doingthepreaching-Almais onepersonand heis connectedorassociated with Amulek,who is aseparate person.Itwouldbewrongtoassume from this sentence that AlmaandAmulekarethesame being.

We find this same situation existing in Paul's writings. At the beginning of most of his letters he says, "Grace be to you and peace from God theFather,andfromourLord Jesus Christ,(1Cor. 1:3;2Cor. 1:2; Galatians 1:3; Eph. 1:2; Phil. 1:2;Col1:2-3;2Thes. 1:2;1Tim. 1:2, emphasis added). While many Christians tend to interpret this to mean that God the Father and Jesus Christ are the same being, that is an incorrect readingof these scriptures. By placing the word "and" in this sentence it should be read as saying, "God the Father sends you his grace and peace, andour Lord Jesus Christ also sends His grace and peace to you as well." When read correctly, this salutation clearly shows that God the Father andJesus Christ are two separate beings.

Paul also wrote that "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore" (2 Cor. 11:31). By placing the word "and" in this sentence we learn that there is a being who is both the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ as well as being the God of Jesus Christ. Thus, this Being holds two different titles. He is both a God as well as a Father to Jesus (see Ephesians 1:17; Colossians 3:17).

WhenAmulekuses the word"and"inhisopening statementhe istellingusthat whenChrist comesHewilldotwothings.ThefirstisthatHewilltake upon him the transgressions of his people. The second thing He will do is atone for the sins of the world. When most people read this verse they automatically assume that taking the transgression of his people and atoning for the sins of the world means the same thing but that is not whatAmulek is trying to tell his people. He clearly makes a distinction between these two events and that distinction is crucial to understanding the fullsignificance of the rest of his message.

The reason why we know that Amulek is talking about two different events is because he relates each of them to two different classes of people. When talking about "transgression" Amulek says that Christ will take upon Him the transgressions of just a certain, select group of people whom herefers to as "His people." In other words, Christ will only take upon Him the transgressions of those whom He considers to be His.

Bydefinition,adiscipleofChristis one whodoes what Jesus commands (see Matthew 21:6).It wasChristwhosaid,"If yecontinuein myword then areye mydisciples indeed" (John 8:31)."He that hath thecommandments,andkeepeth them,he it isthatlovethme: andhethatloveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John 14:21). Notice the word "and" in this sentence. It is not enoughforapersononlytohave thecommandments;they must also keep themaswell.Bothconditionsmustbemetinorderto belovedbyGodtheFather and by His Son, Jesus Christ, again showing that the word "and" connects two separate, distinct things rather than equating both of them as beingthe same.

However, when Amulek talks about the atonement he is referring to something separate and distinct from Christ taking upon Him the "transgressionof His people." While Christ takes upon Him the transgressions of only those who belong to Him, the atonement applies to everyone in the world. Itis universal in its application. No one is excluded from this act of mercy.

Where the confusion comes from on this subject is that most people think the words "transgression" and "sin" mean the same thing then conclude that since Christ atonedfor oursins that meansthesameas Himtaking upon Himselfourtransgressions. However, thatis not themessageAmulek was trying to convey to his people.

Amulek explainsthatwithouttheatonement"allmankindmustunavoidably perish…yea,allarefallenand arelost,and mustperish." (verse 9,emphasis added).Sincethe fallofmanisuniversal thereforetheatonementofChristmustlikewisebeuniversalinitseffecttosaveusfromourfallen condition. This is why Amulek refers to it as "an infinite and eternal sacrifice" (verse 10). But, if the atonement of Christ saves everyone in theworld, then why is it necessary to believe in Christ?

Before Amulek answers this question he first explains something that many of today's Christians have had a great deal of argument about amongthemselves.

Jesus said, "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heavenand earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled" (Matthew 5:17-18).

Thereisconsiderable disagreement among modern Christiansas towhat Jesus meantbythis statement. Some argue thatHemeantthe lawofMoses, with all of its rules, rituals, and commandments, had been done away with because Jesus fulfilled it, meaning that He completed what it was
