intended to do and therefore it is no longer needed. Others argue that when Jesus said He fulfilled the law He was saying that He fully obeyed all the requirementsofthe lawbylivingit toperfection. Since Jesusisourexampletheyarguethatwetoo muststrivetofulfillthecommandmentsofthelaw just as Jesus did. In that way the law has not been destroyed but has been further established as being necessary.

Amulek explained that no one can sacrifice his own blood to atone for the sins of another. If that is true then certainly the shedding of an innocent animal cannot atonefor anyone'ssins(verses11,seeHebrews 10:4). Instead,the lawrequiresthe lifeofhim who hascommitted murder (verse12). If that is true then why did the law of Moses require people to offer up an animal sacrifice? Amulek explained it was meant to point to that greatandlast sacrificeofChrist (verse 14).Thus,all thesacrificesmadeintheancient Israelite temples servedas atype, shadow,orpatternofwhatChrist would someday do.

Amulek then explained that once Christ had offered that final sacrifice, the sacrificial part of the law of Moses was no longer needed because Christwould have actually accomplished what the animal sacrifices were only intended to represent. As Paul explained, the priests offered up sacrificesevery day and the high priest offered sacrifices for the sins of the people once every year (Hebrew 9). But when Christ offered Himself as a

sacrifice He fulfilled the purpose of that ritual (what the scriptures refer to as fulfilling "every jot and tittle" of the law). When that happened there wasnomore needtocontinue performingaceremony thathadlostitsmeaning. However, Christ's atonement onlydidaway withthesacrifice ofanimals. The other commandments in the law of Moses have not been done away with and therefore still need to be observed.

But, just because Christ's atonement is infinite and eternal, meaning that it applies to everyone, doesn't mean that everyone in the world is saved. Beginning in verse 15, Amulek explained what he meant about Christ taking upon Him the transgressions of His people. He stated that salvationcomes only to those who believe in the name of Christ and how Christ's atonement was to bring about the "bowels of mercy which overpowereth justiceandbringeth about meansunto man that they may havefaithuntorepentance.And thusmercycansatisfythedemandsofjustice and encircles them in the arms of safety."

AccordingtoAmulek, whiletheatonement appliestoeveryone,itdoesnotsave anyone.Itmerely makesitpossibleformercytooverpower thedemands of justice. Justice is very much an eye for an eye punishment system. If a man sheds the blood of another then justice demands that that man's blood must be shed. Mercy, on the other hand, allows someone else to pay the penalty of justice thereby allowing the sinner to escape beingpunished for their own sins. This is what Jesus did when He took upon Him the transgressions of his people.

But, there is a condition that must be met in order to receive Christ's mercy. Those who believe in Christ and have the kind of faith in Him that brings themtotrue andgenuine repentanceare the only ones who canreceiveaforgivenessoftheir sins.AsAmulekput it, they are the ones whoaresafely encircled in the arms of mercy where they are protected and shielded from the harsh, exacting demands of justice.

On the other hand, "he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him thathas faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption" (verse 16). In other words, even though Christ died to atone forthe sinsofeveryoneintheworld, thosewhodon'thavefaithinHimtothepoint wheretheybecome repentantoftheirsins must face thefull demandsofjustice.Inthatcase,for themitwillbe asthough Christ neverdiedbecausetheycannot qualifytotakeadvantageofthegreat andeternal plan of redemption.

In our day the Lord has explained, "Therefore I command you to repent-repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by myanger, and your sufferings be sore-how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God,have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I" (D&C 19:15-17, emphasis added).

The atonement of Christ made it possible for all men in every age to repent. The Lord explained this principle to Joseph Smith when He said, "For,behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, [so] that all men might repent and come untohim" (D&C18:11). Without the atonement, repenting of our sins would have no effect in removing even the smallest sin. It is only because of Christ's atonement that repentance on our part has any meaning.

Through His death on the cross Christ paid the price for our sins and because of that great ransom we now belong to Him. He has bought us withhisblood (see1Corinthians 6:20; 7:23).Heownsus. And it isthroughthesheddingof Hisblood thatweobtainaforgivenessof oursins(Colossians 1:14) but only if we have faith in Him unto repentance.

TohavefaithinChrist aloneor torepent without having faithinHimisnotenoughtoreceiveaforgivenessofour sins andbespared the punishment required by the law of justice. Both are needed. That is why Amulek said that Christ taketh upon Him the transgressions of only thosewhom He considers His people, even though His atoning death on the cross applies to everyone in the world.

Without Christ's atonement, all men - righteous and wicked - would be hopelessly lost and eternally separated from God. If Christ had not atoned forour sins then allof uswould become subjecttothespiritofthedevil whereinhewouldsealus ashis own(verse35). ButbecauseofChrist'satonement He has made it possible for all men to come unto Him, repent of their sins and be shown mercy, being protected from the demands ofjustice. At the same time, He has also allowed all men the choice of not coming to Him with a repentant heart. But, if that is what they choose to dothen they must suffered for their own sins as justice requires.

That is the message of Amulek.

Return to main menu

If you like this article, tell a friend, orClick here to email a friend!

OneStat
