It’s just a souvenir coin. Its value isn’t monetary; it’s symbolic. It’s called an Armor of God coin, and while they were serving a military relations mission in Colorado, Jerry and Pam Ingalsbe presented quite a few of them.

During their mission, the Ingalsbes worked closely with members of the Church who are also members of the military. “The coins,” Sister Ingalsbe says, “were just a way of letting soldiers know they have our support.”

“We wanted members serving in the military to feel connected to the gospel despite their frequently changing environments and situations,” Elder Ingalsbe says. “Before they deployed, we tried to present a coin to each soldier we worked with.”

The coin symbolizes many things—the standards and beliefs by which Church members live; the support the Church offers for those who are far away from home; the honor, distinction, and faith with which those in the military should serve their country; and the protection, both temporal and spiritual, received by those who wear the armor of God (see Ephesians 6:11–18).

The Church provides support for members serving in the armed forces—and their families—through the Military Relations and Chaplain Services Division. The division also coordinates with and supports:

- Senior couples called as military relations missionaries.

- More than 258 chaplains affiliated with the Church—109 military chaplains provide religious support to members of the military and safeguard their religious rights while functioning in a pluralistic religious environment; 149 civilian chaplains serve in hospitals, hospice organizations, assisted living centers, police and fire departments, prisons, Border Patrol, Civil Air Patrol, universities, and rehabilitation centers.

- Members of the Church who wish to become chaplains.

- Priesthood leaders who have members of their ward or stake serving in the armed forces.

- Cadets at military academies who wish to take time out to serve a full-time mission.

Tangible resources the Church provides for those serving in the military, their families, and their priesthood leaders include items such as:

- A letter, signed by a General Authority, that arrives during basic military training. It thanks those in the military for serving their country, suggesting things they can do to maintain Church activity while in the military and reminding them that “we’re here for you.”

- A pocket-sized edition of the scriptures as well as the Principles of the Gospel book, which contains a message from the First Presidency, instructions for Latter-day Saints in the military, gospel topics, instructions for priesthood ordinances and blessings, and selected hymns.

- Lessons, pamphlets, and brochures about military life, family resiliency training, and priesthood leader support.

- Online videos to support members serving in the military, as well as presentations from the annual seminar for chaplains.

But the most powerful support for Church members in the military comes with a personal touch.

Roger and Tina Schiele served their military relations mission in Guam. “We were given the opportunity to join those meeting a submarine as it returned to its home port,” Elder Schiele explains. “It was a wonderful experience to see families reunited.”

On board the ship was one young Latter-day Saint who was headed for his first duty station right out of submarine school. After the month-long trip to Guam, no one would be there to greet him when the ship arrived.

“His bishop at home contacted the bishop here and told him he was coming,” Sister Schiele says. “So we were there with a sign that had his name on it, waiting for him. He was so surprised that he asked if he could keep the sign!”

Delwyn and Jill Jensen, who served a military relations mission in Germany, tell how a simple interaction with a military member helped her to find again—and then move forward along—the covenant path.

When she joined the air force, this young woman stopped attending church. “But when we reached out to her with a text, she responded right away,” Sister Jensen says. She began attending church regularly, helping with service projects and sharing her testimony of Jesus Christ.

As the Jensens worked with her, they found she was reluctant to meet with the bishop. But with their love and gentle encouragement, she finally made and kept an appointment. “Afterward, she reported it was one of the most positive experiences of her life,” Elder Jensen said, “and the bishop gave us a similar report.”

The Jensens continued to support her in preparing to go to the temple and in receiving a patriarchal blessing.

Steve and Deborah Anderson served their military relations mission in Rhode Island and Connecticut. Working with local members and leaders, they started a devotional and game night for officer candidates in the navy. The devotional always began with a scripture or with a video featuring a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. This was followed by a spiritual discussion among all participants, then board games and refreshments.

At first, the event was attended by two Church members and seven who were not members, but over time it grew, with an average of 60–90 officer candidates in attendance—a few Church members and a lot of friends.

“Many of them told us the devotional was the highlight of their week,” Sister Anderson says.

The families of members serving in the military face some unique challenges—parental absence during deployments, frequent moves and transfers, financial stress, and so on. To help them deal with the challenges of military life, military relations missionaries teach self-reliance classes to members of the military and their families.

Dave and Rosemary Smart were live-at-home missionaries assigned to the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Maine. They learned of a young seaman in the coast guard who would soon leave for three months’ sea duty. The seaman and his wife, members of the Church, had three children.

Until the Smarts contacted them, the young couple were unaware of military relations missionaries. They were relieved to know that Elder and Sister Smart would be nearby to offer support to the family in the absence of their husband and father.

The Smarts introduced the couple to the manual Becoming a Self-Reliant and Resilient Family. They explained how to find it in the Gospel Library and on the Gospel Library app. The app version would be of benefit to the seaman when he was at sea and there was no wi-fi aboard ship. He realized that the manual would benefit him and his family and that it would assist him in his job. As a health services technician, he often counsels others.

The Church also endorses Latter-day Saint chaplains, and Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, now provides college courses required for those who seek to become chaplains. As part of their duties, chaplains provide worship services and offer spiritual support to service members and families regardless of their religion or beliefs.

Chaplain Brent Jones served as an army chaplain at Ft. Carson, Colorado, in January 2004. He remembers having the responsibility to provide support and comfort to the family of a soldier who had been killed in action. Because the soldier’s unit remained in Iraq to fight, Chaplain Jones was flown to California to honor the dead, which is one of the vital missions of a chaplain.

Chaplain Jones did not know the family or the soldier and was not asked to participate in the soldier’s viewing, funeral, or graveside service. A ministry of presence would have to suffice. However, “on the morning of the funeral,” he says, “I felt the impression that the Lord wanted me to offer a special prayer at the graveside service that would indeed be a blessing to this killed-in-action soldier and his family. But how could I do this when I was not on the program, and I certainly didn’t want to offend anyone?

“After the funeral, as I was walking toward the grave, his religious leader caught sight of me. We had a brief conversation, and it was determined that near the end of the graveside service, when he looked in my direction, I could step forward and offer a prayer. That’s just what I did: I was given the opportunity to offer that special prayer that the Spirit had told me about earlier that morning. I was extremely grateful that the Lord had prepared a way for me to bring honor and comfort to a grieving family.”

All members of the Church have the responsibility to stand strong, with a shield of faith, in defense of our homes, families, and freedom as we resist the fiery darts of the adversary. This is equally true for members of the Church in the military. And there is great support and there are ample resources to assist them as they put on, and continue to wear, the full armor of God.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="147589199" id="aside1_p1">Visit the Military Relations and Chaplain Services website at <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/military?lang=eng">ChurchofJesusChrist.org/military</a>.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
