Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

Preface

Encircled By Love was written to help motivate you to do the work necessary to obtain and maintain loving relationships. We hope this book will increase your knowledge of how to effectively communicate love, and will help you gain the courage to overcome fears so that you can partake of the fruits of love more freely.

The title of our book, Encircled By Love, is taken from the scriptures. Lehi, when he was very close to death, exclaimed, "But behold, the Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell; I have beheld his glory, and I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love." (2 Nephi 1:15.) In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord told Oliver Cowdery, "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love." (D&C 6:20.) We know from the scriptures that God's love "sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things." (1 Nephi 11:22.) Truly, there is still love to be found on the earth. It radiates forth from our Heavenly Father and our brother, Jesus Christ, and it is found in the hearts of many of our spiritual siblings whom we now call neighbors, friends, family, and even strangers. It is found in your heart!

Women, especially, have a great endowment of charity, which is surely an inheritance that comes from our Heavenly Mother as well as our Heavenly Father. We are the ones chosen to nurture and nourish our Heavenly Father's children when they are sent to the earth. These God-given feelings create a strong bond of love between sisters in the gospel. We need each other!

Jill Major discovered the important roles women can play in the lives of each other. Her sister-in-law and close friend, Janet, was dying of cancer, and Jill felt deeply the pain she was going through.

"My husband, Ken, was always by my side, and yet I felt that I needed more—another woman, a sister, to help strengthen me while I helped strengthen Janet," Jill says. Impressed with the loving nature of Lauren Leifson, a woman who had recently moved into her ward, Jill reached out to Lauren for additional love and support.

Janet's death threw Jill into a deep depression. Overwhelmed with feelings of guilt and loss, she gradually shut herself off from all expressions of love. Jill continues her story:

One night I lay in the darkness of my bedroom and sobbed, "I cannot take any more." I no longer wanted to exist. I was not suicidal—I wasn't thinking about taking my own life. I just didn't want to be part of life anymore. My husband held me close, rocking me like an infant. When I calmed down Ken put his hands on my head and gave me a priesthood blessing. "You will be able to get help," he promised me.

God has always answered my prayers. I had faith that I would be able to get help, but I assumed the help would come from a hospital or a clinic. I have since learned that God often answers prayers through those who are closest to you. The next day my friend, Donna, called long distance from California. She tried to shake me out of the blackness. "I want to help you. I love you," she said over and over again. The words slipped off me and fell as if I were wearing a love-proof slicker. In desperation she called Lauren. "Talk to Jill. She needs our help."

Late the next evening the phone rang. "Hi, there," Lauren chirped cheerfully. "Let's talk."

"Okay," I said, feeling it was anything but okay. "What do you want to talk about?" She skillfully guided the conversation to my depression.

"How do you know I am depressed?" I challenged her.

Lauren replied, "Jill, some of the light is gone."

"I don't want to talk about this," I snapped.

She was undaunted. "Jill, I want to share this burden you are carrying. Please talk to me."

I recoiled. My heart started pounding. "No! I cannot share this burden. It is too heavy. I am all alone with this one. No one can help me."

Lauren is the type of person who would never intrude on someone's privacy, but this time she would not back off.

"Jill, there is a scripture that says we are to share each other's burdens. You need to share so your friends can help you carry this load."

A dim light of hope flickered in the distance. Perhaps she is right, I thought.

I began telling Lauren all that had happened in the preceding months—about the little hurts that had become so deep and painful that at times I wondered if I would ever stop hurting again. The conversation went on for hours. Finally I was talked out. Exhausted, I whispered, "Thank you for calling me. I feel better."

"You're welcome," she said. "We will talk again soon. Jill?"

"What?" I answered.

"I love you." Those words echoed down to the depths of my heart and I felt love for the first time in weeks. Not only did I feel Lauren's love, but I also felt the love of many other friends and family members who had shown such great concern during this trial.

When you learn to love others with Christlike compassion, the bonds of charity will enwrap your soul with a sweet peace that cannot justly be described with words. You will have a sure knowledge of the love that our Heavenly Father has for you. Having once felt that love, you will naturally want others to feel it also. It will not matter if those people are friends or strangers, because you will recognize them and know them as your brothers and sisters. This sure knowledge will aid you in encircling others with love.

Hollie Bevan tells of an experience she and her husband had in extending life-saving love to a stranger:

One day, as my husband and I were traveling home on the freeway, I felt prompted to turn and look back. To my horror, I saw someone ready to jump from the freeway overpass.

My husband slammed the brakes to the floor and shoved the car into reverse. Within seconds, we were racing backwards. "Don't worry," he assured me, "it's probably just a kid playing on the bridge."

My husband stepped out of his side of the car and yelled, "Hey! You weren't thinking of jumping, were you?" Then he lowered his head through the open window, and I could see that his face had paled to a chalk white. "It's a man," he uttered in apparent shock, "and he's crying."

I quickly hopped up onto the trunk and yelled, "What's your name?" The man yelled back this information and I told him our names. I continued yelling questions as I mentally noted his position on the bridge. He was sitting on the very edge, his bare feet dangling. His hands were positioned at the point of support that barely kept him from slipping to the concrete below and his head was lowered, as if from the weight of an enormous burden.

Boldly, I asked, "What happened today to make you want to kill yourself?" Through sobs, he told us of his deep despair. By this time, others had also stopped on the freeway to try to help. As they tried to come close to him, he would inch forward, threatening to jump if they continued pressing his space. Even so, he kept responding to us, answering the questions that I kept asking. Sensing his trust, we told him that my husband would remain on the freeway below to talk to him and that he should keep his focus on me and watch me drive the car to the next overpass and on to the frontage road that looped up to the bridge, where he clung to an ounce of hope. He agreed.

I stopped the car about six feet from where he was positioned and slowly stepped forward, all the while telling the man to listen only to my voice. "I'm walking toward you now. I'm six feet from you and stepping to your right." His eyes remained fixed on the concrete below, but he responded, "Okay."

Finally, I grabbed the young man's elbow and he allowed me to help him back over the side to safety. Then I escorted him to the back seat of our car. As soon as it was apparent that the young man was safely seated, a gentleman in a business suit rushed up to the young man's side and threw his arms around him. Tears were streaming down this onlooker's face as he sobbed, "I don't know you, but I love you. Please live! Please, I care." He wiped his tears with his tie and gave the downhearted man another hug; then he pressed some money into the young man's hand and departed.

Because of her great love, Hollie reached out and pulled a young man off a bridge. The onlooker, surely a brother, literally encircled a stranger in the arms of his love. Together they saved a mortal life. As you develop charity you can also reach out, encircling others with the love of Christ. Perhaps, in doing so, you will help save a spiritual life.
