Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 1

Encircle Thyself with Love

Often the commandment "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself" (D&C 59:6) is divided in two parts: some people put the emphasis on loving their neighbors and others on loving themselves. But this scripture was given as a whole, for we cannot truly love ourselves without loving our neighbors, nor can we truly love our neighbors without loving ourselves. We are inseparably linked to each other as brothers and sisters.

Paul counseled Timothy, whom he called "my own son in the faith" (1 Timothy 1:2): "Neglect not the gift that is in thee. . . . Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee" (1 Timothy 4:14, 16). Each time you develop a talent, seek a spiritual gift, learn a new principle of the gospel, overcome a weakness, or conquer a fault, you not only benefit yourself, but you also become a better neighbor. You can give more because there is more of you to give.

The Lord has commanded, "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." (Luke 22:32.) As you love your neighbor, you will strengthen her, and she in turn will become a better neighbor and be able to strengthen you. This, then, becomes an eternal circle, where to give love to your neighbor is to love yourself and to love yourself is to give love to your neighbor.

One sister learned firsthand of this cycle of love through the following experience:

A new neighbor moved in down the street. Again and again, I thought, "I should go over and meet her," but I didn't. When she didn't appear at church, I concluded that she was either inactive or a nonmember. Later, I learned that she was facing the challenge of single parenthood. Once my neighbor was out working in her garden and I stopped by and introduced myself. Those few words were our only contact for a year and a half.

Then in April, as I listened to the general conference talks, I once again thought of my neighbor. Immediately I went to the telephone. "Hello," I said somewhat timidly. "I am your neighbor two houses down. I am looking for a walking partner and was wondering if you like to walk."

My neighbor said that she would rather ride her bike, but that she would give walking a try, so we set up a biweekly walking date. Each step we took together I learned more about my neighbor's needs. I learned how difficult it is to be a single mother, and how frustrating, at times, to be a non-Mormon in a Mormon community. My neighbor also learned about my needs. During that time my little two-year-old niece was dying of cancer. Many times my neighbor offered comfort. "I will pray for you and for her," she told me.

Then came the call that we had been expecting for a long time. "Deborah died last night," my mother said quietly. I went for a long walk that morning, crying out within my heart to Heavenly Father, pleading with him to comfort my sister, whose arms were so empty at that moment. When I returned, my neighbor came to my door. "I heard," was all she said. Then she enfolded me in her arms and I wept.

I reached out to my neighbor, and in my trial, my Heavenly Father sent my neighbor to strengthen me and give me comfort.

It is of paramount importance that we learn to care for ourselves so that we can more fully care for others. Temporally or spiritually, we cannot feed the hungry if our table is empty. We cannot offer water from an empty well to one who is thirsty. We cannot take in a stranger if we have no roof over our head. Nor can we clothe the naked, feed the sick, or visit those in prison, if we ourselves are without clothes, unable to lift our heads from bed, or caged behind prison bars. In order for us to spread happiness to others, we first must be of good cheer. To be able to bear our testimonies, we must first build our own testimonies. To fulfill the commandment to love others completely, we must first love ourselves completely.

Do we love ourselves as well as we love our neighbors? Do we treat ourselves with kindness, gentleness, and tenderness? We should, but many of us don't. Neal A. Maxwell observed, "Some of us who would not chastise a neighbor for his frailties have a field day with our own. Some of us stand before no more harsh a judge than ourselves, a judge who stubbornly refuses to admit much happy evidence and who cares nothing for due process." In the morning we go to the mirror, take one look at ourselves, and say, "Yuck! You look awful. Boy, are you getting old. Look at those wrinkles and crow's feet. You shouldn't have had that dish of ice cream last night. You're putting on weight." Now, would you offer such criticisms to your friend? Or even your enemy? When you make a mistake, are you forgiving, or does your mind scream, "Boy, that was stupid. How can you be so dumb?" Then do you continue to deride yourself for days without any mercy? Can you imagine saying to a friend, "You don't have any talents. You're not good at anything"? Of course not, but many of us whisper those dreadful things in our own minds.

If any of this sounds familiar to you, try practicing these two precious additions to the golden rule.

The golden rule: Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.

The silver rule: Do unto yourself as you would have others do unto you.

The bronze rule: Love yourself as your Heavenly Father loves you.

Let's begin with the silver rule. Consider how you would want your best and dearest friend to treat you. Would you want that person to be critical, judgmental, harsh, or unkind? Of course not. Every person on the earth has faults; no one likes to have them pointed out. Moroni struggled with his weakness in writing and feared that the Gentiles would mock his words, but Christ said unto him, "I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. . . . And . . . Moroni, having heard these words, was comforted." (Ether 12:27, 29.)

One man of our acquaintance truly symbolizes the ideal of loving yourself. On Christmas morning, as everyone is hurriedly tearing paper and "oohing" over gifts, he waits patiently. After everyone else's gifts are opened there is always one gift left under the tree. He silently walks over to the Christmas tree, reaches down, and picks up the gift. The tag reads: To Bill, From Bill. Isn't that great? Every year he goes out and buys himself a pre-sent. Every year he gets just what he wants. What a terrific tradition!

Be your own best friend rather than your own worst critic. Start by giving yourself daily emotional and mental boosters. Lock yourself in the bathroom, face the mirror, and say a minimum of one nice thing about yourself to yourself every morning or evening. If you can think of ten or twenty nice things about yourself, say them. Many people, however, have an extremely difficult time thinking of, let alone saying, even one thing nice about themselves. They get confused because they don't understand the difference between bragging and boosting. Bragging is simply giving yourself boosters in public; it is not a good substitute for daily private boosters. Christ taught that those who "sound a trumpet" before them "that they may have glory of men" already have their reward. (Matthew 6:2.) Bragging increases self-centeredness. Daily boosters, however, if done honestly and privately, can build self-esteem and self-worth.

So take a good look at yourself in the mirror. Examine yourself physically. Do you have beautiful skin, pretty hands, straight white teeth, or attractive hair? Try saying out loud, "I have beautiful eyes," or if you can't quite say those words then say, "Heavenly Father really gave me beautiful eyes." Next, examine your emotional self. Did you control your temper today? Did you express love, concern, or compassion to anyone around you?

Now, look at your spiritual self. Do you feel close to Heavenly Father? Did you lovingly serve any of his children, which includes your family, neighbors, friends, or business associates? Did you read your scriptures, attend a church meeting, take the sacrament worthily?

After just a few minutes of asking yourself these questions, you should have a mental list of several positive attributes. Choose one and say it out loud while looking in the mirror. No booster is insignificant, no matter how small it may appear to you, and it will help you think of yourself more positively, more lovingly.

Next let's consider the bronze rule: Love yourself as your Heavenly Father loves you. The veil, which was placed over us at birth, was necessary in order for us to be tested. We don't remember exactly what happened in our premortal existence, but we do know that we lived with our heavenly parents and brothers and sisters. We lived as a family—exactly the way this earth life was designed. Parallels can be drawn between our heavenly family and our earthly family.

Consider an eleven-month-old child who is just learning how to walk. The mother and father place him tenderly on the floor, steady his arms and legs, and then back away to the other side of the room. The little child gets concerned when left to his own abilities and begins whimpering for help. The mother and father speak softly to him, quieting him and encouraging him to take one little step. The child's knees begin to tremble; his face now is pleading for assistance. Mother says, "Come on, sweetheart. I know you can do it. Just take one little step." The toddler studies the faces of his parents, looking for the faith in him that he lacks in himself. Then he takes courage and inches one tiny foot forward. Mother and Father are thrilled and applaud his wonderful accomplishment. "You see, honey. You can do it," Father says. "Now take another step. You are getting closer to us all the time." After many days of practice the toddler finally makes it all the way across the room and falls into the open arms of his parents. "I knew you could do it. I am so proud of you," the father says joyfully. There is delight in the child's bright eyes. He grins as he realizes his accomplishment and feels the joy radiating from his parents.

This example parallels the way our Heavenly Father deals with us. He places us down on earth, but to him, it is no more than just across the room, for he is always near. Then he holds his arms out to us, saying, "Little child, I have faith in you. You can succeed. I gave you the talents and capabilities required to fulfill your special mission. I am with you and you are near me. Continue in your course. You will get closer to me all the time. Just keep trying." With courage gained from the Lord's counsel, we experience great joy and delight within ourselves as we take each tiny step along life's path. Then one day we will fall into the loving arms of our Heavenly Father and hear, "I knew you could do it. I am so proud of you!" or, in the Savior's words, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant . . . enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matthew 25:21.) But such success takes practice; we must strive for it every day. If we fall down, our Heavenly Father walks back across the room, just as any loving parent would do, helps us up (if we will allow him to), steadies us, and then encourages us to try again. Over and over again this scene takes place.

Sometimes we fail to recognize this divine assistance because our Heavenly Father uses other mortals to lift us up. Jill relates how our Heavenly Father came to her aid in a time of need:

Several years ago, I prayed that Heavenly Father would bless our home with a baby girl. In due time, he blessed us with not one, but two daughters. Twins! When we brought our two little angels home from the hospital, I thought it would be the beginning of the greatest, happiest life ever, but it wasn't. It was horrible! The Lord had obviously multiplied our joys and our sorrows. Both Pamela and Patricia had colic and they screamed twelve hours a day. The nights brought some relief, although the babies took turns waking up, so both my husband, Ken, and I were often up three or four times each. Many people came to help, but as the weeks went by, we grew more tired and despondent.

In church one Sunday, Ken and I each had several turns taking crying babies out in the hall. The words to the closing song began, "There is an hour of peace and rest . . . " Ken tilted his head and whispered in my ear, "Not at our house." Funny? It wasn't then, and I immediately started to cry. To hide my embarrassment I escaped out of the church during the prayer and walked home.

Days and nights became a blur of baths, bottles, diapers, and the ever-commanding bawling in stereo. Finally, I just didn't feel like I could cope one more day. Mentally, physically, and emotionally exhausted, I fell to my knees. "Heavenly Father, please send me some help!" I pleaded.

A few evenings later I was trying to escape the turmoil by walking around our subdivision.

It was dark when I trudged past Jackie's house. "Jill, is that you?" Jackie called out.

"Yes," I said from across the street.

"Are you alone?"

"Yes."

"Would you like some company?" Jackie asked.

I was so drained that I really didn't want to talk with anyone, yet good manners kept me from being honest. "Sure," I said, "that would be great."

As we walked through the night I began to tell Jackie all that was really going on in my home, and as we talked, I felt my burdens ease and I didn't feel quite so frazzled.

It was half an hour before Jackie said, "Jill, are you getting tired yet?" Not until then did I realize that Jackie was not out there for exercise: she was out there to keep me from getting mugged in the dark; she was out there because she had a feeling that she was needed; she was out there, sent by Heavenly Father, as an answer to my desperate prayer.

With infinite patience and love our heavenly parents lift us and encourage us. Should we not be as patient, loving, understanding, and compassionate with ourselves?

"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." We must keep the whole commandment and not divide it into parts. We should continue to live the golden rule, but add to that the other precious rules. You are a child of heavenly parents. You are of infinite worth, so remember to do unto yourself as you would have others do unto you and love yourself as your Heavenly Father loves you.
