Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 3

Love Encircles Through Support

To give someone support means to help lift heavy burdens, to encourage, to uphold when others may tear down, to bear with and endure all phases of life, and, on stage and many times in real life, to have a role subordinate to the "star." Add to that "wholehearted," which means with all one's energy and enthusiasm. Our Heavenly Father gives wholehearted support to his children. King Benjamin taught that God is "preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another." (Mosiah 2:21.) Satan, the great enemy of love, leads people in his dark paths, but in the end, Alma cautioned us to see clearly that "the devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell." (Alma 30:60.) Those who wish to encircle others with love must be willing to follow God's example of wholehearted support.

Hollie received this kind of support from two wonderful friends, Dean and Zella. They called and invited her over for dinner, refusing her offers to contribute to the meal. They even provided a baby-sitter for her children. When she arrived at their house, their bubbly attitude was a little puzzling to her. She explains:

My friends greeted me at their front door with an enthusiasm and excitement that was almost contagious. Then I saw the reason for this specific treatment. There, seated at the dining room table, was a male! They had set me up on a blind dinner date without even telling me about their plans beforehand! I wanted to feel embarrassed, but I couldn't because my friends were so proud of me and so busy expounding my good qualities to the young man, that I didn't have time to squeeze any disgruntled emotions from my heart.

Dean and Zella also didn't seem to be the least bit concerned about my physical state: I was eight months pregnant and also just recently divorced. Instead they expressed their love and admiration for me to the mystery man as if I was someone really special.

I was amazed at how successfully my friends had pulled off this caper. And what's even more important, it proved to be a wonderful boost for my poor self-image. I didn't feel fat and dumpy anymore, but instead I felt like an attractive young woman with much to offer.

Dean and Zella had the talent of giving wholehearted support. Because of this, they were able to lift Hollie in a way that most of us wouldn't even dare to approach. The rest of us, who are learning this skill "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little" (2 Nephi 28:30), can learn a lot by studying their example. Dean and Zella's wholehearted support reached into three critical areas of need: physical, emotional, and spiritual. They had not only treated Hollie to a meal that was beyond her meager means and supplied her with a baby-sitter for a special night away from her feelings of loneliness, but they had included in their actions and words a love toward her that caused her to feel, nothing doubting, that she is a beloved daughter of God.

Following Dean and Zella's example, we'll further illustrate how each of us can give wholehearted support in our own efforts to love others.

Physical support

Hollie loves to tell this story of a time when Zella offered her physical support:

My friend Zella and I were taking some classes together at the local university. On one particularly bad winter morning, with snow and ice everywhere, Zella picked me up in her car and courageously drove up the hill to the Utah State University, parking her car in the first available lot. Looking around, we realized that the entire perimeter of the parking lot was covered with a huge wall of ice and snow—the work of the university snow removal team the night before. Zella surveyed the situation and found a place that had melted down to about three feet high. She hopped up and over the ice because, as usual, she was appropriately dressed in pants and snow boots. I, in my dress and spike-heeled boots, was not faring so well. I cautiously began with only two steps up the ice, but instead of going forward, I slid back down.

"Hollie, hurry up! We're going to be late for class."

I heard a note of impatience in Zella's voice and forced myself to take three steps, but to no avail; I slid backwards to the bottom of the ice again. It was obvious that I needed some help.

Zella hopped to the top of that ice "Matterhorn," grabbed my hands, and began skiing me up the slope. This worked fantastically until I neared the top. My knees suddenly buckled and my feet started to slide in opposite directions.

"Don't move!" Zella yelled.

Actually, I wasn't about to go anywhere. My future plans didn't include falling on my bottom and wearing a wet skirt to class! Luckily for me Zella didn't leave me stranded, as the next moment I discovered that she had maneuvered herself behind me and somehow had begun bulldozing my broadside up the peak with the back of her shoulders. It must have looked as though I was sitting on top of her head! Zella continued to push me to the top of the ice, which made me feel very confident and much relieved until I realized that I wasn't stopping at the top, but instead was losing my balance and beginning to nose dive toward the other side.

In the very nick of time, Zella grabbed the hem of my dress and with all of her one-hundred-and-five-pound might she pulled my body back into an upright position. Then she hopped, skipped, and jumped back over the ice to position herself in front of me. Walking in front of me like my guardian angel, she assisted me with my slippery-soled boots down that other side until I was safely at the bottom and could balance myself with confidence. As we proudly turned to continue on our way, we discovered students encircling us who had stopped to watch the entire show.

To this very day, I can't recall whether or not Zella and I even made it to class, but I will never forget that great example she instilled in me as to the lengths she was willing to go to in order to help me physically over an icy barrier.

Most of us will never have the opportunity to pull someone over an ice mountain, but we will have other chances to show concern and care in physical matters. Traditionally, as Relief Society sisters, our main focus has been on meal preparations, housecleaning, and laundry, but there are many other ways to help those in need. You can be creative in your gifts of love to the bedridden. For instance, you could supply them with favorite books and tapes filled with light, humorous anecdotes to help make the days brighter. If you are talented in crafts you could share your skills with someone who is confined. Counted cross-stitch, ceramics, knitting, needlepoint, quilting, and other skills can make the time pass more quickly and give the homebound person a feeling of accomplishment.

When people are confined to their houses or beds for long periods of time there are problems of "missing." They miss their children's ward and school activities, concerts, games, and plays. If you have a video camera or cassette tape recorder you could tape some of these special events. You might also volunteer to act as a shuttle service or to be a surrogate mother at children's functions.

Flowers help cheer up the sick. You can share a variety from your own garden. It is always a good idea to use a container that doesn't have to be returned, such as a plastic ice cream bucket. Lauren shared a single iris with five buds on it with her bedridden friend. The friend watched each purple flower slowly curl back and then burst open. "What a miracle!" the friend exclaimed. "Never in all my life have I had time to watch a flower bloom." Then the friend chuckled, "And I hope that never in all my life will I have the time again!"

The homebound person also misses out on church meetings. Again, you could offer to tape record these events. Hearing the prayers, songs, announcements, lessons, and comments can help a person who cannot attend feel closer and more a part of things.

These are only a few ways in which you can show physical support. The most important point to understand is that good intentions must be spurred on to positive action. You must physically be there to meet physical needs. Your willingness to sacri-fice and serve translates into great expressions of love to the recipient.

Emotional support

Emotional support differs from physical support. This type of support happens when we listen without making judgments and when we love without imposing any conditions. When we do this, we "lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees." (D&C 81:5.)

Hollie had a precious opportunity to provide emotional support to one in need:

One night I received a phone call from the bishop. "I need you to come over to my office immediately." He didn't explain or offer any reasons, but I knew by the tone of his voice that it was urgent. Since I lived just across the street from the church, I found myself knocking on his office door within minutes of his call.

The bishop came out to greet me, quietly closing the office door behind him. "Hollie," he said softly, "I have a young teenage girl in my office whom I have just stopped from completing a suicide attempt. Her parents are on their way, but it will be nearly four hours before they arrive. Could you please take her home and love her?"

I felt my throat swell into a knot, and my heart started thumping through my blouse. The only way I could answer him was to nod yes.

When he opened his office door, I saw a young girl whose eyes were swollen and beet-red. Her facial muscles were drawn and molded into a mask that kept her from having direct eye contact with anyone. She looked so forlorn and dismal, so broken down, that in the first instant when she walked through the doorway I found myself immediately feeling great compassion and love toward her.

"Hollie, this is . . . well, we'll just call her Jane," whispered the bishop. "She's prepared to go with you now."

I reached out and lightly patted her shoulder and my touch seemed to push a button in her soul. She responded by looking up at me with an expression in her eyes that pleaded, "Please help me!"

Pointing the direction to proceed, I nudged her elbow and we walked in silence back to my house. As we entered, my children rushed out of bed, excited about having a visitor in the house. "Would you like to help me get them back into bed?" I asked Jane with apprehension, and she instantly nodded yes, without uttering a word. As we were tucking them into bed, my little ones reached up and hugged Jane, each in turn expressing their good nights with, "Sweet dreams, Jane, I love you."

Jane didn't say a word but lovingly gave each child a bear-type hug. In fact, she clung to each one as if she were afraid to let go. Then, with tears in her eyes, she turned to look at me, searching my face for needed approval. I winked and smiled, and Jane smiled back at me. I suggested that we go to the kitchen and just talk.

"Oh, I forgot that I'm supposed to bake cookies for tomorrow," I mentioned, breaking the silence. "Jane, would you like to help me bake chocolate chip cookies?"

"Can we eat some, too?" she responded with a sudden excitement in her expression.

We spent the next four hours talking, baking, crying, eating, and laughing, until at 11 p.m., the phone rang and ended our giggly cookie party. It was the bishop. Jane's parents had arrived.

Jane and I walked quickly across the street to the church. There was a definite bounce in her stride now, not like the slow, heavy steps she had taken on her way to my house earlier in the evening. We found the bishop waiting outside his office door for us, his face glowing as he watched us coming down the long hall toward him. As we came within speaking distance, he greeted us with, "Hello, hello!" and then cautiously added, "Well, Jane, how do you feel?"

"I'm okay," she responded with a note of confidence.

The bishop then quickly escorted her into his office, where her parents waited nervously for her appearance. Standing all alone outside in the hall, I felt quite lost for a moment, not knowing what I should do, but soon the bishop reappeared. He patted my shoulder, and with a wink in his watery eyes, he softly reassured me. "She's going to be all right. She has a friend."

With sudden realization, I truly understood the message in his simple response. He was referring to me—I was Jane's friend. Not because of common interests, but because I cared. And in my caring, I also helped Jane to realize how much the Savior cared and that he is her friend.

When someone needs emotional support, we must keep the door of communication wide open. If Hollie had lectured Jane, splashing her with moral judgments and verbal platitudes, she would not have been able to have built a friendship with her. As depressed and lonely as Jane felt within herself, she needed most of all to know that someone cared and understood her feelings. Hollie's role at that time was to reassure Jane and demonstrate her friendship by sincerely listening with heartfelt empathy, to help her bear her "infirmities." (See Romans 15:1-2, 5.) With this approach, it didn't take long for an emotional bond of trust to develop between them, which then allowed Hollie to help Jane climb out of her pit of despair and loneliness.

Elder Robert L. Simpson related the following:

"During the past twelve months it has been my privilege to work closely with many emotionally disturbed people; others who have transgressed; some who have found themselves out of harmony with society; still others who were lonely and afraid. It has not been a year of discouragement and despair, however, because the vast majority of these people have made an important decision, and they have said, 'I want to change my life. I am ready to take direction from someone who really cares. . . . '

"Every success story of the past year has been the result of special effort on the part of the people who cared. They cared enough . . . to follow the great example set by the Savior." (Taken from the Ensign, July 1973, pp. 22-23.)

Spiritual support

The greatest teacher who ever lived, our Savior, said, "Love one another, as I have loved you." (John 15:12.) The Apostle Peter was taught the importance of spiritual support when Jesus asked him not once, but three times, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?" Peter answered with wholehearted sincerity "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee." And Jesus answered him, "Feed my sheep." (John 21:15-17.) Christ was not telling Peter to provide His flock with physical food. His message had reference to Peter's commission and responsibility to give spiritual nourishment. The prophet Alma explained this responsibility to his son Helaman: "I have labored without ceasing, . . . that I might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did taste; that they might also be born of God, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." (Alma 36:24.)

We spiritually nourish others when we learn to value them for who they really are. We must look beyond outward appearances (wealth, position, beauty, talents, and so on) or considerations of what they can do for us, and recognize their inherent worth as sons and daughters of God. With this knowledge we are in a position to lift and support others spiritually. Elder Robert L. Simpson has reminded us that "the Savior did not seem to be so much involved in giving money. You will remember that his gifts were in the form of personal attention, in performing an administration, and in sharing the gifts of the Spirit."

As we follow the example of our greatest friend, our Savior, we should watch for moments where we can be instruments in inspiring others spiritually. One of the best tools we have for this task is prayer, as illustrated in the following story:

I have a friend who, through a very serious illness, seemed to be losing control of her emotions and even her sane judgment. It was during this very painful and trying time as I sat by her bed just holding her hand and watching her drift away that she looked up and asked, "Will you pray for me?"

I responded emphatically, "I have been praying both morning and night for you."

"No, I mean will you pray with me, now?" she pleaded, and added with fervor, "Please help me!"

I knelt down at her side and together we prayed to our Heavenly Father. A sweetness came over her and as we wept together, I watched her countenance change before my eyes as she gained hope. She became passive and calm and a peace bore her up as she endured the suffering encountered on her road to recovery.

Just as our Savior prayed for his disciples while he was here on earth, we too should pray for each other; as he loves us with an unconditional love, we too can respond unconditionally; and as he is true, loyal, and faithful, we too can learn to show these attributes.

One of the exciting things about encircling others with love is that you don't have to wait to be asked to help. It doesn't matter whether a person needs physical help, emotional support, or spiritual uplifting, as long as you respond to the signals, often silent pleas for help, with comfort and edification. (See 1 Thessalonians 5:11.)

We are often prompted with small feelings and ideas that would benefit a sister or brother in need of support. In fact, President Harold B. Lee said, "Every soul [in the Church] who has been blessed to receive the Holy Ghost has the power to receive revelation. God help you and me that we will always so live that the Lord can answer the prayers of the faithful through us in our good deeds." By listening to the Spirit, we can be instruments in encircling others in the arms of the Lord's love.

Our friend Paula Smith tells how she received spiritual support from caring neighbors:

I was really active when I was growing up. After I was married, we moved around a lot. At first, I tried to attend my church meetings, but no one reached out to me. I didn't feel really welcome; in fact, I felt out of place. Then we moved again. The people in my new neighborhood were very warm and friendly. Almost immediately, my husband and I had all kinds of friends. One woman visited with me several times. We would just sit in my living room and chat. One afternoon she announced, "Oh, by the way, I'm your visiting teacher." After several more visits she decided to give me the visiting teaching message. Later she invited me to attend Relief Society and gave me the meeting schedule. I decided to attend. Many of my neighbors were there and I felt loved and accepted at once. It wasn't long after I started going to church again that I was called to be a visiting teacher, then the sewing specialist. We lived in that ward for four and a half years, and as my testimony grew I received other callings: visiting teacher coordinator, second counselor in the Primary, and Primary president.

Then came the opportunity to buy our first home. I was excited, yet sad and a little frightened. I was sure that it would never be the same and that I would never find friends as wonderful as the ones I was leaving. When I expressed these feelings to my friends they said, "Heavenly Father knows your needs and everything is going to be all right." So I spent a lot of time on my knees praying, "Heavenly Father, please help me to find somebody who will understand my needs and who I can be close to."

We moved in on a Saturday and on the following Monday Bret and Lauren Leifson came over and brought us a loaf of banana bread. As they sat and visited with us I told Lauren that a lot of our things were still in boxes in the garage. The conversation continued on and I didn't think anything else about it. When Bret and Lauren got ready to leave she said, "I will be over tomorrow at 10:00."

That will be great, I thought, but why?

Lauren must have seen that I was puzzled so she added quickly, "To help you unpack."

When Lauren and Bret left I started to cry. I knew that Heavenly Father had answered my prayers.

In this example Lauren was able to meet Paula's physical needs by offering to help her unpack, her emotional needs by giving comfort in a time of stressful upheaval, and her spiritual needs by being the answer to Paula's prayer and thus strengthening Paula's testimony. When we are directed by the Holy Ghost we will always be able to accomplish more than we can on our own.

It is important always to act upon those little promptings and impressions that you receive. Whether you feel an impression to send a short note to a friend, or the sudden urge to stop at a friend's home or office unannounced, decide now not to miss any opportunities to show love. Don't dismiss that feeling—act on it!

When we choose to give our wholehearted support to others we will be aware of their temporal needs, take their hands and walk a few steps with them when they are emotionally downtrodden, and offer spiritual support through prayers and sharing the gospel, reminding them that, above all, they are children of God.
