Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 4

The Gift of Time

You may agree with the concepts we've discussed so far, but wonder despairingly, "Where do you find the time?" If so, you are not alone. Our Church leaders frequently remind us that we should read our scriptures, keep a journal, pray morning and night, attend meetings (we could spend an entire paragraph listing all the different types of meetings), do temple work, sing in the ward choir, prepare family home evenings, participate in weekly activity nights, lengthen our stride in performing our church callings, do genealogy . . . the responsibilities go on and on, and we have included only the demands of being a member of the Church. We are not even going to try to list work and home responsibilities. When the Lord said, "Thou shalt not idle away thy time" (D&C 60:13), he meant it!

Time is precious. No matter what your time constraints are, you must understand this: time is essential to forming loving relationships. A gift of time says, "You are important to me." People learn that they are valuable when others take time to listen to them, talk to them, and be with them.

Following are some suggestions on how to use effectively the little time you have in reaching out to other people.

One sister suggested a possible plan:

I noticed that when friends and family called me they would preface their conversation with, "I know you're really busy, but . . . " or "I know you don't have time to talk but this will only take a second." This bothered me. After a lot of thought, I decided that I didn't want people to feel like they were being squeezed into a tight, inflexible schedule. But how could I convey this, when my time was very limited? Finally I decided on a simple plan. In the future when I received the usual "I know you're busy" preface, I would answer cheerfully, "Not at all! I would love to talk!" People immediately became more relaxed and responded with great warmth, and most often, the conversation was only a few moments longer than it would have been when I was letting everyone know what a hyper-pace I traveled. It was a small gesture on my part, but it made a difference to those around me.

When people ask you to do them a favor, try saying, "I would be happy to," or "I would love to do that for you." If you are willing to do the job, it requires no more effort to be enthusiastic than it does to mumble, "I guess so." This small change of attitude will create warm feelings of love and friendship.

One sister makes it a point to ask, "What can I do for you?" when someone calls her on the phone, thus offering help before she has to be asked. When this woman offers her assistance, she plans to serve. If she is turned down she says, "How do you expect me to get any blessings in the kingdom if you don't let me help you?" Her generous attitude makes the receiver feel comfortable.

Christ said, "And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain." (Matthew 5:41.) Surely the Lord does not want us to grumble and complain about how busy we are and how much time the detour is taking, as we walk that extra mile!

It takes very little effort to raise your hand and wave to a passing acquaintance when you are driving down the road. Add a broad smile and that person will know you are genuinely glad to see him or her. Perhaps this will begin a friendship. At the very least it will brighten someone's day.

Taking the time to give a compliment is a little kindness with lasting effects. Lauren remembers a great lesson taught her by a friend:

A friend once gave me some advice: If there is ever anything, no matter how insignificant, that impresses you about another person, tell them, and tell them immediately! I didn't understand just how good this counsel was until it had a personal effect on my life. During one Christmas season, my husband and I attended a party where I had been asked to lead the caroling. Knowing I would be in front of a large group, I wanted to look my best that evening. An hour before the party started, I was home frantically pulling clothes out of my closet.

"I don't have anything to wear!" I cried. I guess I was hoping that right at that moment my mate would pull out a beautifully wrapped package containing a new dress, complete with matching jewelry, shoes, and purse. Why not? It happened to Cinderella.

Coming back down to reality, I quickly pulled on a blue skirt and pink blouse and we drove to the party. I felt extremely uncomfortable and unhappy as we approached the door. Over and over again a little voice in my mind said, "You look terrible."

As we entered the room, Glenna, the hostess, greeted us. "You look really nice, Lauren," she commented.

Immediately my spirits lifted and the little voice went silent.

"Do you really think so?" I asked hopefully.

"Yes, I do. I think you look wonderful."

I gave her a quick squeeze and thanked her. It was such a simple act, to give a compliment, but my outlook for the evening brightened and I thoroughly enjoyed the Christmas party. Her small act of kindness elevated my self-esteem at a time when I needed it.

By now you have probably realized that we are talking about the everyday, humdrum circumstances that we face over and over again. Waving, talking on the phone, and offering compliments are not occasions that make sparks fly. But keep in mind that relationships usually begin slowly and blossom at ordinary moments while people are doing ordinary things. Friendships may start over such seemingly insignificant things as stopping to talk across the fence, chatting for a minute in the grocery store, taking cookies to a new neighbor, offering to baby-sit a friend's children, giving someone a hug, taking a break at work with a co-worker, or making a newcomer feel welcome at a meeting.

A thank-you note is another small gesture that makes a big difference. Just because most friendships blossom in everyday circumstances, that doesn't mean that we can't put a little of the unusual and unexpected in a relationship. Square, printed cards are nice and formal, but a thank-you note could also be an opportunity to use a little imagination. Wouldn't it be fun to receive a thank-you card in secret code? (Of course, the decoding solution would have to be attached to it or the thank you could turn out to be a real frustration.) Send a note inside a balloon or attached to a flower. Saying thank you can be just as much fun as receiving the kindness or gift.

Small gestures can become opportunities to make friends and strengthen relationships.

Exercise is one of those things we all need to do, but for many of us, the only thing that gets a workout is our guilty conscience. Ask a neighbor to walk, jog, or do aerobics with you.

Offer rides to firesides, ward temple nights, PTA meetings, and so on. Doubling up not only saves gas money, but it gives people time to socialize. Study your scriptures with a friend. Invite another family over for family home evening or activity night; ask them to furnish the dessert or the lesson, and then trade on another night. Ask a friend to help you with genealogy or, if you have this skill, offer your help. Hollie invited friends and family over for a Thanksgiving feast and then added, "Bring your box of genealogy. We are going to work on it after dinner."

Home chores can be performed faster when the burden is shared by two. Ask a neighbor to come over for a canning session. Divide the cost and split the fruit of your labors. Organize an old-fashioned quilting bee. Think how much fun it would be to gather together friends and make a quilt for each one in turn.

Lauren grew up in a family of ten brothers and sisters. One of the family responsibilities in her home was for each child to wash dishes on an assigned night of the week. You can imagine how long it took with thirteen plates, thirteen sets of silverware, pots, pans, serving dishes, and so on. Lauren's grandmother was living with them at the time, and after each meal she would get up and begin clearing the table. It created a great feeling of guilt to have an eighty-nine-year-old woman help with the dishes, so Lauren would say, "Grandma, you really don't need to help. Why don't you sit down and rest?" Her grandmother would smile and sing, "Many hands make light work." She was right, and not only did the dishes get done more quickly, but Lauren and her grandmother had time to chat for a while.

When Jill discovered on April Fool's Day 1987 that she was going to have twins, the doctor put her to bed for the remaining two months of her pregnancy. Jill remembers:

One very long and lonely day, I lay in bed with the blinds closed. The room was dark and so were my thoughts. I constantly worried about the babies. "What if they come early? What if they are too small and have to stay in the hospital? What if they have birth defects? What if they die . . . " I knew where these fears were coming from, yet they would not leave.

Suddenly, the door burst open and there was my friend Diane. "I don't have very much time," she said, almost breathlessly. "I was just driving down the street and had the feeling that you needed a hug." She reached down and grabbed my shoulders and gave me the warmest, most wonderful hug. I melted in her arms and started to cry. In a few minutes I had poured out all of my fears and my friend took them in and promised to store them for me. "Don't worry. Everything will be all right," she promised.

Diane was there for only five minutes, yet I felt comforted.

Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "I have come to know that inspiration comes more as a feeling than a sound." Diane did not hear a voice, yet she had a feeling that Jill needed a hug. Many people dismiss this kind of feeling, saying, "I don't know if it is coming from me or the Holy Ghost." It is easy to tell. Mormon gave us the key. "Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil . . . that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God." (Moroni 7:12-13.)

So if you have a feeling you need to call someone, or write, or visit, no matter how busy you are, no matter what you are doing, act on those feelings; they come from the Spirit and will always be the right thing to do.

Investing our time in people will always bring great returns. Acts of kindness are generally accepted gratefully and usually returned tenfold. Lauren talks about an investment of time she made that really paid off:

Several months ago we invited a friend over for dinner. She called me a few hours before she was to come and asked if she could bring some Icelandic halibut. My husband and I love fish, so I quickly assured her it would be great. That was my first reward: she was bringing the main course. The second reward came when my friend arrived: she even cooked the fish for us. We had a very enjoyable evening together and she insisted that we keep the leftover fish to enjoy for dinner the next day. The third reward: no cooking tomorrow.

The next afternoon my sister stopped by to visit. I told her about the fabulous fish we had enjoyed the night before and offered her some to take home for dinner. When I pulled the plate out of the refrigerator and lifted up the foil covering, there were only two small pieces left.

"Whoops, I thought there was more left over than this," I apologized. "Since I've bragged about how good it is, why don't you take what's left. We had plenty of it last night and I want you to taste it." My sister thanked me and left.

"Boy, that was dumb," I said to myself. "Now what are you going to have for dinner?" I looked in the freezer. "I guess the menu for tonight is frozen burritos," I said out loud.

Two hours later the phone rang. It was my neighbor. I was surprised to hear from her since I knew she was in the middle of packing to move to another city.

"I was wondering if you wanted to have our old dining room set. We just bought a new one and we don't have room in our new house for this one. Would you be interested?"

I glanced over at our sixty-year-old, bright yellow and silver chromed dining room table, which we had purchased used just before we were married five years ago.

"Yes," I exclaimed. "You have no idea how much we need it." (Afterwards I thought that she certainly did have an idea how much we needed it. She had been in my kitchen many times.)

The fourth reward: a new dining room set! Now, you may tell me long and loud that inviting a friend over to dinner had no direct cause-and-effect relation on the fact that we ended up with a new dining room set, but you would never convince me. As someone once said (slightly paraphrasing the Bible), "Cast your bread upon the waters and it will come back to you toasted and buttered."

Time is our most precious commodity. It is an asset, just like money. When you give someone your time, it is the highest compliment you can pay them. In effect you are saying, "I think you are worthwhile." So give the gift of time to people. You never know what rewards will come your way or whose day you might brighten. You might even find that the sunshine you bring will brighten your own day.
