Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 5

Foes to Love

Women should be allies: showing love, building up, and lifting each other. Unfortunately sometimes just the opposite is true: we pick at, gossip, pull down, and judge. We need to recognize what a great force our nurturing nature can be in helping build the self-worth of those around us. Often, women see themselves through the eyes of other women. If they feel that they are loved and respected, then they are more able to love and respect themselves. It takes a strong foundation of confidence and self-esteem for all women to go forward and accomplish their missions here on earth. You can help strengthen those foundations or help to destroy them.

First let's look at some common problems that are damaging to loving relationships.

Cicero cautioned, "Never injure a friend, even in jest." Sarcasm and "put-downs" are sometimes deadly. Week after week we watch this carefully cultivated type of humor on TV sit-coms, which joke about fat people, dumb people, ugly people, clumsy people, aging people, and so on. The canned audience laughs and we are programmed to think that these jokes are funny. But in the real world, sometimes they are not funny. Often they hurt!

Jokes about ethnic groups, such as the once-popular and frequently resurrected "Polack" jokes, sometimes offend people. One of our friends is a generation removed from her Polish heritage. She literally wilts during the telling of one of these types of jokes. As the room erupts in laughter she ducks her head and stares down at her feet to hide her embarrassment and anger. After following the struggles of the courageous Polish people to remain free even though oppressed by their communist neighbors, we too feel great indignation when this type of joke is told.

Jokes that make fun of physical problems and handicaps are also offensive, as one friend's experience shows:

One evening I listened to the telling of a joke that involved a person with a "harelip." We all snickered as the joke master spoke in a nasal-toned twang—well, almost all of us. There was one young lady who was edging her way to the outside of the group. When our eyes met I saw great sadness and then I remembered that she has a brother that was born with a cleft palate and a harelip. To her, the joke was cruel.

Jokes about tragedies such as death, disease, divorce, and disasters are also bound to hurt someone. As Shakespeare so aptly put it, "He jests at scars that never felt a wound."

Are there any funny jokes that don't hurt people? Yes! Erma Bombeck takes everyday irritations and situations and finds the humor in them. Instead of putting down other people, she laughs at herself. She becomes a mirror to our personalities and we, in turn, laugh out loud when we see our own reflections through her humor. In other words, if you want to share with the world your most embarrassing moment, or highlight your own bulging waistline, or make jokes about your midlife crisis, or tell a story about your foibles, go right ahead. Hollie once told a friend, "I got up at 5:30 a.m. to do my gardening, but my allergies became so bad I just had to go right in the house and remove my false eyelashes."

Her friend laughed for months thinking about Hollie out gardening in full dress makeup. "If I can't joke about my vanity, I might really start taking it seriously," Hollie often quips.

There is nothing wrong with putting yourself in the spotlight of humor, but be aware that there are some very sensitive people (and sometimes people who are not so sensitive, but have very tender spots in their human makeup) who don't appreciate it if you shed any rays in their direction.

Solomon Freehof once said, "Years ago I preferred clever people. There was joy in beholding . . . a mind . . . bearing thought quickly translated into words, or ideas expressed in a new way. I find now that my taste has changed. Verbal fireworks often bore me. They seem motivated by self-assertion and self-display. I now prefer another type of person; one who is considerate, understanding of others, careful not to break down another person's self-respect.

" . . . My preferred person today is one who is always aware of the needs of others, or their pain and fear and unhappiness, and their search for self-respect. . . . I once liked clever people. Now I like good people."

The Lord commanded, "Cease to speak evil one of another." (D&C 136:23.) Gossiping and backbiting are two more foes of love. Kids often chant, "Sticks and stones can break my bones, but words can never hurt me." How wrong they are! The real truth is that hard words thrown can never be recovered.

In one neighborhood there used to be a little walking (and talking) group. As the group rounded the corner past a neighbor's house, one woman made a critical remark containing some bit of gossip she had recently heard about this neighbor. Her friend immediately listed several positive qualities about the same person, ending with, "I really like him!" The first woman had chosen to stab a person in the back. Her friend had effectively pulled out the knife and put it back in her hand, showing that a person can and should stick up for her friends.

Akin to backbiting and gossiping is the greatest all-time killer of loving relationships. See if you can recognize it in the following little example:

"You will never believe what I just heard about Mary!" Jane says, and then whispers her hot secret.

Her friend giggles at the news. "Whoever told you such a thing?"

"Well, Mary did, of course. But I promised I wouldn't tell a soul, so don't you say a word!"

Oh, the stories we could tell about broken confidences causing hurt feelings and destroying friendships! But we can sum it up all up in one sentence: If you don't want a secret to leak, don't speak!

Judging and prejudging other people are foes of love. There are times when we need to take a friend aside and quietly discuss a conflict or problem for that person's own good and growth. But wantonly passing judgments on people, flinging them out for the whole world to see and hear, does not build or lift. It often destroys. Remember the words of Mormon: "And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged." (Moroni 7:18.)

On the other hand, we do not know of anyone who has suffered from positive feedback. A person will glow inside when someone is kind enough to tell her she has performed well. Make it a point to observe good things about people, and when you do observe the good, tell the person so immediately. Don't ever let an opportunity pass to build up someone.

Contention can also destroy love. It is an old problem in the Church. The Lord said, "My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened." (D&C 64:8.) Bickering and strife still divide the Lord's disciples today.

We need to realize that many contentions originate within our own thoughts. The Lord asks, "And why beholdest thou the mote [speck of dust] that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam [large piece of timber] that is in thine own eye?" (3 Nephi 14:3.) We cannot change other people, but we have been given the free agency to examine ourselves and change our own behaviors and attitudes. As we do this, we will come closer to our goal of perfection.

If you are sure that the cause of the contention does not lie within yourself, try discussing it privately with the people involved. When you choose to take the problem elsewhere, words can slip and rumors can fly away on swift wings. If you cannot come to an agreement, possibly you can agree to disagree. Not every problem can be resolved, but you can go on loving anyway.

Remember, no matter what happens, the Lord requires that we forgive all men and warns that we cannot expect his forgiveness of our sins unless we forgive others. Unresolvable conflicts must be left in the Lord's hands. The Lord instructs us "to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee, and reward thee according to thy deeds." (D&C 64:11.)

Sarcasm, put-downs, negative teasing and joking, backbiting, gossiping, not keeping confidences, judging, and contention are all against our nurturing nature. So why do we allow them? Why aren't we more kind and generous to each other? Sometimes it is because of carelessness or lack of understanding, sometimes it is because of fear or distrust, and sometimes we are just plain envious or jealous.

Jealousy and its near-kinsman envy have numerous faces—all of them hideous. They are bitter, invidious feelings that can slither past our best spiritual guards to send messages of misery to our minds.

Experts cannot agree on a clear dividing line between jealousy and envy. For the purpose of this chapter, let's define jealousy as an emotion directed to people about people, and envy as an emotion directed to people about things, such as personal possessions, status, honors, abilities and talents, church positions, and so on.

What causes jealousy? After pulling book after book off the library shelves, and reading the theories of well-known psychologists, psychiatrists, medical doctors, and professional writers, we decided to return to the best authority of them all—the scriptures. In very plain language, Mormon answered this question: "Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually." (Moroni 7:12.)

Teamed together, jealousy and envy are two of Satan's most powerful tools. When the Lord called Cain to account for killing his brother Abel, Cain whimpered, "Satan tempted me because of my brother's flocks [envy at its worst]. And I was wroth also; for his offering thou didst accept and not mine [or, 'you love Abel more than you love me,' a jealous reaction]." (Moses 5:38.)

In the Bible we read that "Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours. And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren [note that it was not the beautiful coat that irked them, but the favoritism of their father], they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him [jealousy].

"And Joseph dreamed a dream, . . . and told it his brethren, and said . . . behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me. . . . And his brethren envied him [or envied the power and position that they were afraid Joseph might obtain over them]." (Genesis 37:3-11.)

Motivated by envy and jealousy, Cain killed his brother Abel, and Joseph's brothers sold him for twenty pieces of silver to the Ishmeelites, who transported him to Egypt. Is it any wonder that Paul preached, "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; . . . Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God." (Galatians 5:19, 21.) Mormon, writing to the latter-day Gentiles, commanded, "Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways; and repent of your . . . envyings, and your strifes." (3 Nephi 30:2.) And the Lord has commanded, "strip yourselves of jealousies." (D&C 67:10.)

How do we overcome feelings of jealousy and envy? How do we rid ourselves of these mortal tendencies that destroy love? First, we must recognize the problem. In the article "The Hardest Truth I Ever Faced," one brave sister confessed, "For a long time I had been harboring feelings of resentment toward some of my relatives, without understanding why. Then one morning as I lay quietly in bed . . . the Spirit spoke and I heard words I didn't want to hear: 'You're jealous.'

"At first I resisted the thought. How could I be jealous of the people I had criticized? How could one who thought jealousy was wrong be jealous? But even as I protested, I knew it was true. And perhaps the truth would at last free me of my bad feelings." (Taken from the Ensign, August 1980, pp. 46-47.)

Next, we must take ownership of our problem. One of the hardest things for us, as humans, to do is to take responsibility for our weaknesses. We want to blame somebody else—anybody else! But we must recognize that the problem lies within ourselves before we can begin to correct it.

Then we can take the problem to the Lord. Moroni 7:45 gives a definition of charity that makes a good measuring stick. In every conflict we should ask ourselves, "Am I being long suffering and kind? Do I have feelings of envy or am I puffed up and proud? Have I been easily provoked? Do I rejoice in the iniquity or the sins and shortcomings of others? Am I bearing all these things well, keeping my hope bright, and enduring to the end?" If we answer no to any of those questions, it is time to get down on our knees and "pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that [we] may be filled with this love." (Moroni 7:48.)

A sister talks about her battle with negative feelings:

One dark night I lay in bed, feeling weighed down with my own weaknesses. I stared out at the blackness that surrounded me; it was as dark as my own inner thoughts. I prayed for peace, for help, and for comfort. Very suddenly the blackness began to lift, replaced by a warmth that surrounded and penetrated my whole being: this, I knew immediately, was love—an incredible love! Fearing that the feeling would leave, I held my breath. The thoughts that tortured me fled before the light and I understood that even though I was weak and filled with shortcomings, my Heavenly Father loved me!

Our Heavenly Father loves each one of us in a way that is far beyond our comprehension. With his divine help, we can conquer jealousy, envy, or any of our other weaknesses—and win!

Armed with this knowledge of the power of prayer and the love of our Heavenly Father, we are ready to march into battle. The war with Satan is very real; he seeks to destroy us. By learning to recognize and wield the proper weapons, we can win. President Heber J. Grant was fond of telling this story:

I believe there is a great deal in the story that some of you may have read, in which a donation was requested, and a man decided to give a ham.

He had a smoke-house full of hams, and he had decided to give a ham to some poor person that needed a donation. When he went in there, he picked out a nice large ham, and the spirit came over him:

"Now, that is a big ham; you don't need to give that person such a large ham; give him a little one."

He said, "Shut up, Mr. Devil, or I will give him two hams," so he had no more trouble—none whatever. (Gospel Standards, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976, p. 283.)

In other words, we can effectively fight Satan's evil by counterattacking with double the goodness. Satan may whine, "Walk away. Turn down all invitations. Don't pick up the phone. Sever your relationship. It will be so much easier if you don't have to face the envy or jealousy. It hurts too much."

Why would Satan want you to do that? Because if you refuse to deal with the problem, you cannot conquer it; therefore, you will not grow. If Satan wishes you to walk away, then invest more time, be more available, serve with love. Instead of running away, try talking about your feelings with the person you are struggling with. This is difficult, but it is worth a try. Explain what is hurting you. Don't place the blame or lash out at the other person; instead, admit that you are jealous or envious and ask for understanding and patience.

Learn how to forgive and to be forgiven. When jealousy and envy enter a friendship, there is going to be pain. Many marriages and other relationships are destroyed because people cannot choke down their pride and say "I am sorry," or "I forgive you," or "Will you forgive me?" President Gordon B. Hinckley said, "I should like to say a word concerning charity of a different kind. I speak of charity in the sense of forgiveness, of tolerance of the failings of another, of the smothering of the feelings of jealousy and unkindness toward associates. . . . If there be any within the sound of my voice who have harbored grudges, who have let hatred develop in their hearts one toward another, I ask you to make the effort to turn around. Hatred always fails and bitterness always destroys, but 'charity never faileth.' (1 Cor. 13:8.)" (Taken from the Ensign, November 1981, p. 97.)

Satan may murmur, "See what she has? It is better than what you have, so tear down, criticize, demean, belittle, ridicule. Somebody needs to keep her humble." The best defense against such an attack is a direct counterattack: build up, praise, and encourage; moreover, learn to enjoy, to value, and to treasure the gifts, accomplishments, talents, even the possessions of your friends. The first time Jill heard Lauren sing she thought, somewhat enviously, Oh, to have a voice like Lauren's. That would be a wonderful gift. And so she once said to Lauren, "I would give my eyeteeth for your voice." "Really? " Lauren said. "And what would you be willing to give me in exchange for my voice? Would you give me your writing talent or your ability for public speaking?"

"No! I need those talents."

Lauren smiled. "Oh, I see—you want my talent and all of your talents also. That's not fair!"

Lauren was right—and when Jill realized it, she stopped envying Lauren's talent and started to enjoy it. Once we get over envying our friends' abilities and talents we can benefit from them.

Satan may growl, "Two is company, but three is a crowd." It's easy to be envious of the good times our friends have with others. Satan would encourage exclusivity and cliquishness in our relationships. But the Lord never intended for all of our needs to be met by one or even two people. You will find that each person who enters your circle of love will bring you something new, beautiful, and unique. Some may be easy to talk with; some may need a listening ear; some will be blessed with many talents; some will have great spiritual gifts; some will be available to exchange services, like baby-sitting; some will be a joy just to socialize with, and so on.

As you reach out, your circle will expand and you will grow. Don't you want the same for others? If you do not, scrutinize your motives carefully. Someone once said, "In jealousy there is more self love than love." Jealousy and envy seek to possess, to claim territorial rights, to set boundaries. Love offers free agency.

Satan may snivel, "You cannot conquer jealousy or envy. They are overpowering and you are weak." Then he will probably try one of his favorite ploys, "You are discouraged, discouraged, discouraged."

Don't believe it. Start by setting some little goals. By achieving each little goal you will move ahead and eventually reach your destination. You will have some failures. When you do, congratulate yourself, since only people who are sincerely trying can fail. In Jill's house, when one of her family members auditions for a part in a play, a choir, a place in the talent show, or campaigns for a school office, whether the person makes it or not, the family throws a party. It takes courage to try, and courage should be celebrated.

Don't let Satan trap you into feeling as if you are a total failure because you failed to achieve one goal. Many times, one setback will cause a person to reflect on all the other mistakes in her life. These negative thoughts can become overwhelming, and discouragement breaks through. If you must turn your head to the past, look behind you and see how far you have traveled.

Conquering jealousy and envy will not be easy; however, battle by battle you will win the war. Our Heavenly Father placed us here on earth to succeed, not to fail. And with his help, as we struggle, we will gain strength. Through his servant Moroni, the Lord promised, "And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then I will make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27; italics added.)

By stripping away jealousy, envy, and the other foes of love, we can create a happier life for ourselves and all those around us. We can tap that great power to build, lift, and nurture that is part of our divine inheritance.

We are told that after Christ's mission on the American continent, "There was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults . . . and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (4 Nephi 1:15-16.)

Someday this whole earth will be cleansed, and then it will be that way again, but we don't have to wait for the Millennium. We can each do our part by cleansing our inward vessels first (see Alma 60:23) and then reaching out to strengthen others.
