Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 6

A Wall of Fears

All of us struggle with fears. Imagine each of these fears forming a block, and each of those blocks becoming part of a wall. Some people think that this wall protects them from the difficult world outside. It doesn't. Each of us is here to be tried and tested—no wall can help us avoid that. What this wall of fears does is to keep us from seeing the needs of our spirit brothers and sisters, and to obscure their ability to see our needs. It also stops us from developing close, loving relationships.

In an epistle written to his beloved son Moroni, Mormon taught that "perfect love casteth out all fear." (Moroni 8:16.) Then Mormon charted the way in which to obtain perfect love: "And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; and the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God." (Moroni 8:25-26.)

The wonderful first principles and ordinances of the gospel—faith, repentance, baptism, and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost—are the beginning steps to perfect love, the only love that can remove fear. Next, we must be humble and seek perfect love by diligence in prayer. Diligence implies not one, but many prayers. Each and every time we find ourselves in a situation that is fearful, or in which we show anything less than pure love, we need to "pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ." (Moroni 7:48).

Strengthened with the bonds of love, you can boldly step out from behind your wall of fears, indeed, you may even find that you are excited about it! You are the one who must make the move; you cannot expect anyone to come flying over or crashing through your wall. The wise King Solomon said, "A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly." (Proverbs 18:24.)

Sir Isaac Newton said, "Men build too many walls and not enough bridges." Let us share with you some ways to pull down your wall, sometimes using those same blocks of fear to make a bridge to love.

Block 1: I'm not good enough

We are often shy about reaching out to others because we feel inadequate. We see all that they accomplish and feel that we just aren't good enough to be their friends.

This kind of feeling can be likened to a ride on an escalator. When you step onto an escalator, there are people above you and people below you, but there is very little room for anyone to stand right next to you. Similarly, we tend to feel that there are people who are better than we are. And, though we would be ashamed to admit it, most of us feel that there are people who are not quite as good as we are. (None of us would really place ourselves at the bottom of the heap, would we?)

We need to change our attitude and view our trip through life as a giant elevator in which we can all go up together. Then we can truly rejoice in each other's accomplishments and benefit from each other's talents.

Sometimes we feel inferior over things that are imagined, sometimes over things that are very real, but Eleanor Roosevelt concluded, "No one can make you feel inferior without your consent." Do you remember anything about Eleanor Roosevelt? You would think campaigning for her husband, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and serving as First Lady for more than twelve years would have been enough—but it wasn't! She served as a delegate to the United Nations General Assembly, was elected chairman of the UN's Human Rights Commission, helped draft the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, worked with the underprivileged, fought for equal rights for minorities, and wrote several books. She also had terrible buck teeth, which she obviously didn't sit around sulking about and feeling inferior over.

You are a child of our Heavenly Father and oh, how he loves you! He doesn't care if you are bald or short or never learned to play the piano. He pays no attention to whether your clothes or your house or your furniture or your cars cost as much as the neighbors'. He loves you! And our Savior pleads with each of us to "remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D&C 18:10.) This includes your soul! Don't let the "I'm not good enough" block of fear rule your life. You may miss out on some wonderful experiences.

Block 2: I don't fit in

Most of us have felt, at some time in our lives, as if we just didn't fit in. We tend to see people as fitting into certain specified groups. We think it is just easier to associate with people who are our age, or our color, or our religion, or our occupation, or our weight, or our financial status. We spend a lot of energy in seeking out our "group," and if we are a little uncomfortable we tell ourselves that we don't fit in. Many times this is a great excuse for not trying.

Lauren shares the worries she once felt about fitting in in a new neighborhood:

When my husband and I were looking for a home to buy, the real estate agent showed us a cute rambler on a quiet cul-de-sac. One afternoon the real estate agent was driving me over to see the house for a second time. As luck would have it, we stopped behind the school bus that was letting off some of the elementary school kids who lived in that neighborhood. I was astounded at the number of children who jumped through the yellow doors and onto the street; it was as if an entire colony of ants had gotten loose. We waited in the car for what seemed like ten minutes until all of the children were off the bus and walking toward their homes. Later, I learned that the stop was only the first of three in my new neighborhood.

Something inside of me screamed, "Every other family in the neighborhood has children and you don't have any. You don't fit in!" It took me a long time to quiet that fear and understand that it didn't matter. Not one person ever mentioned the fact that we were the only ones who didn't have children and no one ever came up to me and said, "You don't fit in." In fact, many people were envious of my position because of the time I was able to spend with my husband. In their eyes we were free.

Once, when a friend came to visit, she exclaimed, "Listen to that!"

I listened. "I can't hear anything."

She rested her head on the back of the couch. "I know. Isn't it wonderful! It is so quiet here." My friend has a large family and she thought my home was heavenly.

We can learn a lot from people who are not in our "group." I learned so much from my friends who have children that I really felt better prepared when motherhood finally came. Besides, seeing some of my friends' struggles with their children helped take the hurt out of having to wait so long.

Sometimes block number two creeps up on people as they attend church meetings. In a church centered around the celestial family, childless couples, single adults, wives or husbands with inactive or nonmember spouses, wonderful parents whose children have gone astray, and others who do not have strong marriages with happy children may feel that they do not fit. Also, newly baptized members, members who have recently moved into a ward or branch, or members returning to church after a period of inactivity may feel uneasy, wondering where their place is or even if there is a place for them.

Did you notice how large this list of people is? You may find that more than half of the people in your ward or branch belong in one of these categories. If you want to feel as if you really belong, then go out of your way to make others feel as if they really fit. Because they do! If you set a goal never to let another sister sit alone in a church meeting, you will never sit alone either. If you set a goal to cross the room and introduce yourself to at least one person each week, someone will always know your name. If you set a goal to talk to at least one person in between meetings, someone who really may need a friend, you will soon have many friends.

In one ward two large families moved in the same week onto the same street. As soon as the first family had unpacked the pans, they took dinner over to the second family. "We know how much it means to have support when you are moving in," the mother of the first family said. These two families immediately felt that they fit in: the first because they gave freely, the second because they received graciously.

President Gordon B. Hinckley said, "It is a wonderful time to be a member of the Church, with millions of members all belonging to the greatest community of friends in all the world. Wherever one goes as a faithful Latter-day Saint he will have instant friends if he makes his identity known." The reality is that you already belong. You already fit! Now it is up to you make yourself feel that way.

Block 3: She won't like me/She doesn't like me

Most of us have feelings of insecurity in our relationships. We worry that others won't like us. One sister expressed her struggle with these feelings:

I once thought that if someone really got to know me, if someone could really see what was in my heart, if a person had the ability to read my soul, they would immediately turn away and want nothing to do with me.

Some time ago there was a very talented, enthusiastic, fun-loving woman in my ward and I really wanted to be her friend. But the "she won't like me" feeling prevented me from reaching out to her.

One evening we just started talking. Do you know what I found out? She really wanted to get to know me better and to be my friend, but she was afraid that if I really got to know her, if I really found out what she was like on the inside, I wouldn't like her. I was shocked! She had jumped into the icy waters of deep communication and I wasn't going to let her stay in there by herself, so I told her about my feelings. Expressing those fears helped both of us overcome them and, through this common bond, a friendship flourished.

In the following days and weeks I found out that my friend had many heartaches and tragedies in her life. It helped her to know that I wouldn't laugh or be insensitive when she revealed inner thoughts and feelings, and I felt better knowing that I could also share with her and not be ridiculed or turned away. Best of all, we found out that we liked each other!

Don't stop a relationship before it starts just because you think a person won't like you. Give yourself a chance. Give your potential friend a chance.

The "She won't like me" block is usually fixed with a strong mortar to the "She doesn't like me" block. You get past that first fear and timidly reach out, but unfortunately, your new friend responds with lukewarm aloofness. If your wall includes this block your immediate response is, "See, I was right. She doesn't like me!"

In your search for close, loving relationships you will find that other people are also facing many challenges. You may choose to befriend a person who does not know how to return offered love, or who is deeply involved with personal problems, or who really does not have much time, or who does not value your friendship as much as you value hers, or who is also hiding behind a wall of fears. Such a person will give as much as she is able to. Try not to interpret her inability to meet your expectations as "she doesn't like me" when, in fact, she probably hasn't made that judgment at all. The only thing that has really happened in such a situation is that the person you have reached out to has not responded in the way you wanted.

Ideally every person should return equally that which is given to them; however, that practically never happens. If you really value a friendship you may have to make all the phone calls, plan all the luncheon dates, and always be the one to offer or ask for help. In other words, you must give without thought of what you are going to get in return. This is part of unconditional love.

You may also have to step back and give the friendship room to grow. If you have ever planted carrots or radishes too close to each other you know that if they are crowded they do not develop fully. They are scrawny! Sometimes a person can feel crowded by an overanxious friend, and the only way to help friendship survive is to give it a little more space. Remember that "charity suffereth long, and is kind." (Moroni 7:45.) You may have to be the sole nurturer of a friendship for months or even years before it will blossom. Don't cut a friendship off at the roots because of the "She doesn't like me" block of fear. Recognize that you are once more fighting with your own insecurities.

Block 4: I might get hurt

In every relationship where there is caring or love, there is also an element of risk. People can hurt each other to the same depth, degree, and intensity that they love each other. Lehi taught, "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." (2 Nephi 2:11.)

This principle is illustrated clearly in parenthood. There is no greater love than that between a parent and a child. Who can bring you more joy than your children? Who, also, can bring you more sorrow than your children? The same is true of any people who care deeply for each other: they can, and sometimes do, hurt each other deeply.

The "I might get hurt" block is a whole wall in itself to many people. We live in a society that is frightened of pain. If we have a headache, we take an aspirin. There are medicines for stomachaches, backaches, toothaches, earaches, and even placebo pills for imagined aches. But there just isn't an easy remedy for a heartache and perhaps that is why we fear it so much.

Yet, it obviously is not in our Heavenly Father's plan for true followers of Christ to insulate themselves from pain. The Lord commanded, "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Matthew 5:44.) This is hardly a prescription for pain-free relationships. The question is, how can we ever gain the maturity to love our enemies, if we are so fearful of being hurt that we cannot give complete and full love to our friends?

When we experience deep emotional pain inflicted by another person, it is natural to want to pull back—like jerking a hand off a hot stove—taking the pain and the hurt with us. "I'll never trust anyone again," we sometimes feel. But trust is one of the vital organs of a loving relationship. Without it the relationship will shrink away and eventually die. Forgiveness heals deep emotional wounds, bringing peace and restoring trust. If a hurt is allowed to go unforgiven, it will poison the relationship and the unforgiving person as well. It is only through total forgiveness and renewed trust that we can let go of the hurt and extend our hand again. Forgiveness brings great joy and peace, crushing the "I might get hurt" block.

We have talked about removing fears through love, forgiveness, and trust. To these things we would like to add the important quality of faith. Marvin J. Ashton promised, "Fear in our lives can be conquered if we will but have faith and move forward with purpose."

The Apostle Peter showed courage and faith many times. On one such occasion, the winds were howling and the ship he was in was being tossed about in the waves. Then the disciples saw Jesus walking on the water. Peter didn't wait for the Savior to come to him, but called out, "Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water." In a similar fashion, we can't wait for others to come around our wall of fears; we have to be willing to walk out from behind it.

Jesus beckoned Peter to come. Jesus knew what terror the water would hold for Peter, but he also knew that Peter would not grow spiritually if he stayed safely in the boat, just as we cannot grow spiritually if we stay safely behind our walls. Then, with faith, Peter jumped out of the boat and started walking on the water! Many times we don't give Peter enough credit for trying, focusing instead on his failure. Peter could have said, "Never mind. It looks pretty scary out there. I'll stay here in the boat and wait until things get a little calmer." But he didn't.

The scriptures say that when Peter "saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid." When you reach out, you are going to face strong winds of adversity. Satan is not going to overlook the fact that you can do much good if you get over your fears. He is going to stir up a storm. With his strong opposition, your fears may return. You may even doubt and, like Peter, begin to sink. But remember that Peter cried out, "Lord, save me. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him." Just as Jesus did not let Peter fall, neither will he let you fall! However, as our Lord takes you gently by the hand and lifts you up, be prepared for a brotherly scolding just as he gave to Peter: "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" (Matthew 14:24-31.) The Lord chastens those he loves. (See D&C 95:1.)

Peter continued to fight with his fears and doubts. It was fear that caused him to deny the Christ three times outside the doors of the palace of the high priest while the Savior was being unlawfully tried inside. But Peter never gave up. He moved forward with faith and purpose, eventually conquering his fears and becoming the chief apostle of his day. Our Heavenly Father is mindful of the righteous desires of your heart and he will help you achieve them.

Pulling down the wall that has hidden and protected you for many years may be a very frightening experience in itself. It takes time and patience, but the risks you take and the pain you might experience from removing blocks of fear from your life will be worth it!
