Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 7

Communicating Love

People who wish to encircle others with love consistently send out messages of love. They do it by the way they greet people, smile, touch others with a handshake or hug, remember names, listen, involve others in their lives, and express their feelings. They know how to communicate love sincerely. The ability to communicate is a skill that must be learned. This chapter will help you acquire this knowledge so you can more effectively reach out to others.

Greet with a smile

Start by greeting everyone with a smile. Smiling is a talent that anyone can acquire; with practice, you can even become a grand master smiler. Think of it: no matter how many long hours of practice you put in on the piano, you may never play in a concert. No matter how many voice lessons you take, you might not get the lead in an opera. But your smile can be the star of the show every day.

First, practice in front of every mirror you come across. When you brush your teeth, comb your hair, or put on makeup, practice your biggest, broadest grin. One of our friends practiced when she stopped at red lights. She stretched her chin up until she could see her mouth in the rearview mirror and then tried out her grin. She tried large, toothy grins, closed-mouth grins, and even demure half smiles. She got some strange looks from other drivers and passengers, but now when she walks into a room the sunshine seems to follow her.

Don't worry if your teeth are spaced unevenly or yellowed or crooked or your smile is lopsided. People who are self-conscious about their smiles often cover them up with a hand. Don't do it! Let your smile shine through.

Next, practice your smile with your friends and family. If they are not used to seeing your lips curved up they may ask, "Are you okay?" But soon they will get accustomed to it, and then, when you are not smiling, they will ask, "Are you okay?"

When you have mastered that, smile at strangers. During the back-to-school shopping crush a young store clerk was running in and out of the stock room, trying to retrieve merchandise for a customer. The customer grumbled at each item the clerk showed him and finally stomped off without making a purchase. The clerk return to the cash register, silent and sullen.

Another customer commented, "Sometimes it can be pretty rough working for the public, can't it?"

The clerk looked up and saw a sympathetic smile. "Sometimes, but most of the time people are pretty nice," she replied, returning the smile. As the second customer turned to leave she noticed that the clerk had a smile for the customer behind her and that smile was also returned. A smile is a gift that you can give to anyone around you.

The power of touch

Have you ever noticed how often Christ extended his hands and touched those around him to heal, to bless, and to ordain? When a leper came to him and asked to be cleansed, "Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean." (Matthew 8:3.) When he found Peter's mother-in-law sick with a fever "he touched her hand, and the fever left her." (Matthew 8:15.) When two blind men came to Jesus begging, "Thou Son of David, have mercy on us," Jesus asked them, "Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you." (Matthew 9:28-29.)

In the Book of Mormon we read that Jesus "took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them." (3 Nephi 17:21.) Can you picture Christ surrounded by infants, toddlers, and older children? He reaches forth his hand, marked by the wound of the nail, and gently takes the hand of a little girl in the circle. He smiles and lifts the little one onto his lap and places his hands on her small head. After blessing all the children his joy was so great that he wept. (3 Nephi 17:22.)

Human touch is important, both eternally and temporally. One of the first things we learn in mortality is that close bodily contact brings forth feelings of safety, warmth, and love. A baby quiets when cuddled and rocked. A small child climbs on Mother's lap. Older children lean against their parents or brothers and sisters in church or during story time. Hugging, tickling, gentle pinching and poking, back rubbing, tousling the hair, and wrestling are common ways in which families make that human connection.

But sometime, somehow an invisible box called "personal space" closes in around each of us. When someone sits or stands too close to us, we automatically slide or back away until we are at a comfortable distance. The amount of personal space we need varies with each person and between people. Think of the differences in the amount of room you need to feel comfortable when you are sitting by (1) your spouse, boyfriend, or fiancÃ©, (2) a friend, (3) a stranger, or (4) someone you have negative feelings toward. You probably don't need much personal space at all with the first, and yet you may not feel comfortable being in the same building with a person you have had a confrontation with.

We need to respect people's need for personal space, but there are ways we can quickly pop in and out of that space, creating warm stirrings of love and friendship. One of these "safe" times is with a handshake.

Let's forget all the traditional rules of etiquette between men and women and concentrate on this important communication of love. Have you ever extended your hand to someone, only to be kept waiting there with your hand dangling in midair? Even a few seconds of hesitation from the other person can feel like minutes. During that time the negative messages begin to flow: What have I done to him? Why am I being rejected? Is he mad at me? In reality the other person's hand is probably just sweaty or cold and clammy, and he hesitates out of embarrassment. Unfortunately, in those seconds of hesitation a negative message is communicated: "unfriendly!"

When a hand is extended, reach back immediately! Don't squish like a juicer—that maims ring-decorated pinkies. Neither do you want to let your hand rest gently and corpselike in the palm of another during a handshake. The right grip is actually a natural reflex. Have you ever pressed your finger into the hand of a newborn baby? The tiny fingers close firmly and gently. What a wonderful, secure feeling that is! When the grip is just right, don't pump or saw—just move the hand slightly up and down. An added positive gesture is to place the second hand on top of the two clutched hands. And, of course, look the person in the eyes and smile!

Hugging is another way that we can reach through the personal space that surrounds most of us and communicate friendship and love. A single mother stood before her sisters in a Relief Society meeting and, with tears in her eyes, spoke of her struggles in raising her small family without the aid and companionship of a husband. Then she said, "One thing that has really helped me is the warm hugs I receive from my friends. I can be having the worst day and a friend will come up and say, 'You look like you need a hug' and then give me a warm squeeze. It is always perfect timing and it always makes me feel better." For some people, a hug is uncomfortable. But we believe that people need to be touched whether they know it or not. If you feel that someone is uncomfortable with a hug, you might simply touch a hand or an elbow. In this way you can still communicate your love and friendship without making the person uneasy.

Remember names

There are no dearer sounding words in all of speech than a person's own name. Remembering (or forgetting) a name or mispronouncing a name is also a loud and clear communication of friendship or the lack thereof.

Jill likes to tell of one special person's talent for remembering and using her name:

When I was working for a local TV studio I often had the opportunity to meet famous people who came in to be interviewed on the air. It was in this way I met Gordon Jump, star of WKRP in Cincinnati. After the show, I introduced myself to him and we chatted briefly. When I excused myself, he said very politely, "It was a pleasure meeting you, Mrs. Major." I was impressed that he had listened for my name and used it!

About ten minutes later Mr. Jump left the studio, but he was still standing in the lobby when an important phone call came in for him. I volunteered to relay the message. "Mr. Jump, you have a phone call at the reception desk," I told him.

He smiled at me. "Thank you, Jill," he answered.

From our brief encounter I decided that Mr. Jump was really friendly and he cared about people. Why? Just because he remembered my name.

Remembering names is important; it communicates caring. It says, "You are an important person to me." If you are one of those people whose mind seems to have a trapdoor through which all names are released into some dark, dusty, forgotten room of the brain, don't despair. There is hope.

One of the biggest reasons most people do not remember a name is that they don't hear it in the first place. The introduction takes place; the name is mumbled; you didn't quite hear it, but you are too embarrassed to ask for the name to be repeated. If that happens, swallow a little pride and simply say, "I'm sorry. I didn't quite catch your name. Will you say it for me again?"

Sometimes we hear the name but quickly forget it because we are distracted or we aren't concentrating. Learn to stop and focus in on people during introductions. Say the name over silently several times and then use it immediately. "It is really nice to meet you, Mr. Jones." Then use the name again before leaving that person.

There are several excellent memory books on the market that explain how to use word association to remember a name and its owner. If you really struggle with remembering names, borrow one of these books from the local library and put it to use. It is amazing how quickly you can train your mind to remember and retrieve names. It soon becomes a habit.

Just as important as remembering the name is pronouncing it correctly. It is just plain uncomfortable to hear your own name mispronounced, so during introductions pay close attention to correct pronunciations of other people's names.

Contributing to conversation

Many potentially wonderful friendships are never started because one or both of the people are nervous about starting a conversation and keeping it going. What do you say? Most people like to talk about themselves, so questions are an easy way to start a conversation. Questions that require simple yes or no answers are often roadblocks to conversation. Keep inquiries open-ended: Tell me about the place you used to live, or your job. What do you enjoy doing in your spare time? What did you do this morning?

Be careful to keep questions limited in scope. "Tell me about yourself" is like flinging open a dozen doors at one time. The person may just stand there, feeling confused, wondering which passageway to turn into.

Above all, don't be afraid to contribute to the conversation by sharing some of your own history, background, ideas, feelings, interests, and hobbies. When one person is asking all the questions and the other giving all the answers, it soon begins to feel like an interrogation instead of a friendly chat.

As important as knowing what to say is knowing what not to ask. The Church has an abundance of people who do not live in traditional family circumstances. The prophets' calls to collect and record family histories do not include the personal details of your neighbors' lives! It is not important for us know what happened in a divorce; how a spouse became inactive; why an older single adult has not married; why a couple has a very large family, a very small family, or no children; or about any other personal family traumas. Neither should we rain down judgments: "There must be something wrong with her if she is divorced," or "She isn't married because she is too picky." Nor should we make assumptions: "They probably waited to have children until after they finished school or they bought a home or because she wanted a career." We need to be sensitive to other people's feelings!

Instead of asking "Are you married?" or "How many children do you have?," try saying, "Tell me about your family." Then the person is free to talk about her brothers and sisters, her aunts and uncles, her genealogy back to Adam, or anything else that comes to mind.

No matter how delicate we try to be there are going to be times when, out of ignorance, we say inappropriate things. If this happens, put your arms around the person you have offended and immediately ask for forgiveness. The relationship will grow because your friends will learn to trust your efforts to be sensitive.

If you have been a recipient of this type of prying and grilling, our advice is: refuse to be offended. People do not mean to hurt your feelings. In fact, in most cases they have no idea their questions cause you any pain. You cannot control the words of others, but you can control how you react to them. Try to see that when a friend puts her foot in her mouth it is nasty-tasting and humiliating to her also.

Many people have left the Church because of the unthoughtfulness of others. What a shame! We have a friend who was once the victim of cruel deeds and harsh words, but his words were ever tender and merciful. He said, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

Listening more effectively

In order to listen to someone, first you must focus your attention on what that person is saying. While someone chats away, your mind may be chugging down several tracks. Perhaps there will be a pause in the conversation that jolts you back. You ask a question. "I just explained that to you," your friend says with exasperation in her voice. The conversation has just crashed. To hear, you must have a one-track mind, and it must be on the same track as your friend's.

Once you start hearing, then you can listen. The two have some of the same elements, but they are not the same action. Listening is deeper than hearing. Listening—not just passively tuning in, but actively listening—is the most important part of a conversation. It communicates love. When you listen, you are using your ears not only to process words, but also to interpret the tone of voice. You are using your eyes to see facial expressions, body movement, and responses. You separate yourself from your own life and from your own emotions at that time so that you can feel what the other person is going through.

For example, when you ask the traditional question, "How are you?" you will probably hear the conventional answer, "Fine." Now, if you took a survey on how many people are a plain, flat "fine" all the time, the numbers would probably be few. Now listen! You might hear that your friend's voice has a musical ring and see that there is a certain extra brightness in her eyes. Then, perhaps, you could say something like, "You look extra happy today. Did something special happen?" Or you may see that your friend's shoulders droop, and hear melancholy in her voice. In this case you could make a comment such as, "You look like you are feeling a little tired or a little down." People will be surprised and delighted that you genuinely care enough to really listen.

You don't have to be a psychologist to be a good listener—just use good old common sense. Suppose you are speaking about a sensitive, serious, personal subject and the person you are talking with reacts in one of the following ways: (1) He or she busily looks out the window or at the television. (2) He or she picks up a book or newspaper and begins thumbing through it. (3) He or she breaks into the middle of your sentence and doesn't let you complete it. (4) After you finish your thought, he or she quickly interjects, "I don't mean to change the subject, but . . . , " which of course means, "I really mean to change the subject, so. . . . " How do you feel when one of these situations occurs? Well, if you feel put down, belittled, unimportant, and inconsequential, common sense tells you how other people feel under the same circumstances.

Notice that most of the words in the preceding sentence are negative. We need to build each other with positive feelings. A good listener can make another person feel important and worthwhile. When someone is talking to you, look into her eyes, not at her feet, her scarf, out the window, or at the newspaper. This is so basic that even small children know it. Many times a child will take both of her little hands, place them on each side of an adult's cheeks and physically turn the face so that he is looking right straight in her eyes. The message is very clear: "You are not listening to me unless you are looking at me."

Nod occasionally, and say "uh-huh." When appropriate, ask a simple question that shows you are interested in the topic. And even if the topic doesn't interest you, don't change the subject until there is a comfortable break in the conversation. Yes, this does take some patience and endurance, especially if the speaker likes to spend hours chattering on about her last fifteen operations, but the payoff is, that person feels important because you really listened! Don't get perturbed if you can't get a word in edgewise. Think of listening as a compassionate service, since it truly is. According to Marion D. Hanks, "Every human being is trying to say something to others, trying to cry out, 'I am alive. Notice me! Speak to me! LISTEN to me! Confirm for me that I am important, that I matter.' "

Finally, listen with a kind ear. One of our favorite quotations expresses this beautifully: "Oh, the comfort, the inexpressible comfort, of feeling safe with a person, having neither to weigh thoughts, nor measure words, but pouring them all right out just as they are—chaff and grain together—certain that a faithful hand will take and sift them, keep what is worth keeping and with the breath of kindness blow the rest away." The three of us often dump on each other, secure in the knowledge that the others will listen without making judgments or passing on negative thoughts and feelings. Oh, what a wonderful treasure is a friend who knows how to listen with a kind ear!

Don't be afraid to ask

Many people feel it is a show of weakness to have to ask for assistance. These same independent people are often those who enjoy serving most, yet, even in a personal crisis situation, they do not utter a word of request and they turn down all offers of help. It is a shame! Not only do they deny others the opportunity to serve them, but they also close many doors to strengthening bonds of love. When you ask a person to do something for you, you are paying her a compliment. You are saying, "I need help and I trust you enough to provide that help." If your heart is in the right place, you are also communicating the message, "I will be there anytime you need me." Later, when that person needs a favor, she will remember that you asked her, and so she will feel more comfortable asking you in return. So ask an acquaintance for that needed ride, for a cup of borrowed sugar, for help with your genealogy, for an hour of baby-sitting, to tape record an important meeting that you must miss, to sit by you in Relief Society because you are feeling a bit uneasy, to help you find just the right flowers for your garden, for advice on child raising, to bring in a meal when you are sick, and so on. That acquaintance will quickly become a friend.

Another type of asking is to ask a person to do something with you. This communicates the message, "I like your company. I want to be with you. I value your friendship." Many people do not ask because they fear being turned down or rejected. When a person is unavailable to do something with you, do not interpret this to mean, "I don't want to be your friend," when it probably means, "I don't like doing that" or "I am too busy that evening" or "I am very shy and uncomfortable." Even if you get turned down, you have communicated your desire to be a friend.

Say "I love you"

"I love you" is such a simple phrase, yet for many people these words are very difficult to say. A friend shared how the words "I love you" changed her life:

When I was growing up I never heard the words "I love you" used in my home. I knew that I was loved. My parents worked very hard to see that I received the things I needed and they tried to spend as much time as possible with me. Yet, these words were never said. For some reason they were embarrassing. Fortunately, I married a wonderful man who expresses his love to our children and me several times each day.

After being away nearly ten years from the home I grew up in, I began to feel a deep yearning to express my feelings of love to my brothers, sisters, Mom, and Dad. It was hard, but I set a goal for myself and then I made opportunities to do it. I remember walking Mom out to the car, keeping the conversation going, trying to find just the right moment. Finally, as Mom got ready to shut the door I took a deep breath and said, "Mom, I just want you to know that I really love you." "I love you too," she said quietly, then we hugged. I stood on the driveway for a long time after my mother left, wiping away tears of joy, reliving that moment, wondering how something so simple could have taken me so long to do. I decided right then that each time I left a member of my family, they would know how I felt.

It still isn't easy, but I have noticed that a great miracle has taken place in my family. Now, those words that were never spoken are used by everyone.

In this chapter we have talked about many ways to communicate love. When you do one of these things, such as greeting someone with enthusiasm, it is like giving a person a beautiful helium balloon—what a great lift! If you learn to use many of these skills together—a smile, a firm handshake or a needed hug, remembering a person's name and pronouncing it correctly, a caring conversation—it is like presenting someone with a whole bouquet of beautiful, colorful balloons. But just as helium balloons float away if they are not anchored, these communications of love may drift away also, unless they are tied down securely with frequent verbal expressions of love. Learn to express your love and do it often. It will brighten cloudy eyes, turn up the corners of a downcast mouth, and scatter shadows of loneliness. When you communicate love, you will find that miracles will bloom all around you.
