Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 8

Love Encircles Golden Friends

King Mosiah gave a strict command to be followed throughout all the churches in his kingdom that "there should be no persecutions among them, that there should be an equality among all men; that they should let no pride nor haughtiness disturb their peace; that every man should esteem his neighbor as himself." (Mosiah 27:3-4.) As true followers of Christ, we too should live by these words. There should not be any room for acts of inequality toward our neighbors. We should be free of the rumors that we, the Mormon people, are interested only in making proselytes, not in making friends. Yet, stories circulate of Mormon families who held their arms open in friendship until their nonmember or less-active neighbors showed no interest in the Church; then they folded their arms and bowed out of the friendship.

Part of the problem is that many of us, keeping the emphasis on missionary work in mind, tend to look at others first as golden contacts, so we become their friends. We need to reverse the order of priority and look at others first as golden friends. This does not mean that we do not share the gospel. We should give the best of our lives to those we love. But by placing the emphasis on the friendship first, we will never leave a friend stranded by the wayside.

Jesus taught the duties of being a neighbor in the parable of the good Samaritan. These duties have important parallels today. The story begins with a man who traveled on the dangerous, dusty road that linked Jerusalem with Jericho. Thieves attacked the man, stole his clothes, and left him bloody, bruised, and half dead. Today, our less-active Mormon neighbors are often people who fell among bad company, usually in their teenage years. These robbers professed to be friends, but stripped the people of their beliefs, wounded them by introducing bad habits, and departed, leaving them half dead spiritually. Sometimes the robbers are Mormons who have set bad examples. Perhaps they stripped their neighbors of their right to be accepted members of the neighborhood, wounded them by ignoring them or doing things that the gospel expressly commands not to do, and departed, leaving them with bad feelings about all members of the Church.

Christ's parable continued with a priest and a Levite, both respected and important men in the Jewish church, who, seeing the poor man, crossed the road and walked on. Do we also at times get in a hurry, usually to attend to one of our many church duties, and so pass by those in our neighborhood who desperately need our love? But then the Lord told about a Samaritan, one who traditionally was treated by Jews with bitterness, intolerance, and even hatred, because of religious differences. The Samaritan saw the poor man and felt compassion for him so he knelt down by the man's side and bound up his wounds (took in a plate of cookies, helped unload the moving van, assisted in unpacking), poured in oil and wine (smiled and waved, lent a listening ear), and set him on his own beast (opened the doors to his home, included him in parties and gatherings), and brought him to an inn and took care of him (brought in a meal when there was sickness in the family).

"And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host [involved other people in including and encouraging the new friend], and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee." (Even though responsibilities of work, church, family, and community took him away, he returned to his non-Mormon or less-active Mormon friends.) (See Luke 10:30-37.)

Through this parable the Lord taught that anyone who needs our love, compassion, and help becomes our neighbor, whether that person lives near us or not. He also taught that a good neighbor would never leave another stranded by the wayside. Decide now that whether your nonmember friend decides to join the Church or not, or whether your less-active friend decides to become active or not, you will always stand by her and be her faithful friend!

Another complaint about Mormons is that they are cliquish or clannish. Yes, we do enjoy being with one another, and there is nothing wrong with that, but could we try harder to include those who do not attend our church activities every week? Could we expand our circle of friends and bring in those who do not believe the way we do? Sometimes we fail to do so because of fears that creep up; sometimes we get so involved in what we are doing that we don't take the time; sometimes we just don't know how to begin. But it is worth the effort to get over fears, take the time, and learn how to begin. Extending a hand to our nonmember and less-active member neighbors adds variety and great riches to life.

The experience of friendshipping a less-active member is a favorite memory for Lauren and Jill. When Susan and Lee moved into their ward, Lauren, Jill, and their husbands decided to make a conscious, consistent effort to be good neighbors and great friends. At the time, the fact that Susan and Lee smoked heavily seemed to be an obstacle. Where could they go that they could all be comfortable? Finally Jill came up with a brilliant idea: "How about a hockey game?" Lauren hesitated. She had never been to a hockey game and wasn't sure she ever wanted to go.

"It really would be the perfect place," Jill assured her. "We would be able to talk and be entertained at the same time. Besides, if either Susan or Lee want to smoke, they could just go out into the lobby for a few minutes."

The date was set and Susan and Lee were delighted to be invited. Susan was a hockey fan and had a basic understanding of the game, so whenever the others didn't understand why a player was penalized, they asked Susan. If Susan didn't know, she simply tapped the shoulder of the person sitting in front of her and asked him. One time, after receiving an explanation from a fan, Susan turned to them and said, "Hockey people are such friendly people!" That was probably true, but Susan was also friendly. She wasn't afraid to talk to strangers. In fact, from the first time that she met anyone, that person was Susan's friend.

After the hockey game Jill and Lauren invited Susan to a ladies-only evening at the opera Madame Butterfly.She accepted, but several days before the opera Jill got a phone call. "I'm sorry, but I won't be able to go with you," Susan said with disappointment in her voice.

"Is everything all right?" Jill asked.

"No. I'm in the hospital. The doctor says I have a blood clot in my lung." Susan sounded understandably frightened. "I was wondering if Ken could come and help my brother give me a blessing?" Jill and Lauren were excited to find out that Susan's family were active in the Church and that Susan had also been very active as a teenager.

Susan came home from the hospital a few days later with strict instructions from the doctor: quit smoking! During the next few weeks, while Susan was going through nicotine withdrawal, all her friends tried their best to help her. It seemed that each time Susan would feel the incredible urge to have a cigarette, to the point that she couldn't control it, Heavenly Father would gently nudge Ken, Jill, Bret, or Lauren. The prompting would come, "Call Susan" or "Visit Susan." They found out as they dropped by or picked up the phone that Susan desperately needed their support at that moment. It was a great lesson in learning to listen to the Spirit.

It was during those long weeks that the bishopric asked Jill to direct the roadshow. In protest Jill said, "But I've never directed anything!"

The bishop's counselor just grinned, "Great! Then you are qualified."

"Immediately, Jill called all of her friends for help, which, fortunately for her, is everyone in the ward. When Jill called Lauren she asked, "Would you please choreograph the roadshow?"

"But I have never choreographed anything," she protested.

"Great! Then you are qualified," Jill answered gleefully.

One day Jill mentioned the road show to Susan. Susan was excited and wanted to know what she could do to help. Jill decided to let Susan assist Lauren with the choreography.

Susan and Lauren were discussing the road show one afternoon on the way home from a doctor visit. "I know Jill is directing and you are choreographing the road show, but what are Ken and Bret going to do?" Susan asked.

"I don't think they are going to do anything," Lauren replied.

"Well, you can just tell Ken and Bret that if I have to quit smoking, they can certainly be in the road show!" Susan said emphatically. The cast of characters for the road show was the "Fruit of the Bloom" family. Each person on stage dressed up as a giant fruit. There were apples, bananas, peaches, grapes, strawberries, cherries, pears, oranges, and even fruit flies—the villains! A large kitchen with huge cabinets and a giant refrigerator formed the set. All of the fruity characters entered through the refrigerator door. Ken, a distinguished administrative law judge, was a giant banana. Bret, a corporate controller, was a dancing pear. As Susan said, "Fair is fair."

When Susan and Lauren finished the blocking and all the dancers had learned their parts, Susan felt disappointed. She no longer had a responsibility, but she still wanted to be involved. Lauren then had a brilliant idea: the refrigerator needed a light! Someone found Susan a long, black, hooded cape and a large electrician's light. Each time the refrigerator door swung open, she held up the light and turned it on. Susan was so excited about her part that she invited her family to come and watch her perform. After the last performance she was given the "Light of the Road Show" award.

Susan, Jill, and Lauren became even closer friends over the next several months. One Saturday evening Jill received a phone call. "I was wondering what time Sunday School starts?" Susan asked.

Jill stammered momentarily, surprised at the question. "Ten a.m.," she finally said.

"Okay, we'll see you in the morning," Susan replied.

Jill hung up the phone, wondering why it had never occurred to her to ask Susan to come to church. At 9:55, Susan and Lee walked into church for the first time in twenty years.

Early one evening Susan called Jill with some bad news. Her voice was shaking as she said, "I've been to the doctor today. They told me I have cancer and they only give me six months to live."

Jill was stunned. "Susan, are you alone?" she asked.

"Yes," came the quiet reply.

"I'll be right over." Jill spent the next several hours with Susan, crying, talking, sharing, and eventually laughing.

The following weeks were filled with visits to doctors and radiation treatments at the hospital. This wasn't new to Susan; she had already had one bout with cancer a few years before. Susan was sick and stayed in bed most of the time during the duration of the treatments. Susan's mother, Claudia, came to live with the family and take care of their needs. When Claudia couldn't be there, Jill, Lauren, and other neighbors took turns fixing Susan breakfast in the morning and sitting on the edge of her bed in the afternoon, talking or playing games.

About that same time Clint DeYoung and John Draper, two teenagers in the neighborhood who had become acquainted with Susan through the road shows, brought her a dozen red roses. (Does this give you any idea how important it is to get our nonmember and less-active neighbors involved in activities where they can meet a lot of friends?) "These are the first roses I ever gave a girl," Clint told Susan. Almost every time anyone saw Susan after that she just glowed as she retold the story of the visit and the roses.

As the weeks dragged on, Susan became more and more ill and Jill and Lauren felt more frustrated and helpless. The cancer not only ate away at Susan physically, but it also devoured her hope and optimism. Her usual cheery nature began to darken. As Susan's birthday approached, Jill and Lauren hunted for something to lift her spirits.

"I know," Jill said. "Let's make her a Depression Emergency Kit!" They purchased some medicine bottles from the pharmacy and labeled them like prescriptions. Then they filled the bottles with various items, mostly things they found in their homes. Here is a list:

Take one when:

you are feeling under the weather (a miniature paper umbrella) you have no pep (Pepto Bismol tablets) you can't put it together (safety pins) you can't bear it any longer (gummy bears) there is no joy in your life (Almond Joy candy bar) you are sick and tired of life (brown paper "barf" bag) you are at the end of your rope (a small piece of rope) you are feeling wiped out (baby wipes) you are feeling blue (brightly colored crayons) you really blew it (balloons) you have no get up and go (a battery)

"Can you think of anything for 'when you need a lift'?" Jill asked.

Lauren began laughing out loud. "I think we should try to find a size 64 triple E bra!"

They found just what they were looking for at Deseret Industries: a huge, black, lacy treasure for only fifty cents. After a great deal of exertion they managed to stuff that bra into one of the prescription bottles. Then they wrapped up their kit and drove to Susan's house.

Susan was lying in bed, but when Jill and Lauren marched in singing "Happy Birthday" she managed a weak smile. Susan's mother joined them, and together they watched Susan open her gift. When she pulled off the wrapping paper and read "Depression Emergency Kit" on the decorated shoebox, she looked a bit puzzled. She lifted the lid and read what was printed on the inside: Dr. Major and Dr. Leifson. Office hours: anytime. Susan lifted each bottle out of the box and read the label. She was too weak to unscrew the lids, so Lauren sat by her side, unscrewed each lid, and set the cap on top so she could lift it off and look inside. As she opened each bottle, Susan's expressions slowly began to change. First, there was a faint smile, then a larger smile, then a small chuckle. Susan lifted out the last bottle and read the label out loud: "Take one when you need a lift." She handed the bottle to Lauren, who loosened the lid, being extra careful not to allow Susan to see what was inside. Susan lifted the lid, looked inside, looked up at Jill and Lauren, then back to the bottle. Jill and Lauren couldn't hold back the laughter. Just a little tug on the black cloth brought the entire bra popping out of the bottle and into her lap. Tears of laughter were rolling down all their faces as Susan held up her new gift by the straps for everyone to admire.

A few days later the doctors discovered a large tumor at the back of Susan's skull. Her family moved her to the hospital so that she could receive the care and the pain medication she needed to remain comfortable. Jill and Lauren stayed by her side as much as possible. One special, memorable visit they entered her hospital room and found Susan very groggy from medication. She opened her eyes slowly to see who was there and then raised up her hand toward them. "I don't feel much like talking," she whispered.

"That's all right," they replied. "We just dropped by to let you know we are thinking about you."

"Really? You came all this way just for that?" Susan asked.

Jill and Lauren both nodded their heads.

"My crazy friends," Susan said quietly as she squeezed both their hands.

Susan lived only two weeks after her birthday.

Jill and Lauren miss Susan and wish that they could have had more time with her. They are anxious to see Susan again and look forward to that glorious day when they can once again throw their arms around her and laugh and talk with her. And whether she accepts the gospel or not, Susan will always be their friend!

Friendshipping a nonmember may be a new experience for you, especially if you grew up surrounded by Mormon friends and family. Here are some suggestions on how to begin:

If your neighbor has children, invite her to ride with you to a PTA meeting, or invite the children to come over to meet your children and the mother to stay and visit with you. Offer invitations to family outings, or just to go out to lunch. Have a few friends over to play games and include your neighbor.

Don't be overly concerned with a person's bad habits. The Word of Wisdom does not need to be a line of division between Mormons and everyone else. The burden of Mormons and non-Mormons alike is to be respectful of those who are different. If your friends like a light alcoholic drink with their dinner at the restaurant, they should not be made to feel judged. You can refuse coffee or alcohol politely with a simple "no thank you." "I don't believe in using that stuff" is a put-down and a value judgment to those who see nothing wrong with it. If smoking is annoying but not nauseating to you, offer on occasion to sit in the smoking section of the restaurant.

Of course, we would like all our friends to join the Church so they can share in the great joy the gospel brings, but friendships should not end because the waters of baptism or the doors to reactivity are not penetrated or opened. You can have a close, loving relationship with those who may not share your habits or beliefs. Those golden friends who are outside your comfortable circle of Mormon companions will add great joy to your life!
