Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 9

Love Encircles Enemies

The Lord has commanded, "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." Then he explained why this commandment is so important: "That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:44-45.) Our Heavenly Father loves all his children, both the wicked and the righteous, and commands us to do likewise so that we can learn to be as he is.

A mother tells how her children put this principle into practice:

My two sons were having a lot of trouble with the little boy next door. Whenever they would go out to play, John would sit on the fence and call them names or throw dirt clods at them. This went on week after week. At first, my sons threw the dirt back at him. This just made things worse. My advice to "just ignore him" didn't work. He was chasing them out of their own backyard. I talked to his mother, but still the behavior continued.

Finally, in a family council meeting, we discussed the problem. "How would Jesus handle this situation?" we asked each other. As we looked a little closer at the boy, we realized that he never played with anyone. Maybe he was lonely and trying to get attention. We decided to befriend him.

A few days later one of my sons came running in the house. "Do you have an extra cookie for John?" he asked. Then almost bubbling over my son explained, "John climbed the fence, but before he threw anything at us, I said, 'Would you like to come and play in the sandpile?' Now he's playing with us."

Our problems with John are not over, but they are certainly a lot better.

When Abraham Lincoln once said a few good-hearted words about the Confederates an irate woman snapped, "How can you say kind things about your enemies? You should want to destroy them!"

Lincoln answered, "What, Madam, do I not destroy them when I make them my friends?"

Sometimes our "enemies" are the flaws and faults in ourselves and in other people. These imperfections often cause conflicts and discord. The Lord pleaded with Peter, "Feed my sheep." His plea goes out to each of us. However, in order to feed the Lord's sheep, we must get right in amongst the flock. When we do, we find that the perfect, docile, little lamb that followed Mary to school is found only in the nursery rhymes. All the Lord's sheep have blemishes. Maybe they bleat too loud, or stir up dust, or eat too much of the grass, or don't produce the finest quality wool. We may be tempted to shun others because of their shortcomings, but as disciples of Christ we must choose to continue to love. Where there is bitterness and hatred the Holy Spirit cannot dwell.

One sister lived close to her extended family. Heartbreaking experiences descended upon her relatives and, through it all, this sister was always at their side, giving support and caring for their needs. She had endured many insults and backbiting comments from those relatives, and yet always rallied to their aid and defense. Although this sister received no outward rewards expressed in thanks or appreciation, her spiritual rewards were great. She felt at peace knowing that she followed Christ's example.

It can be a blessing rather than a curse to learn that our friends and family are not perfect, because then we might worry less about our own imperfections. Richard L. Evans said, "Perhaps any of us could get along with perfect people. But our task is to get along with imperfect people." As we learn to love unconditionally, perhaps our example will enable others to accept our faults and love us unconditionally in return. Maybe our love will even soften the hearts of those who reject us.

We must be aware, as we feed the Lord's sheep, that we might get snapped at by a wolf carefully disguised in soft sheep's wool. Because of this possibility, we do need to use some caution. In the Book of Mormon, when the Nephites or Lamanites were righteous they prayed for their enemies and even tried to convert them, but they also planned carefully to protect themselves against destruction. There are some people who may purposely seek to take advantage of, abuse, or destroy you or those you love—emotionally, spiritually, financially, or physically. You can love them yet safeguard yourself at the same time.

Consider the following examples:

Case 1: Mary and Joan are neighbors. Joan is very loving and giving. At first, it seems that Mary has much the same personality, but Joan soon notices that Mary is constantly pointing out her faults and criticizing her. At first these little jabs are conducted in the name of friendship: "I just want you to know for your own good what people are saying behind your back." But soon the back stabs deteriorate into frontal attacks: sometimes in private, sometimes in public, sometimes camouflaged as jests and jokes. The negative abuse begins to undermine Joan's feelings of self-worth.

Your task is to love, yet you must also be cautious about people who wish to demean and demolish you. Those who love you will want to help you be a better person. But there is certainly an appropriate way to give constructive criticism. The Lord teaches such a way in his counsel on righteous exercise of priesthood authority—a method that applies well to all relationships. He says, "Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy." (D&C 121:43.)

The second word in this scriptural reference is betimes. It is sometimes mistakenly interpreted as sometimes or many times, but actually it is an archaic word meaning early or before it is too late. A person who loves you will let you know that you are on the wrong path before you have gone too far to turn around, but by her words and actions you will know that her "faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death." (D&C 121:44.)

There is a vast difference between being lovingly criticized and unjustly put down. The first is like a gift of love brought to the door of your soul; the second is like a planted bomb, that, if allowed to detonate, will leave the spirit filled with shrapnel of self-doubt, self-distrust, even self-contempt.

Case 2: Margaret and Jeanne have been next-door neighbors for years. Margaret suddenly shows an interest in the Church, borrowing church books and other literature from Jeanne, which causes great excitement in Jeanne's family. Jeanne takes Margaret to church and introduces the missionaries to her. At first everything seems to go smoothly. Then Margaret begins to challenge the missionaries, using a belligerent tone. She points out the faults of all her Mormon neighbors and finally pulls out anti-Mormon literature and shoves it at the missionaries and Jeanne. Communication completely breaks down when Margaret argues with anything Jeanne and the missionaries say. Because some of the things Margaret quotes seem logical and because Jeanne doesn't have all the answers, she becomes confused and begins to doubt her testimony.

You must continue to love, yet realize that people who find it amusing to take potshots at sacred things may eventually mortally wound your spirit. There are a few people, sometimes members in good standing, who habitually criticize the organizations, leaders, and even doctrines of the Church. Continuing a close relationship with such people is like sitting in a room where someone is smoking: even though you may not be contributing to the air pollution, some of the rank odor is sure to cling to you.

There are other times when it is wise to turn your back on a relationship and quickly walk far away. Elder Boyd K. Packer mentions two such situations:

"If someone approaches you individually or invites you to very private meetings, claiming to have some special calling, whatever you do, follow Paul's counsel—'from such turn away.'

". . . . There are some who, motivated by one influence or another, seek through writing and publishing criticisms and interpretations of doctrine to make the gospel more acceptable to the so-called thinking people of the world. . . . If their spirits are pure and their motives worthy, they will do no harm either to themselves or to others. If they are not, we would all do well to follow Paul's admonition and 'from such turn away.' " (Taken from the Ensign, May 1985, p. 35.)

Case 3: A long lost mission companion, let's call him Mark, called John one day. "Hey, buddy, I would just love to see you. It's been ten years, hasn't it?"

John was a bit confused by this sudden interruption from his past, but he was also flattered to be remembered, so he invited Mark to his home to meet his wife.

The appointed day arrived and so did Mark. After several minutes of chitchat Mark got right down to business. "How would you and your wife like to never have any financial problems again?" He launched into a sales pitch for a pyramid scheme. "Right now you can get in on the ground level . . . just have to sell it to your friends . . . get them to join . . . be doing them a favor . . . easy money."

John is a quiet and polite man. He listened, then, trying to keep the anger from his voice, he invited his "friend" to leave.

The Mormon people have often been targeted by criminals as easy marks. Because we are taught to be honest and trustworthy, we often assume—sometimes too readily—that everyone else has accepted the same teachings. It is always an unhappy surprise when one of our own brothers or sisters in the Church is accused or convicted of a crime. We learn over and over again that out of the best nesting grounds hatch some very bad eggs. We also learn that Satan is happy to incubate and import as many rotten eggs as he can find. We must love even these, yet we need to stay far way from their schemes.

Case 4: Sometimes financial abuse of a friendship is very closely linked to physical or substance abuse. Bill, a known pusher, tried to deliver drugs to a young woman who had sworn to go straight. As subtle and devious as the serpent in the Garden of Eden, Bill tried every device he could think of to get the young woman to partake of the forbidden fruit, but she refused. "Okay, but when you want it, don't go to a stranger." He pointed to himself and added, "Remember to call your friend."

A friend will not seek to destroy your life to put dollars in his pocket; in doing so he has sold his friendship. This is a common type of betrayal in our history. We read in the Bible of Judas, one of the twelve, a chosen friend in the Savior's closest circle, betraying the Christ for thirty pieces of silver. The scriptural account is revealing:

"And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.

"Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.

"And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kissed him.

"And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him." (Matthew 26:47-50; italics added.)

Can you feel the sadness in our Savior's voice because of the betrayal of one he called "friend"? Yet the Lord continued to love even Judas.

No matter what the circumstance may be, we must continue to love. But as long as a person's words or actions remain damaging to you, keep her at a distance and proceed with the relationship only under inspiration. Never be rude or bitter. You can be loving and kind, yet not allow that person into your inner circle where she can tear up or pull down that which you have worked so hard to build.

The Lord states definitely that we should be willing to forgive anyone who harms us. "For, if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father will also forgive you." (3 Nephi 13:14.) And we should always allow for repentance and a changed heart. "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isaiah 1:18.) Our Heavenly Father has given us almost unlimited space to turn around and come back. We, the children of our Heavenly Father, can do no less for our brothers and sisters.
