Jill C. Major, Lauren C. Leifson, Hollie C. Bevan, Encircled by Love ( 1989)

CHAPTER 10

Love Encircles Distances

As our feelings of charity grow, we eventually come to the realization that we need to include everyone in our circle of love. As the years pass, we have opportunities to meet a multitude of people. They move in and out of our neighborhoods and wards. Sometimes we are the ones that must leave and make a new home. It is difficult to meet all these people, and impossible to develop and maintain a loving relationship with each one. Because of this obstacle, many people don't try to meet anyone new. Some people even feel that if you can't make a lasting friendship, there is no need to get acquainted or introduce yourself at all. For these reasons, people living in apartments or renting homes, or those who are only visiting and attending church meetings for a day, are sometimes ignored.

A sister from Hawaii who visited a ward in Salt Lake City observed, "It sure is different here. When you attend church in Hawaii, no matter who you are, everyone comes up to greet you and give you a big aloha hug. Here, no one even asked who I was until after all the meetings were over."

Sometimes people who know that they must move again refuse to get involved with their neighbors and ward. "I just don't want to get too close," one sister admitted, "because I know I won't be staying here long and it will make me sadder if I have to leave friends behind."

Thus, we miss many opportunities for adding joy to our own lives or those of others. What a shame! It doesn't need to be this way. These barriers to unconditional love can be removed if we will just be willing to look beyond the distances and view eternity. There are several steps we can take to enlarge our limited perspective:

Looking troubled, the Relief Society president said, "I can't believe you asked that! There is someone. I've been praying for answer on how to reach her. She has requested not to have visiting teachers anymore." Hollie learned that this sister was someone she knew, loved, and had worked with over the years in ward and stake callings:

I invited my friend to lunch, which was not a common, everyday thing, but something rather out of the ordinary. I'm sure it was mostly out of curiosity that my friend accepted my invitation, however, nothing was voiced about the unusual lunch outing until we were seated in the restaurant and prepared to order from the menu.

"Well, do you want to know why I invited you to lunch?" I asked with a silent prayer in my heart.

"Of course," she cautiously nodded. "What's up?"

Not ever being one to beat around the bush, I went right to the point, "I've been asked to be your visiting teacher, and I'm praying that you won't turn me down."

Time stopped. It was as if the world around us became a motionless void of background scenery. She focused directly at my eyes, neither of us moving, until I saw the tears swelling across her unblinking lids and steadily increasing until they burst like a waterfall down her cheek.

"I don't want a visiting teacher," she quietly and distinctly said. "I just can't have one." Each word was uttered with obvious strained control.

"I know that you don't want one, but Heavenly Father said, 'No.' It is not his plan or intention that you should not have a visiting teacher."

"But, you don't understand," she said with anguish in her voice.

I interrupted her worry and assured her, "I do understand. I don't know what's happened, but I do know that you have a great hurt within you, and that I understand. Please let me be your friend and visiting teacher! Please, please don't shut me out too."

Our hands, which were across the table from each other, pushed forward to touch. We continued looking at each other; both our eyes were filled with tears from sharing the unspoken words of our feelings and emotions. Her head slowly bowed as she whispered her acceptance to my offer. In the last weeks before Hollie moved she succeeded in being an instrument in the Lord's hands to give strength to her friend. After Hollie moved, new visiting teachers were called and they were once again welcome in her friend's home. Although she left her neighborhood, Hollie didn't leave this friend to struggle alone. Because of the special feelings of tenderness these two friends felt toward each other, they have persisted in their commitment of friendship even though distances separated them.

Lauren tells about a friendship she has nurtured since childhood:

"Come on, Annie. Please answer the phone," I pleaded in my thoughts. "I really need to talk to you."

I waited as the phone rang several more times. No answer. This was the third time in the space of a week that I had dialed the Washington, D.C., number. As I hung up the phone I began recalling the many experiences that Annie and I had had during the past twenty-one years.

Annie and I met when we were four years old. She lived just one block away from me. For the next four years we were inseparable. We walked to school together, played together, and were constantly sleeping over at each other's houses. Annie was my best friend.

The summer before we entered third grade, Annie and her family moved across town. Both of us were heartbroken. We wouldn't even be going to the same school together anymore. Still our friendship endured. Going to movies together and the "sleeping over" practice continued as often as our parents would allow. The autumn we began junior high was wonderful. We were together at last in the same school. Suffering through the same algebra course, tolerating the same creepy boys, and nearly driving our home economics teacher crazy with our giggling, our friendship blossomed and deepened. We sang together, walked together, cried together, and talked together. Years passed and we entered high school. That first year is filled with memories of driver's education, girls' chorus, double dates, and the day my parents informed me we were moving to another city. I recalled the flood of tears as Annie and I said goodbye and secretly wondered if our friendship could last over this new and greater distance. We managed to still get together occasionally for double dates and birthdays and we kept each other informed on new boyfriend prospects. After graduating from high school, we attended the same university. Later, when Annie went to France for six months and I went to Alaska to work, we wrote letters. Her letters would be humorously addressed to "Bush Baby Lauren."

Six months later Annie served as my maid of honor when I got married. After Annie married, she left with her husband for Washington, D.C., where he would be attending medical school. Later that year I received the special phone call I had been waiting for. "It's a girl," Annie exclaimed joyfully.

Listening, loving, and caring, Annie had always been there to share the good times and support me through the bad times. Oh, how I needed to talk to her now! "I'll try calling her again later," I promised myself.

Saturday morning I was awakened by the phone ringing. "It's Annie from Washington, D.C.," Bret announced. I immediately wondered if something was wrong. We hadn't talked for several months. Why on earth would she be calling?

I grabbed the phone. Annie greeted me in her usual cheerful voice and I could tell immediately that all was well. Then my emotional dam burst and all of the troubles and worries that had backed up came flooding out. As usual, Annie listened intently and helped me deal with my concerns.

"Annie, I don't know why you called this morning, but I'm sure glad you did," I told her with tears rolling down my cheeks.

"I've just had 'Lauren on the brain' for the past two days and felt that I should call you," she replied.

I don't know what directions each of our lives will take us in the coming years, but I do know that it will never matter how many miles separate us, Annie and I will always be close friends.

When a friend or family member moves away, get a phone number and address as soon as possible. Don't write this vital information on the back of an old envelope or other scrap paper. Record it in your address book immediately. If you have lost the address of a friend, check with your local library. Many libraries keep current phone books from all over the United States.

Continue to remember birthdays and other special holidays. Lisa and Becky bonded a strong friendship while living next door to each other; then Becky moved two hundred miles away. Since their birthdays are within a few days of each other, they decided to meet and have a celebration luncheon in a small town halfway between their two cities. This has become a yearly tradition that has helped them continue a beautiful friendship.

Sending Christmas cards is a great tradition that seems to be dying out. If you have to shorten your list, take off those people to whom you can wish a personal "Merry Christmas," but leave on those who are far away. It is nice to receive a card, to keep in touch, even it is only once a year.

One mother likes to share recipes, cartoons, and newspaper articles with her children who live far away. When time is short she just clips the item, writes "love, Mom" in a corner, and sends it in the mail. Some families have family newsletters. The editor can be changed with each edition, or appointed for a year or more. Everyone in the family contributes by writing personal news flashes.

Some communications get tied down over whose turn it is to write or call. "Well, I called her last time. It's her turn to call me." "I'm not going to write a letter. She didn't answer my last letter." Don't worry about it. Call or write whenever that distant person drifts across your mind.

Hollie tells how a spiritually sensitive friend lifted her from despair one New Year's Eve. A letter from Hollie's fiance, calling off their wedding, had left her shattered and empty. The pain from his rejection was swelling inside her this particular night until she thought she would burst. She relates:

I prayed fervently for help. Didn't someone love me? Didn't someone care?

Then the doorbell rang. Who rings doorbells at 11:30 p.m.? I thought. I called out, "Who's there?"

The answer came, "It's Cara."

"Cara!" I shouted and excitedly unlatched the separate locks and threw open the door.

"Cara, what are you doing here?" Cara lived a hundred miles away and was standing on my doorstep with her P.J.'s over one arm and holding a half gallon of ice cream with her other hand.

She looked at me, and ever so sweetly spoke, "I just thought you needed me, so I got in the car and drove straight to your house."

We hugged, and tears fell from the joy of understanding each other. God had heard my prayers, and when I had reached my darkest hour, he had sent an angel to comfort me, a friend—my friend!

During Jesus' time on earth he reached out in love to everyone. Distance wasn't a barrier. His love encircled all those who lived on earth and those who had passed on. His love encircled worlds without number that he had created. His love encircled you, me, and millions of our brothers and sisters who dwelt in a kingdom far away, anxiously awaiting their time to come to earth. We too can reach out and encircle others with love, whether we know them only for a moment or for a lifetime.
