As part of the renovation of Temple Square, a series of new statues will be placed across the two-block site of the temple grounds. In addition to the temple, the area includes the Tabernacle, Church headquarters, and other buildings and gardens in downtown Salt Lake City.

These sculptures portray key moments in the life and ministry of Jesus Christ, as well as important moments in Church history. Each creates a sense of drama and significance, prompting visitors to stop and ponder their relationship with Deity.

Every entrance to Temple Square—from north, south, east, and west—becomes a pathway leading to the temple. Visitors will encounter statues along each path.

“Temple Square has always had gardens and sculptures,” said Bill Williams, director of the Design Services Division in the Special Projects Department. “This renovation allowed us to reimagine the story these sculptures and gardens could tell.”

Brother Williams added, “People can wander around the grounds and find something that impresses them. They have a chance to sit down, contemplate the sculpture and reflect on what it means to them and their relationship with the Lord Jesus Christ.”

The first statue, installed in December 2024, depicts Joseph Smith as a truth-seeking 14-year-old boy kneeling in a grove of trees on his family’s farm near Rochester, New York. The sculpture shows God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, above Joseph in response to his prayer.

Artist Michael Hall, who designed the sculpture, likened it to a visual testimony. “Because of this young 14-year-old boy, Joseph Smith, we can know that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ do care about us,” he said.

For David Hunter, an architect involved in the redesign of Temple Square, the First Vision statue tells a story of faith and hope. “It captures the innocence of a young boy seeking answers to spiritual questions,” he said.

A second statue, depicting Christ and two of His Apostles at the Sea of Galilee, was placed just before Christmas 2024, and more will be placed on the grounds in 2025 and 2026.

The experience of strolling the temple grounds will leave visitors with a sweet and tender witness that Christ leads The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and that all are welcome.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="165666826" id="p_vNHC1"><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CI--ofS55dk">View a video</a> of the First Vision statue.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
