When my mother was young, her mother abandoned her. A few years later, her father passed away, and she was given to a family that was unkind to her. This experience made her believe she could not find happiness in a family.

When she joined the Church, however, her attitude changed as she came to understand the importance of family in God’s plan of happiness. She served a mission and eventually married my father. Together they formed a family full of faith in Jesus Christ and did their best to live according to their covenants with God. That’s the kind of family I grew up in in a small Argentinian town called Lima.

After serving a full-time mission, I remember feeling sad and confused about what to do professionally. But Heavenly Father strengthened me to keep my faith and my covenants, and He blessed me with a mother who kept hers too. Her faith and determination became a source of inspiration to me.

As I contemplated college studies, I considered a major that wasn’t really what I had dreamed of studying. Noticing my sadness, my mother said, “Hold on to your dreams. Choose the path you know in your heart is right.”

When I was a child, I had dreams related to music and entertainment. I learned to play the piano, led Church choirs, and shared the gospel through music. For a time, life’s challenges and distractions took me away from those dreams.

President Russell M. Nelson said those who make covenants with God “have access to a special kind of love and mercy” and that making such covenants “affects who we are and how God will help us become what we can become.”

Our covenants offer us security. As I kept my covenants, I felt His special love for me. He removed obstacles from my path until my path became clear.

I came from a small town that offered little promise for an unknown boy. Today, I produce professional concerts and theater shows in Buenos Aires. My wife, children, and professional work are my dreams come true.

I believe that God wants us to succeed. If we persist, He will prepare a way for us to achieve all He wants us to achieve. Most important, He will help us become an instrument in His hands in bringing others to Him.
