A certain young ruler, as he was described in the scriptures, ran to Jesus, kneeling at His feet, asked with genuine sincerity, “What shall I do to inherit eternal life” (see Matthew 19:16; Mark 10:17; Luke 18:18). The scriptures record that the Savior patiently reviewed a list of commandments with this good man, all of which he claimed he had faithfully kept.

His further thought or question after this review may have been, “What more can I do?” The invitation to him from the Savior, Jesus Christ, to go and “sell that thou hast … and come and follow me” (Matthew 19:21) is universal application to all who will or do seek a safe passage home to live with our Eternal Father and His Son eternally.

“Following Christ is not a casual or occasional practice. It is a continuous commitment and way of life that applies at all times and in all places.”

The Savior has defined the path by His example and teachings for His disciples to follow. And all are invited to this path: “black and white, bond and free, male and female; … and all are alike unto God” (2 Nephi 26:33). His teachings and example invite us to love God with all our heart, mind, and soul and to love our neighbor as ourselves.

How do I love the Lord? It seems a bit vague or abstract. The Savior Jesus Christ made this simple and doable in His further teachings, “If ye love me, keep my commandments” (John 14:15). So I can love Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ by keeping Their commandments, such as praying always, studying the scripture, worshipping in the temple, receiving ordinances, and entering into covenants with Them. I can pay my tithes, keep the Sabbath day holy, and be obedient.

Consider the example of this young deacon in the Aaronic Priesthood as shared in his talk in the Benin Ikpopan Stake conference, where I recently presided. The young deacon, Nelson Wonodi, had always admired how young men dressed and served at the sacrament table every Sunday. I share his first day experience with approval from his parents in his words:

“Ever since I was a little boy, I watched the young men in my ward pass the sacrament, and I longed for the day when I could do the same. I would sit in my seat, staring at them thinking, ‘One day, that’s going to be me.’ I even practiced at home, carefully pretending to pass an imaginary tray to my family members, just to make sure I got it right! Then, finally, my day came. I had received the Aaronic Priesthood and was asked to pass the sacrament for the first time. I was so excited … but then something strange happened. As I stood there, holding the tray, looking out at the congregation, my legs started shaking, and my hands felt sweaty. I thought to myself, ‘Wow, is this me? Or am I dreaming?’ It felt surreal. Here I was, finally doing what I had dreamed of for years, but suddenly, I realized just how sacred this responsibility was. This wasn’t just a routine or something I had seen others do. It was real, it was sacred, and it was my privilege to help others remember the Savior”.

Fortunately, a caring congregant, noticing the predicament of the anxious young man, stretched forth her hand, took the tray, and passed it on, thus emboldening young Nelson to continue and successfully accomplish that assignment. Nelson testified that his life of service is preparing him to serve a mission at a later day.

To love your neighbor includes Christlike deeds of kindness and service. Can we be less contentious, more forgiving, less critical, and more loving? President Russell M. Nelson taught, “Giving help to others—making a conscientious effort to care about others as much as or more than we care about ourselves—is our joy. Especially … when it is not convenient and when it takes us out of our comfort zone. Living that second great commandment is the key to becoming a true disciple of Jesus Christ.”

Two ministering brothers felt a strong prompting to visit a man who has not been regular in church. As they resisted this prompting, it became stronger until they decided to follow the impression to visit the man in his home. On getting there, they knocked for several minutes without any response from the man. They thought that the man was not home and wondered if they should leave. Thankfully, they tarried a while and decided to knock again. This brother finally decided to open the door. On entering the room, they noticed the man was considering extreme self-harm. Those thoughts were immediately negated by the brethren as they were able to share the Savior’s love with him. Because they were mindful of their fellow man, they were able to hold up the Savior’s light, as instructed in 3 Nephi 18:24: “Hold up your light that it may shine unto to world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up”.

In the ordinance of the sacrament, we covenant each Sunday that we will “always remember him and keep his commandments” (Doctrine and Covenants 20:77). As we obey His invitation to walk with Him, He has promised His Spirit upon us and that we will not be alone (see Moses 6:34). As we walk with Jesus, He shares His power with us, changing our hearts to be more loving, more holy, more like Him. When we follow Him by making covenants with God, we will have access to His healing, strengthening, and redeeming power. “These spiritual privileges are available to all who seek to hear Him and follow Him.”

Jesus Christ is the way to our Father in Heaven. He is the light that brightens that path that leads to our eternal home. He lives. He will take us safely home if we are willing, humble, and obedient.
