On 28 January 1988, I was given a Book of Mormon by missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. On opening the book for the first time, I saw a scripture with the name Jehovah (2 Nephi 22:2). I knew, from a spiritual experience in 1973, that my God was Jehovah. I was passed a scripture to read about the stick of Judah and the stick of Joseph (Ezekiel 37:19) and was asked if I was familiar with it. I laughed inwardly, for I had known this scripture for ten years, but had no idea what it meant.

I had been searching for a church to belong to for ten years and was desperate to sing and worship with others. I had been a member of the Presbyterian church for most of my life. In March 1974, at the age of 32, I was baptised at an assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I finally left that organisation in 1978. Before I left, I quoted the scripture in Ezekiel 37:19 to an Elder, not knowing what it meant. I felt that I was seeking another stick. I believed that the prophecies of Joel (Joel 2:28) and Malachi (Malachi 4:5) would be fulfilled, and that the gifts of the Spirit, spoken of by Joel, had not ceased. A scripture in Ezekiel 16:8, that it was the time of love, confirmed to me that the Lord had brought me to his people: a prepared people with a prophet and apostles.

On 22 February 1988, I rang the missionaries and told them that the Book of Mormon was inspired scripture. I had found a pearl. The power of the Holy Ghost was strong.

I have tried to be faithful over these many years, with the ups and downs of being the only member in my family. I have been blessed with varied callings in the church, and as I have borne my testimony, I have received light and revelation from the Lord.

During the last few years I have experienced much ill-health. My dear husband, who is not a believer, but who is also not an atheist, remarked recently that someone seems to be helping me, as I am still here after so many health problems and investigations.

Priesthood blessings, and especially the scripture in D&C 84:88, have brought me much comfort. In the dark hours after surgery to remove cancer, the Lord always seemed near when this scripture came to mind: “… for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up.” These angels also include my sisters and brothers in the Gospel.

And the scripture currently stitched to my heart is the one above: “For the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song” (2 Nephi 22:2 and Isaiah 12:2).
