Lorenzo Snow, Italian Mission ( 1851)

LETTER I

Southampton, June 14th, 1850.

MY DEAR SISTER,

Though almost half the world lies between us, I hope this brief record of my travels will reach you in safety. Wheresoever I may be destined to wander, I shall ever remember those charms of relationship, which may be interrupted on earth, but are happily consecrated in your bosom, and mine, for eternity: they seem like a golden chain, passing over earth and ocean, and linking this foreign shore with your dwelling in the far distant West.

Recalling the scenes of the past, my mind reverts to the 19th of October, 1849, when, in solemn silence, I left what, next to God, was dearest to my heart—my friends, my loving wife, and little children. As I pursued my journey, in company with my brethren, many conflicting feelings occupied my bosom—the gardens and fields around our beloved city were exchanged for the vast wilderness which lay spread out before us for a thousand miles. If my mind still glanced onward, there was the stormy main, and, in the far distant perspective, a land of strangers—the field of my mission. We were hastening further and still further from the mighty magnet—HOME! but we knew that the work in which we were engaged was to carry light to those who sat in darkness, and in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and our bosoms glowed with love, and our tears were wiped away.

Some judged our horses were too enfeebled to bear us over the mighty plain; but when the snows began to fall, winds swept our pathway, and enabled us to pass without difficulty, while, on our right and left, the country was deeply covered for hundreds of miles.

One day, as we were taking our noon-tide meal, and our horses were quietly grasing on the prairies, the following scene occurred. A startling shout resounded through our little camp—"To arms! To arms! The Indians are upon us!" We looked, and beheld a spectacle, grand, imposing, and fearful. Two hundred warriors upon their furious steeds, painted, armed, and clothed with all the horrors of war, rushing towards us like a mighty torrent. In a moment we placed ourselves in attitude of defence. But could we expect with thirty men to withstand this powerful host? Onward came the savage band with accelerated speed, as a mighty rock, loosed from the mountain's brow, rushes impetuously downward, sweeping, overturning, and burying every thing in its course. We saw it was their intention to crush us beneath the feet of their foaming chargers. Now, they were within a few paces, and in another moment we should be overwhelmed, when, lo! an alarm like an electric shock struck through their ranks, and stayed their career, as an avalanche, sweeping down the mountain side, stops in the midst of its course by the power of a hand unseen—the Lord had said, "Touch not mine anointed and do my prophets no harm."

Many incidents occurred which often called forth the remark, that, in our past experience, the hand of the Lord had never been more visibly manifested. When we arrived on the banks of the great Missouri, her waters immediately congealed for the first time during the season, thus forming a bridge over which we passed to the other side: this was no sooner accomplished than the torrent ran as before.

On arriving at Kanesville, we were saluted with shoutings, firing of cannons, songs of rejoicing, and other demonstrations of welcome. During the few days of our stay, we experienced universal kindness from the Saints. I shall never forget the parting with President Hyde, and the deep interest he manifested for myself, and mission, as he gave me an affectionate farewell, and, in the fullness of his soul implored the Powers of Heaven to protect me from evil in that stronghold of superstition.

I passed through Mount Pisgah and Garden Grove. At both places I much enjoyed the society of my old acquaintances. I proceeded to Nauvoo. I gazed upon its ruins—the direful work of mobocracy. My heart sickened as I contemplated that once beautiful city, filled with the songs of rejoicing, and all that was good and virtuous, where the voice of the Prophet had sounded forth upon the ears of thousands the deep and heavenly mysteries that had been concealed for ages: there we had met together, oft relating the sad tale of our past woes—the bitter cup of persecution of which we had taken such abundant draughts: there the old and the young had rejoiced together in the blessings of the new and everlasting covenant. But now, oh, how sad the change!—the moss was growing upon the buildings which were fast crumbling down, the windows were broken in, the doors were shaking to and fro by the wind upon their rusty, creaking hinges; the lovely Temple of our God—once the admiration and astonishment of the world, and the hope of the Saints—was burned, and her blackened walls were falling upon each other. Ever and anon a human head would be thrust through windows to gaze upon the traveller; but these were not Saints: the people who now dwelt in those houses, who walked those streets, believed not in Jesus, the Son of God—they were professed Infidels.

Shortly after, I entered another place of painful interest in the history of the Saints. If, on ordinary occasions, words are too weak to convey the feelings of the soul, where shall I find language to portray the thoughts that agitated my mind as I entered Carthage? There, but a few years before, was a scene over which my breast alternately glows and chills with horror and indignation. Here, an infamous mob were imbruing their hands in the blood of our beloved Prophet and Patriarch, Joseph and Hyrum. Oh, earth! then flowed on thy cold bosom the blood of thy noblest and best. Who were those MARTYRED ONES? Ask the ministering angels from on high!—Ask the demons of the dark abyss!—Ask the mighty throng whom they have guided to peace, knowledge, wisdom, and power! And who are they? My friends—the friends of millions—the friends of UNIVERSAL MAN.

Over that guilty place there seemed to hang the gloom of death—the emblem of the deed which was passed, and the foreshadowing of righteous retribution. Although hungry and fatigued, nothing could induce me to eat or drink that accursed and polluted people.

In St. Louis, we found a large branch of the Church of nearly 4000 members. We were kindly received; and it was delightful to see them assembled in their spacious and beautiful hall. The completeness of their organization reflects the highest credit upon their officers.

On the 25th of March, I left New York, on board the "Shannon." I had a pleasant voyage over the great waters, and at length, on the 19th of April, came in sight of Albion's shores. I never beheld a more lovely morning. Everything wore an enchanting appearance. A cheering calm serenity rested upon the broad bosom of the waters. Old England lay before me besprinkled with farms and multitudes of human dwellings, with beautiful hawthorn hedges, and newly plowed grounds. Around about on the waters, in full view, were ships of all nations; some passing in one direction, and some in another. In the midst of this enchanting scene, my feelings quickly changed from the high-thrilling tone of animation, and fell into pensive melancholy, as the thoughts of my loved home crowded upon my mind. Six long months I had been augmenting the distance between myself and those I love, and still I must continue to do so. Things certainly appeared strange to me when I thought of the unknown future of my mission. But the Lord of the whole earth had sent me, and in his name I was resolved ever to go forward.

On my arrival at Liverpool, I was priviledged with the company of Elders Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, and President Pratt's family. After leaving this city, I visited the following conferences:—Manchester, Macclesfield, Birmingham, Cheltenham, South Conference, London, and Southampton. Presidents, officers, and members received me with kindness, and contributed liberally towards my mission; and, though I have not had the opportunity of visiting Cambria's hills, the Welch brethren have sent donations with all that nobleness of soul which gives unasked.

How changed my feelings from what they were some eight years ago. Then, I might say, I entered Britain a lonely foreigner, unacquainted with the manners, laws, customs, and institutions of the country. Now, I felt myself comparatively at home. Many who were my children in the Gospel surrounded me as I passed through those conferences where I had formerly laboured. I also had the pleasure of seeing men whom I baptized on my former mission, now preaching the Gospel, and presiding over important conferences.

The traveller in the desert sometimes finds a green spot which stands in deep contrast to the barrenness of surrounding nature. England appears thus now I am about to leave its shores for the lands of darkness. The voices of a thousand friends are dying away in the distance, while before me is a land of strangers, whose tongues soon will sound in my ears like the jargon of Babal. I have been refreshed with the company of so many kind friends, and go forth on my mission with renewed energy of body and mind.

To-morrow I leave this place for Italy. Farewell my dear Sister, and may Heaven's choicest blessings be your continued portion is the prayer of

Your affectionate Brother,

LORENZO SNOW.

To Miss Eliza R. Snow,

Great Salt Lake City.
