Lorenzo Snow, Italian Mission ( 1851)

LETTER II

Genoa, July 20th, 1860.

MY DEAR FRANKLIN,

Having safely reached the land of my mission, I take the earliest opportunity of describing my situation and prospects.

This ancient city, where I have now resided a short time, contains about 140,000 inhabitants. It is chiefly built upon undulating ground, extending back as far as the base of the mountains, and, in some places, reaching partly up their summit. Before me I have a most lovely and interesting view of the port of Genoa, and then of the Mediterranean, bearing upon her broad bosom multitudes of fishing boats, schooners, war frigates, steamers, and ships of many nations.

The edifices of this famed city lie open on my right and left. Its palaces, numerous cathedrals, churches, high-built promenades, and antique buildings form altogether a very singular and magnificent appearance. At a little distance from the city, I have the fascinating scenery of Italy's picturesque mountains, and over my head is a sky of clearest blue. My eyes are filled with tears while attempting to picture the glorious view. It recalls to mind the more than lovely—the sacred scenery of the far-off West—the Valley of the Great Salt lake, where is poured forth the streams of revelation through our beloved Prophet, Brigham, to a people gathered from among the nations, and where, nine months ago, in mournful silence, we pressed the parting hands of our weeping wives and tender offspring.

This city is filled with armed men; so, in fact, is almost every sea-port town and city through which we have passed since leaving England. Little money is circulating, and commerce languishes on every side. The country is not yet in a sufficiently settled condition to induce the enterprize of the capitalist. Since the revolution, the working class have suffered severely from the depression of business. Wages are, of course, very low. Upon an average, perhaps, not more than 20 cents for a day's work for a labourer, which is commonly made to consist of about sixteen hours.

Many of the customs, laws, and institutions are very singular.

Priests are seen in great numbers on every side. I meet them in every street. From the peculiarity of their dress, there is no mistake as to their profession. The superior order are enveloped in black, and their heads display the accompaniment of a three-cornered hat. Those of another class present a shorn crown to the evening breeze and the noon-tide sun; and the meanness of their garments are intended to represent their vows of austere poverty. A coarse woollen dress is attached to their body by a rope loosely tied round their waist, from whence hang their rosary beads and a small crucifix. Their feet are shod with a species of sandals. They are generally seen two together, and are very unlike the wealthier ecclesiastics, who mingle freely with the best society.

First Mission to ItalyHCThe other day, as I was returning from a walk, I fell into the following reflections:—I am alone and a stranger in this vast city, eight thousand miles from my beloved family, surrounded by a people whose manners and peculiarities I am unacquainted. I am come to enlighten their minds, and instruct them in principles of righteousness; but I see no possible means of accomplishing this object. All is darkness in the prospect.

First Mission to ItalyHCWhile I thus walked gloomily along the thronged streets, I was suddenly awakened from my reverie by a glance of recognition from a gentleman passing, and was not a little pleased to find it was an Englishman with whom I had previously formed a slight acquaintance. He spoke words of friendship, and said he had called at my lodging, but was disappointed in not finding me at home. He wished me to write down the heads of subjects upon which I sought information, which, he assured me, he would spare no pains to procure. He thought the society of many English visitors in Genoa was not suitable to men religiously inclined as I appeared, and could not recommend them to my acquaintance. He accompanied me to my lodging, and desired to know in what way I thought this country could be spiritually benefitted. He evidently believed that I was a missionary, and was about to open a campaign against Catholicism. His bosom glowed with desire to engage in this laudable undertaking. Finding that such was the state of his feelings, I looked him steadfastly in the face, and spoke as follows:—"Do you think, Mr. A., that the Lord had any hand in your coming to this place?" "I do," said he, "for when letters were sent informing me I could have a situation whereby I could support my family, I opened them and spread them before the Lord, and knelt upon my knees, asking him what I should do, and the spirit manifested to me it was wisdom to come." I then said, "Mr. A., I have entered this country to establish the Kingdom of God. The Lord God of Heaven himself has sent me. The Holy Ghost has sent me. The President of the Church of Jesus Christ has sent me, and the prayers of a hundred thousand people (Saints of God) are daily offered up for my prosperity. Now I have a message for you from the Lord. It is your duty to be ordained unto the holy Priesthood, and assist me in establishing the Gospel among this people." He listened with deep interest, and his countenance was lighted up with animation at the thought of being associated with me in such a glorious mission. He then put the inquiry, "Are you sent by the Wesleyans?" "I am a member," I replied, "of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." All his desires to do good and become great seemed to go down in proportion as the last idea arose in his mind and became clear.

First Mission to ItalyHCHe said he had heard one of our elders preach, and he made baptism essential to salvation: what were my ideas upon that point? "It is now," said I, "because God has commanded it: until he did command, and sent some one to administer, it was not essential." I then lent him several books, asking him to read them prayerfully. He promised to do so, but with great reluctance, "and he went away sorrowful."

I am now in a Roman Catholic country. Its inhabitants are before my eyes continually. My heart is pained to see their follies, their wickedness, gross darkness, and superstition. Oh, I weep that the day of the Son of Man has come upon them unawares: so little are they prepared to receive the voice from on high, "The Bridegroom cometh: go ye out to meet him!" They are clothed with darkness as with a garment, and they know not their right hand from their left. I ask my Heavenly Father to look upon this people in mercy. O Lord, let them become the objects of thy compassion, that they may not all perish. Forgive their sins, and let me be known among them, that they may know Thee, and know that Thou hast sent me to establish Thy Kingdom. They do wickedly all the day long, and are guilty of many abominations. They have turned their backs upon Thee, though they kneel before the image of Thy Son, aud decorate temples to Thy worship. The rulers, the priests, and people have all gone astray, and have forgotten Thee, the Lord their God. But wilt Thou not have mercy upon them. Thou knowest that I have bidden a heart-rending farewell to the loved and tried partner of my bosom to obey Thy call, and hast thou not some chosen ones among this people to whom I have been sent. Lead me unto such, and thy name shall have the glory through Jesus Thy Son.

Since I wrote the foregoing, I have received a letter from Elders Stenhouse and Torronto. I have felt an intense desire to know the state of that province to which I had given them an appointment, as I felt assured it would be the field of my mission. Now, with a heart full of gratitude, I find that an opening is presented in the valleys of Piedmont, when all other parts of Italy are closed against our efforts. I believe that the Lord has there hidden up a people amid the Alpine mountains, and it is the voice of the Spirit that I shall commence something of importance in that part of this dark nation.

Please to remember me to Brothers Coward and Collins, whose names will never be forgotten for their kindness to Brother Erastus and myself.

Prudence and caution lead me to request that you will not at present give publicity to my communications.

Affectionately,

LORENZO SNOW.

To Elder F. D. Richards,

Liverpool.
