Lorenzo Snow, Italian Mission ( 1851)

LETTER III

La Tour, Vallee de Lusernc,

Piedmont, Italie.

November 1st, 1850.

DEAR PRESIDENT YOUNG,

When I arrived at Liverpool, I sent you a letter, in conjunction with Brothers Erastus and Franklin, which I hope you duly received. Soon afterwards, as I contemplated the condition of Italy, with deep solicitude to know the mind of the Spirit, as to where I should commence my labours, I found that all was dark in Sicily, and hostile laws would exclude our efforts. No opening appeared in the cities of Italy: but the history of the Waldenses attracted my attention.

Amid the ages of darkness and cruelty they had stood immoveable, almost, as the wave-beaten rock in the stormy ocean. When the Anathemas of Rome shook the world, and princes fell from their thrones, they dared to brave the mandates of the Pope and the armies of the mighty. They appeared to my mind like the rose in the wilderness, or the bow in the cloud. The night of time has overspread their origin; but these dissenters from Rome existed ages before Luther was born. During the fierce persecutions to which they have been subjected, their limits have greatly decreased. A few narrow valleys, which are, in some places, only a bowshot in breadth, are all that remain in their possession; except the mountains by which they are engirdled. But a period of deep calm has at length arrived; and, since the storm of revolution swept over Europe, they have received many priviledges from the Sardinian government. Thus, the way was opened only a short period before the appointment of the mission, and no other portion of Italy is governed by such favourable laws.

A flood of light seemed to burst upon my mind when I thought upon the subject, and I endeavoured to procure some information in relation to this people. The librarian to whom I applied informed me he had a work of the description I required, but it had just been taken. He had scarcely finished the sentence when a lady entered with the book. "Oh," said he, "this is a remarkable circumstance, this gentleman has just called for that book. I was soon convinced that this people were worthy to receive the first proclamation of the Gospel in Italy.

I made a short sojourn in England, and visited several conferences. Going to London, after so many years' absence, was a circumstance of uncommon interest. The happiness I experienced during two week's stay was no small compensation for the anxieties and difficulties which I had endured in carrying on the work of the Lord there for two years immediately after its foundation had been laid by yourself, Elders Kimble, Woodruff, and G. A. Smith. When I received my appointment to that city, I found 30 or 40 members: now, 3000, and many had emigrated. It is one of the largest and most important conferences in England. Here I became acquainted with Elder Stenhouse, President of the Southampton Conference. After consultation with Brother Franklin, I felt that it was the mind of the Spirit that he should accompany me on this mission. I therefore proceeded with him to Southampton. During his preparation for departure we went to Portsmouth; and, among "the forces of the Gentiles," we visited the "Victory," the vessel in which Lord Nelson met his death. We were very politely shown the varied departments of this mammoth of the deep, the spot where Nelson fell, and the cabin where he expired.

The hour at length arrived for leaving the last home of the Saints. In the parting of Elder Stenhouse with his wife and friends, I was forcibly reminded of what I had experienced in leaving my own. As we withdrew from this scene of sorrow, I observed, "Did the people of Italy but know the heart-rending sacrifices we have made for their sakes, they could have no heart to persecute.

On the 15th of June, we left Southampton, by the steam-boat "Wonder," for Avre de Grace, and then proceeded immediately to Paris. After having our passports counter-signed, we continued our journey through the beautiful country of southern France. We passed through Lyons, and arrived at Marseilles in about four days from leaving Paris. We then embarked on the clear blue waters of the Mediterranean, for Antibes, the last French port. By disembarking there, we escaped being detained six days in quarantine, under the burning sun of Genoa. We then travelled to Nice, the first town in Italy. Here Catholicism began to show itself more prominently. Priests were numerous. Images of the Holy Virgin, with the infant Jesus in her arms, were to be seen on the corner house of every street, and on the front of many others.

We left Nice by "Diligence," and travelled by the shores of the Mediterranean. It was the feast-day of John the Baptist. Labour was entirely suspended, and all seemed to enjoy themselves in honour of this great man. We certainly saw some hundreds of priests—rather a gloomy introduction. On the 25th of June, we arrived at Genoa. Here we called upon the Lord, and offered the gratitude and praise of our souls for his providence. We had accomplished this journey, of nearly 1200 miles, much quicker than we had anticipated. From the time we left England, we had only spent three nights in bed.

June 27th.—This is the feast-day to St. Peter. Again all work is suspended, and the people enjoying themselves. Jesus said, the fathers killed the prophets, and their children build their tombs and garnish their sepulchres. The fathers beheaded John and crucified Peter: this week we have witnessed feastings and rejoicings in honour of their names. Pleasing reflections—starvation!—bonds!—imprisonment!—and martyrdom! and subsequent generations paying us divine honours.

I visited the Cathedral of St. Lorenzo, and beheld the most superb and richly decorated interior of any building I had ever seen. As we entered, our attention was immediately attracted by the grand altar. Here was a display of richly cut candlesticks, and vases, glittering with gold and silver gilding. In the former, were wax candles of four or five feet long, and in the latter, a most delightful association of flowers. On each side of this building were six recesses, where were fixed small altars, upon which stood a cross, with an emblem of Jesus, surrounded with candles and flowers, on a small scale. Before them were benches for the accommodation of the devoted. The side wall of each recess had a painting, representing, in full size, some particular person in the act of devotion. These worshippers were portrayed, in some instances, as holding a levce, with "Holy Mary, Mother of God," who was well surrounded with young warbling angels, who had been assisted in their descent with eagles' wings! Others were represented with volumes of smoke around them, thickly studded with young cherubs, who were blowing profusely upon the worshipper, while they were loaded with garlands to encircle his brow. Two beautifully cut and spiraled pillars of choice stone stood at the extent of each recess, supporting an arched roof, which was also richly painted. Between every two pillars were placed the statue of one of the ancient Apostles. The design and execution of these monuments of departed worth elicited our admiration.

The roof of the building was completely covered with paintings, representing the promanent circumstances recorded in the New Testament. Each picture was surrounded with massive gilt mouldings. On the dome, over the grand altar, was a representation of the day of Penticost. The Holy Ghost, in its plenitude of power, was portrayed in the descent of the Dove, while tongues of fire, in glowing colours, rested upon the disciples.

Two rows of large massive pillars, from one end of the church to the other, stood erect from floor to roof; each side of which was filled with seats for the congregation, while the centre was left for visitors, and those approaching the altar. Here we sat, and while the unmeaning sounds of the preacher fell upon our ears, our minds were absorbed in the contemplation of the beauty and richness of art, the power of unity, and the darkness of human understanding, as the monuments of each were around, before, and above us.

First Mission to ItalyHCOn the 1st of July Elders Stenhouse and Toronto left Genoa, according to my appointment, to visit the Protestant valleys of Piedmont. On the 23rd of the same month I left Genoa, passing through the city of Turin, the capital of the Sardinian States, and arrived at La Tour, in the valley of Lucerne.

First Mission to ItalyHCThe country in which I now found myself, bears a striking resemblance to the valley of the Great Salt Lake. Piedmont is situated at the foot of the Alps, the highest mountains in Europe. The scenes of this land embrace all the variety of a region where the heavens and the earth seem to meet. The clouds often enwrap these mighty eminences, and hide their frowning grandeurs from our eyes. At other times they are covered with snow, while, at their feet the vine and the fig-tree are ripening their fruit. A poet has said of this identical locality in which we are placed

First Mission to ItalyHC"There is a scene would well repay The toil of many a weary day; And every form of nature there, Wood, rock, and stream, and summit rare

First Mission to ItalyHCAll seem to bid the traveller rest; For ne'er from tower or mountain crest, In emerald vale or sunny plain, Shall he behold such scenes again."

First Mission to ItalyHCThe Protestant inhabitants are called "Vaudois," or Waldenses. They number about 21,000: there are also about 5,000 Catholics. The fertile portion of these valleys are rich in their productions: but two-thirds, or more, present nothing but precipices, ravines and rocky districts, or such as have a northern aspect. The inhabitants are far too numerous, according to the nature of the soil. They are often compelled to carry mould on their backs, to form a garden amid the barren rocks. The French language is generally understood, but in many parts it is spoken very imperfectly, and with an admixture of provincialism and Italian. The latter is understood by a considerable number of persons; but it is not extensively used. In fact, this is a place where there are at least five distinct dialects spoken by different classes.

First Mission to ItalyHCDuring our protracted journey, the health of Elder Toronto had been considerably affected; but this salubrious clime having re-invigorated his frame, he became very anxious to visit his friends in Sicily. As I felt it proper for him to do so, he took his departure at the beginning of August.

First Mission to ItalyHCSoon after my arrival here, I considered it necessary to issue a publication in French; accordingly I wrote, and compiled a work, entitled "The Voice of Joseph," containing "Visions of Joseph Smith—Discovery of Gold Plates filled with Egyptian Characters and Hieroglyphics—Their Translation into the English Language by the aid of the Urim and Thummim—The Sacred History of Ancient America now clearly revealed from the earliest ages after the Flood, to the beginning of the Fifth Century of the Christian Era"—Organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—Their Persecutions—Expulsion from the States of Missouri and Illinois—Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith—Banishment of many Thousand Saints—Their Travels in the Western Wilderness—Their present location in Upper California—Their Organization of the "State of Deseret"—The Missionary Labours of their Elders—Sketch of their Faith and Doctrine."

First Mission to ItalyHCAfter fruitless endeavours to find a proper person to translate this work, I found it necessary to send it to England; where, through the kindness of Elder Orson Pratt, it was translated by a professor from the University of Paris.

First Mission to ItalyHCI felt assured that the Lord had directed us to a branch of the House of Israel; and I was rejoiced to behold many countenances that reminded me of those with whom I had been associated in the valleys of the West. We endeavoured to lay a foundation for future usefulness, in silently preparing the minds of the people for the reception of the Gospel, by cultivating friendly feelings in the bosoms of those by whom we were surrounded. Yet I felt it rather singular, and no small tax upon patience, to be weeks, and months, in the midst of an interesting people, without being actively and publicly engaged in communicating the great principles which I had come to promulgate. But, as I felt it was the mind of the Spirit that we should proceed at first, by slow and cautious steps, I submitted to the will of heaven.

First Mission to ItalyHCWhile surrounded by strangers in a land of darkness, many circumstances occurred of great importance to us, though they may not appear so to those unacquainted with the peculiar difficulties with which we had to grapple. One incident I will extract from my private journal.

First Mission to ItalyHCSept. 6th. This morning my attention was directed to Joseph Guy, a boy three years of age, the youngest child of our host. Many friends had been to see the child, as to all human appearance his end was nigh at hand. I went to see him in the afternoon, death was making havock of his body—his former healthy frame was now reduced to a skeleton, and it was only by close observation we could discern he was alive. As I reflected on our situation, and beheld this effort of the Prince of Darkness, to raise a barrier against us, and the establishment of the Gospel, my mind was fully awakened to a sense of our position. For some hours before I retired to rest, I called upon the Lord to assist us at this time. My feelings on this occasion will not easily be erased from memory.

First Mission to ItalyHCSept. 7th. This morning I proposed to Elder Stenhouse we should fast and retire to the mountains and pray. As we departed we called and saw the child—his eye-balls turned upwards; his eye-lids fell and closed; his face and ears were thin, and wore the pale marble hue indicative of approaching dissolution. The cold perspiration of death covered his body, and the principle of life was nearly exhausted. Madame Guy and other females were sobbing, while Monsieur Guy hung his head, and whispered to us "Il meurt! Il meurt!"—(He dies! He dies!)

First Mission to ItalyHCAfter a little rest upon the mountains, aside from any likelihood of interruption, we there called upon the Lord in solemn prayer to spare the life of the child. As I reflected on the course we wished to pursue—the claims we should soon advance to the world, I regarded this circumstance as one of vast importance. I know not of any sacrifice which I could possibly make, that I was not willing to offer, that the Lord might grant our requests.

First Mission to ItalyHCWe returned about three o'clock in the afternoon, and having consecrated some oil, I anointed my hand, and laid it upon his head, while we silently offered up the desires of our hearts for his restoration. A few hours afterwards we called, and his father with a smile of thankfulness said "mieux, beaucoup, beaucoup."—(better much, much.)

First Mission to ItalyHCSept. 8. The child had been so well during the preceeding night, the parents had been enabled to betake themselves to rest, which they had not done for same time before, and to-day they could leave him and attend to the business of the house. As I called to see him, Madame Guy expressed her joy in his restoration; I, in turn, remarked—"Il Dio di cielo ha fatto questa per voi."—(The God of heaven has done this for you.)

First Mission to ItalyHCFinding circumstances as favourable as could be expected, I considered it wisdom to send for Elder Jabez Woodard, of London, with whom I had formed an acquaintance while in that city. By the exertions of Elder Margetts, President of the London Conference, and the liberality of the saints, he was enabled to join us on the 18th of Sept. The following day being eleven months from the time the Foreign Missions left the city of the Great Salt Lake, I proposed we should commence our public business.

First Mission to ItalyHCIt was well-known that we had come to establish a church. This was looked upon by many as an impossibility. But, we now found that we had the materials marvellously assembled from four different nations, viz., ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, ITALY and AMERICA. With one member from each of these countries we proceeded to organize the church. We ascended a very high mountain a little distance from La Tour, and having taken our position on a bold projecting rock, we sung praises to the God of heaven, and offered up the following prayer:—

First Mission to ItalyHC"We thy servants, Holy Father, come before thee upon these mountains, and ask thee to look upon us in an especial manner, and regard our petitions as one friend regards the peculiar requests of another. Forgive all our sins and transgressions, let them no more be remembered. Look, O Lord, upon our many sacrifices in leaving our wives, our children, and country, to obey thy voice in offering salvation to this people. Receive our gratitude in having preserved us from destruction amid the cold wintry blasts, and from the hostile savages of the deserts of America—in having led us by the Holy Ghost to these valleys of Piedmont. Thou hast shown us that here thou hast hid up a portion of the House of Israel. In thy name, we this day lift into view before this people, and this nation, the Ensign of thy Martyred Prophet and Patriarch, Joseph and Hyrum Smith—the Ensign of the fulness of the Gospel—the Ensign of thy Kingdom once more established among men. O, Lord God of our Fathers, protect thou this banner. Lend us of thine Almighty aid in maintaining it before the view of these dark and benighted nations. May it wave triumphantly from this time forth, till all Israel shall have heard, and received the fulness of thy Gospel, and have been delivered from their bondage. May their bands now be broken, and the scales of darkness fall from their eyes. From the lifting up of this Ensign, may a voice go forth among the people of these mountains and valleys, and throughout the length and breadth of this land; and may it go forth, and be unto thine elect as the Voice of the Lord, that the Holy Spirit may fall upon them, imparting knowledge in dreams and visions concerning this hour of their redemption. As the report of us, thy servants, shall spread abroad, may it awaken feelings of anxiety with the honest, to learn of thy doings, and to seek speedily the path of knowledge.

First Mission to ItalyHCWhosoever among this people shall employ his influence, riches, or learning to promote the establishment of Thy Gospel in these nations, may he be crowned with honours in this world, and, in the world to come, crowned with eternal life. Whosoever shall use his influence or power to hinder the establishment of Thy Gospel in this country, may be become, in a surprising manner before the eyes of all these nations, a monument of weakness, folly, shame, and disgrace. Suffer us not to be overcome by our enemies in the accomplishment of this business upon which we have been sent. Let messengers be prepared and sent forth from Heaven to help us in our weakness and feebleness, and to take the oversight of this work, and lead us to a glorious consummation.

First Mission to ItalyHCRemember our families: preserve our lives and our hearts from all evil, that, when we shall have finished our missions, we may return safely to the bosom of our families. Bless Elder Toronto in Sicily, and give him influence and power to lead to salvation many of his father's house and kindred. Bless President Young and his Council, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and Thy Saints universally: and to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost shall be the praise, honour, and glory, now and for ever. Amen."

First Mission to ItalyHCOther proceedings of the day I extract from the Journal of the Mission:—

First Mission to ItalyHC"Moved by Elder Snow, That the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints be now organized in Italy. Seconded, and carried.

First Mission to ItalyHC"Moved by Elder Stenhouse, That Elder Lorenzo Snow, of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, be sustained President of the Church in Italy. Seconded, and carried.

First Mission to ItalyHCMoved by Elder Snow, that Elder Stenhouse be Secretary of the Church in Italy. Seconded, and carried."

First Mission to ItalyHCThe Church in this country, this day, is composed of the following:—

First Mission to ItalyHCLorenzo Snow, of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; Joseph Toronto, of the Quorum of Seventies; T. B. H. Stenhouse, Elder, and Jabez Woodard, Elder.

First Mission to ItalyHCWe then sung "Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah." After which Elder Stenhouse engaged in prayer, calling upon the Lord to bless and preserve our wives and families, and all who minister to their wants during our absence.

First Mission to ItalyHCElder Woodard then implored the out-pouring of the Spirit of God upon the honest in heart among ministers and people of these lands.

First Mission to ItalyHCElder Snow followed, calling upon the God of our fathers in mighty prayer to bless and sanction the proceedings of this day, and crown our future efforts with success.

First Mission to ItalyHCAs the Spirit of God rested upon us, we felt "it was good to be here." After singing a song of Zion, Elder Snow prophesied, and said, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, now organized, will increase and multiply, and continue its existence in Italy till that portion of Israel dwelling in these countries shall have heard and received the fulness of the Gospel."

First Mission to ItalyHCElder Stenhouse prophesied, and said, "From this time the work will commence, and nothing will hinder its progress; and before we are called to return, many will rejoice, and bear testimony to the principles of Truth."

First Mission to ItalyHCElder Woodard prophesied, and said, "The opposition which may be brought against this Church will, in a visible and peculiar manner, advance its interests; and the Work of God will at length go from this land to other nations of the earth."

First Mission to ItalyHCAfter we had sung, prayed and prophesied, Elder Snow laid his hands upon the head of Elder Stenhouse; and, through the operations of the Spirit, was led to comfort and cheer his soul with the things of the Kingdom. He then laid his hands upon the head of Elder Woodward, and prayed that he might have the power to act as Aaron, and speak unto the people by the power of God.

First Mission to ItalyHCHaving now finished the business for which we ascended, we felt reluctant to leave the spot where we had rejoiced so much in the goodness of the Lord. From the nature of our proceedings—the fruitfulness of the mountains—the rich variety around—and the impregnable fortress of mountains behind, Elder Snow proposed that this mountain be known among the people of God, henceforth and for ever, as MOUNT BRIGHAM, and the rock upon which we stood, the ROCK of PROPHECY. We descended the mount, and reached La Tour about six o'clock in the evening. As a sign to all who might visit us, we nailed to the wall of my chamber the likenesses of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. From that day opportunities began to occur for proclaiming our message.

First Mission to ItalyHCThere is an English gentleman residing here, whose name has an almost magical effect among the Protestants. He has materially assisted the schools, and other benevolent institutions. Your recommend (the only one I had) procured me a ready and cheerful introduction to this gentleman, which resulted in several interesting interviews. On one of those occasions, he said, as he retired, "You shall receive no opposition on my part: and if you preach the Gospel as faithfully to all in these valleys as to me, you need fear no reproach in the 'Day of Judgment.'"

First Mission to ItalyHCThe Protestant Chapels here are called Temples. The first that was ever erected was that of St. Lorenzo. It has long since crumbled into ruins; but a Catholic Chapel has been erected, which now bears the name. One day we were invited to the residence of the officiating Priest. We received every attention from our host, and were provided with a dinner, which, for excellence and variety, exceeded any thing we had enjoyed in Italy. When viewing his Chapel, we took the opportunity of presenting the Truths of the Gospel. He listened with great attention, and proposed many interesting questions with regard to modern revelation. Although we had intended to return to our residence, he insisted very strenuously that we should stay over night. He presented me with an Italian Grammar, in which he inscribed his name. In the morning, after an early breakfast, he accompanied us some miles on the way.

First Mission to ItalyHCIt is customary among the Protestants to hold small meetings in private houses, for religious worship. These are called 'Re-unions.' We attend them; and sometimes are permitted to speak upon our principles. This has produced some little stir among the officials; and, a short time since, we received an invitation to attend a public meeting, and answer some questions relative to our mission. We did so, and found some of the most talented ministers present, with an evident desire to crush our efforts. But after we had preached and discussed for three hours, one man, at least, retired with the conviction that we were the servants of the Lord.

First Mission to ItalyHCOn the 27th of October, this person presented himself as a candidate for baptism. The introduction of the principles of Truth, in all countries, has, more or less, been attended with anxiety and difficulty: of these we have had our share. It was, therefore, with no small degree of pleasure I went down to the river-side to attend to this ordinance. Peculiar, indeed, were my feelings when I thought on the past, the present, and endeavoured to penetrate the dark labyrinth of unborn time, I rejoiced that the Lord had thus far blessed our efforts, and enabled me to open the door of the Kingdom in dark and benighted Italy. My brethren stood on the river bank—the only human witnesses of this interesting scene. Having long desired this eventful time, sweet to us all were the soft sounds of the Italian, as I administered, and opened a door which no man can shut.

Tales of slander against the Saints have been circulated around us already. The list of lies which we have seen in print here, might bleach the memory of many a vile traducer in other lands. From the rise of the Church to the death of Joseph, all the principal facts have been changed for the foulest mis-representations. But this is a small part of our difficulties. We have to preach, on the one hand, to a people nominally Protestants; but who have been, from time immemorial, in a church where any organized dissent has been unknown. The people regard any innovation as an attempt to drag them from the banner of their martyred ancestry. On the other hand we have the Catholics, with their proud pretensions to a priesthood of apostolic origin. Our presence in this land is only just tolerated and not recognized as any right, founded upon established laws. Liberty is only as yet in the bud; and the poet says, "The bud may have a bitter taste." But while surrounded with difficulties that seem loftier than the snow-crowned Alps, I can lift up my head, as a servant of God, and rejoice in the anticipation of final triumph. Our course is often dark and difficult; but I believe that, however slow it may be for awhile, it will ultimately be brightened with complete success. Popery, ignorance, and superstition form a three-fold barrier to our attempts. Strange customs, laws, and languages surround us on every side. In a word, we feel that we are in Italy—the polluted fountain which has overspread the earth with her defiling waters.

La Tour is the principal town in the Protestant vallies. Here there is a large Catholic chapel, with a number of officiating Priests. There is a Protestant college, with several professors, and about seventy students. They have also a large chapel in course of erection, principally by English liberality.

Having thus given you a sketch of my travels and proceedings, I close with my kind love to yourself and family, Elders Kimball and Richards, and all the Saints.

I am, Dear President Young,

Yours very affectionately,

LORENZO SNOW.

President B. Young,

Great Salt Lake City, California.
