Lorenzo Snow, Italian Mission ( 1851)

LETTER IV

La Tour, Vallee de Luserne,

Pismont, Italic.

December 2nd, 1850.

DEAR PRESIDENT RICHARDS,

Your affectionate letter was duly received. Its contents were rendered doubly agreeable by the kind and feeling spirit in which they were communicated. When a servant of God is far removed from the endearing society of the Saints, and his ears are no longer saluted with the cheering voice of the partner of his toils, or the merry-making and prattling of his little ones—situate in a foreign land, surrounded by strangers, in whose bosoms dwell no kindred feeling—'tis then a favour, or a kind word from afar, awakens in the mind a recollection of the past, and draws from the burthened spirit its choice blessings upon the head of those who bestow and imprints feelings of gratitude that continue in lively remembrance, when cares and sorrows will long have been buried in forget-fulness. To be placed in such circumstances is not unprofitable, however unpleasant. To be separated from the society of those for whom we live, and for whom we would die, is not without its recompense; such a position serves to teach man his weakness, and dependence on the Lord. It cultivates patience, and, by contrast, teaches the true value of good society and friends.

First Mission to ItalyHCI am happy to learn that, at the departure of Elder Pratt, the Presidency of the British Conferences has been entrusted to your care; as I am satisfied you possess every qualification for that, and the Editorial department.

First Mission to ItalyHCAs you have expressed an interest in this mission, and desire information respecting our situation, I devote a little leisure in throwing together a few circumstances.

First Mission to ItalyHCTo commence, then. We are all well. Elders Stenhouse and Woodard are constantly engaged. Their diligence and faithfulness deserve commendation. I could not have selected two better qualified for the various duties pertaining to the singular course which I have to adopt in conducting this mission. I have not as yet heard from Elder Toronto.

First Mission to ItalyHCThink not, dear Franklin, that we are amid the marble palaces, nor surrounded by the choice productions of art which adorn many portions of this wondrous land. Here, a man must preach from house to house, and from hovel to hovel. Here, many a dwelling has no glass in the windows; and from the scarcity of fuel, there is often no fire upon the hearth; and during the long winter evenings, the family are huddled together in the stable, among the cattle, for the sake of a little warmth which they cannot find elsewhere.

First Mission to ItalyHCIn our intercourse with the clergy, we have been treated with respect; but it is in vain that we announce to them the great message of the last days. The professed teachers of religion have always been slow to receive the revelations of heaven. When attending their place of worship the other Sunday, one of their ministers looked piteously upon us, and then at the congregation, to whom he said, in tones mournfully low, "Do not leave that dear church which is consecrated by so many glorious remembrances, and for which your fathers have died." What would have been his feelings if he had known that, in a few hours afterwards, I baptized one of his flock who had been listening to his admonition.

With regard to Romanism, let no one imagine that our difficulties are decreased, because the Pope has quarrelled with the king of Piedmont. The influence of papal domination does not crumble away before the earthquakes of political controversy. The system of education has enthroned it too firmly to be shaken by the timid protest of an Italian government. In taking a general survey of Italy, a dark cloud hangs over its bosom. If the tree is to be judged by its fruits, what must be the state of this country?—what fruit has it borne for ages and ages? Vice has walked with bold, unblushing countenance through its proud cities; and when man has dared to think for himself, and search for truth amid the labyrinth of opinion, he has quickly been removed to a dungeon. There the great Galileo was immured, and there hundreds have died whose names are unknown, but who were as sensitive to pain and oppression as any child of Adam. The dark veil of the inquisition is drawn over many of these scenes; yet, ever and anon it is blown aside, and we see the instruments of torture, and the bones of the martyred.

But the time has now arrived when the Gospel must be sounded through the earth, and Italy will hear its announcement, though all its dead popes should burst into life! Nor will the importance of this mission be limited to Italy: the way will open from hence to other parts of the world. There has long been an intimate connexion between the Protestants here and in Switzerland. I intend to avail myself of this circumstance, that the Gospel may be established in both places. I shall circulate the "Voice of Joseph" here, and in the Swiss Cantons; and also another work, which I am getting translated through the politeness of the French mission. There are many parts of Italy where the Lord has a people: among others I might mention the city of Nice, and the ancient republic of San Marino; but the time has not yet arrived for sounding the Gospel trumpet in those places.

If circumstances permit, I shall probably visit England in February or March.

The work here is slow and tedious. The spiritual atmosphere around us is like the Egyptian darkness which might be felt. Nevertheless, the Church has been established. The tree has been planted and is spreading its roots. The leaven has begun its process. Many good things have been spoken concerning Israel. Many prophecies of great importance have been given in connexion with this mission; and recalling them to mind seems like the dawning of day upon the benighted. We especially remember the one you uttered at the meeting in London. You have not forgotten prophesying that thousands would, ere long, embrace the Gospel in Italy. We have also been assured that, before it was known in Great Britain, a mission was appointed to Italy; the spirit of prophecy testified, by the mouths of Brethren in Wales, that the Elders should come to this land, and commence their labours at the feet of those mountains by which we are now encircled, and that from hence it should extend itself triumphantly. Praying for the fulfilment of these prophecies,

I am, dear Brother,

Yours very affectionately,

LORENZO SNOW.

To Franklin D. Richards,

Liverpool.
