Lorenzo Snow, Italian Mission ( 1851)

LETTER FROM ELDER WOODARD TO LORENZO SNOW.

La Tour, Vallee de Luserne,

Piedmont, Italy.

February 26th, 1851.

First Mission to ItalyHCDEAR PRESIDENT SNOW,

First Mission to ItalyHCI am happy to inform you that the Brethren and Sisters in Italy are all well, and send their salutations to you, with the request that you will also salute the Churches in England for them.

First Mission to ItalyHCOn the 24th of February, two young men presented themselves for baptism. It rained and snowed amain, and the atmosphere was so dense, that we could not see distinctly a little way a-head. But as we descended towards the Angrogna river, a singular scene was presented—the clouds suddenly rent asunder, as if they had been a piece of paper, and the side of Mount Brigham was visible in a moment, from the top to the bottom. I exclaimed, "The veil over Italy has burst!" and yet, at the instant, I knew not what I was saying. I stood paralyzed with the magnificent views which opened on every side: then with a prayer to Israel's God, we entered the stream.

First Mission to ItalyHCIn the evening, a congregation assembled, and I commenced preaching; but the devil entered into some who had been resisting the Truth, and I saw he had got firm hold, and my words seemed to be wasted on the assembly, through the presence of such a deadening and defiling influence, I therefore stopped short, and sat down, after giving an intimation that every body might go where they liked. By this means I got rid of the chaff, while the good grain remained. I then re-commenced preaching, and the power of God rested upon us. Many a tear rolled down those weather-beaten faces. The next day I baptized ten persons: they are not the rich and noble, but you shall judge them by their own language, as they have each given me a line to send to their foreign brethren. They are as follows:—

First Mission to ItalyHC1 May we meet when the earth is renovated.

First Mission to ItalyHC2 Pray for a young Sister, who wishes to grow in grace.

First Mission to ItalyHC3 Absent in body, but united in spirit.

First Mission to ItalyHC4 Hallelujah, for the Lord hath remembered his people.

First Mission to ItalyHC5 If we do not meet in these bodies, may we embrace each other in the resurrection. (This is from a Brother who is 62 years old.)

First Mission to ItalyHC6 In the midst of weakness I hope for strength.

First Mission to ItalyHC7 Pray for a poor Brother.

First Mission to ItalyHC8 May we be crowned with glory when the world is judged.

First Mission to ItalyHCThe other Brethren and Sisters have sent the following:—

First Mission to ItalyHCWe thank our Heavenly Father that we have begun to walk in the pathway of a new and endless life.

First Mission to ItalyHCOne Brother, who is a firm believer in the "Voice of Joseph," I have advanced as an Elder. Five months ago, he was requested to take the office of Elder in the Waldensian Church. This he refused.

First Mission to ItalyHCPlease address my letters as usual, but add "Posta Restante." I do not see an opening at the present moment, but I believe the Lord will enable me to be independent of the Hotel, and by that means I shall know more as to the true character of the inhabitants.

First Mission to ItalyHCRemember me to Sister Woodard, and all friends whom you see in your travels.

First Mission to ItalyHCAll kinds of calumny and petty persecutions are brought into use. The devil is not idle here: and sometimes he tells the truth.

Yours in the New and Everlasting Covenant,

JABEZ WOODARD.
