Lorenzo Snow, Italian Mission ( 1851)

POETRY

THE HERO'S REWARD.

BY MISS E. R. SNOW.

Well may the fire of glory blaze Upon the warriors tread, And nations twine the wreath of praise Around the hero's head: His path is honour, and his name Is written on the spire of fame.

His deeds are deeds of courage, for He treads o'er gory ground, Amid the pride and pomp of war, When carnage sweeps around; With sword unsheath'd, he stands before The foe, amid the cannon's roar.

If such the meed the warrior gains— If such the palm he bears— If such insignia he obtains— If such the crown he wears— If laurels thus his head entwine, And stars of triumph round him shine,

How noble must be HIS reward Who, 'midst the crafts of men, Clad in the armour of the Lord, Goes forth to battle, when The powers of darkness warfare wage, And Satan's host around him rage.

Who goes opinion to unbind, That reason may go free, And liberate the human mind From priestly tyranny, To sever superstition's rod, And propagate the truth of God,

Who wars with prejudice, to break Asunder error's chain, And make the sandy pillars shake Where human dogmas reign— Who dares to be a man of God, And bear the Spirit's sword abroad,—

Above all earthly, his shall be An everlasting fame; The Archives of Eternity Will register his name With gems of sacred honour rife— His crown will be eternal life.

STANZA ON THE PRESENTATION OF THE BOOK OF MORMON TO QUEEN VICTORIA.

BY MISS E. R. SNOW.

Before leaving London, Elder Lorenzo Snow presented to Her Majesty Queen Victoria, and His Royal Highness Prince Albert, through the politeness of Sir Henry Wheatley, two neatly bound copies of the BOOK OF MORMON, which had been donated by President Brigham Young, and left in the care of Elder Snow for that purpose, which circumstance suggested the following lines:—

Of all the monarchs of the earth, That wear the robes of royalty, She has inherited, by birth, The broadest wreath of majesty

From her wide territorial wing, The sun does not withdraw its light; While earth's diurnal motions bring To other nations day and night.

All earthly thrones are tottering things, Where lights and shadows intervene; And regal honour often brings The scaffold or the guillotine.

But still her sceptre is approved: All nations deck the wreath she wears; Yet, like the youth whom Jesus loved, One thing is lacking, even there.

But lo! a prize possessing more Of worth, than gems with honour rife— A herald of salvation bore To her the words of endless life.

That gift, however fools deride, Is worthy of her royal care: She'd better lay her crown aside Than spurn the light reflected there.

O would she now her influence bend— The influence of royalty, Messiah's Kingdom to extend, And Zion's "nursing mother" be:

Thus, with the glory of her name Inscribed on Zion's lofty spire, She'd win a wreath of endless fame, To last when other wreaths expire.

Though over millions called to reign Herself a powerful nation's boast, 'T would be her everlasting gain To serve the King, the Lord of Hosts.

For there are crowns and thrones on high, And kingdoms there to be conferr'd— There honours wait that never die; There fame's immortal trump is heard.

Truth echoes—'t is Jehovah's word; Let kings and queens and princes hear: In distant isles the sound is heard; Ye heavens rejoice! O earth, give ear!

The time, the time is now at hand To give a glorious period birth: The SON OF GOD will take command, And rule the nations of the earth.

FINIS.
