# Chapter 7: Words

### Chapter 7: Words
Orson Scott Card , Stone Tables (Salt Lake City 2000)
 
 

Chapter 7: Words

Moses did not take well to the numbing routine of the pastoral life. Every day the sheep needed water. Every day one of Jethro’s daughters led him on the search for new pasture, or taught him how to herd the stupid animals—couldn’t they train a dog for this?—or tried to teach him the silly country songs that they used to pass the time. All the while, Moses could not drive Egypt from his thoughts. Mother—Hatshepsut—what was she going through? How was she dealing with the crippling blow that his exile caused her? Was she able to keep the boy Tuthmose from combining with the priests to oust her? No doubt by giving him exactly what he wanted, his own throne. She would be able to rule over and around and even through him for a time, because he was still young. But he would work at soldiering—he had a gift for it, Moses knew that from his own days teaching the boy—and in due time he would have his own following among the soldiers, who would long for him to lead them instead of a woman.

As for the priests, well, that was Tuthmose’s deepest weakness, that he was already beholden to them. Was he stupid enough to use them again? Didn’t he understand the constant danger that the priests posed to Pharaoh? Why else did Pharaoh have to become a god? It was so he could outrank the priests in their own hierarchy. Priests had meddled in government before, and it was always extremely difficult to get them out again, because any action taken against a priest was immediately portrayed by them as an attack on the gods. If Tuthmose went to them again, if he admitted them to the inner ring of government, there would be no expelling them. Maybe he would have the strength to keep them under his control during his own lifetime, but sooner or later there would be a weak pharaoh and the priests would seize power for themselves.

The worst thing was that Tuthmose was not the sort of man who would take the long view, who would care even a bit about the rulers who would come after him. Let them solve the problems of their own time. Tuthmose would do what was needful now. That kind of pharaoh was the reason Egypt had fallen under the sway of the Hyksos invaders from Canaan. Weak without knowing he was weak. Weak because he inherited weakness from his father and never suspected it. Tuthmose would be ambitious, bold, triumphant no doubt, but he would leave Egypt weaker than he found it. That’s why he was unfit to rule, and now he would rule, and it was Moses’ fault. Because he couldn’t control himself, because he had to help one slave, and now a whole kingdom would pay.

And what was happening to the Israelites now? Because he killed an Egyptian to save a single Israelite, what punishment was being visited upon them all? What was Jochabed suffering now? How were Miriam and Aaron cursing him? Or were they—yes, certainly they were—gloating, knowing they had driven him to a commitment to them and their people. Though they would insist that it was their God that had driven him. . . .

“What were you thinking?” Keturah demanded. Small as she was, her voice penetrated, echoed from the cliffs. A few of the other girls were near enough to hear and look up.

Moses looked around, tried to remember what he was supposed to be doing. Oh, yes. A simple job. Watching the nursing ewes and their lambs. But where were they? Oh, only a few yards off. “There they are,” said Moses.

“Look at what you’re letting them eat!” Keturah grabbed him by the hand and dragged him over to where the ewes were gathered. As they walked, Moses could see that the ewes were unsteady on their feet. One of them took a couple of steps and fell over.

“Oh no,” said Moses. “Is it dead?”

“Drunk. Drunk as one of the village men at a festival. This plant makes them dizzy. Now we won’t be able to get them to do anything for hours.”

“I didn’t know.”

“I told you there was a patch nearby and you had to watch to keep them out of it!”

“I’m sorry,” said Moses.

She pulled up one of the plants and waved it right in Moses’ face. “There it is! It doesn’t look like anything else. I pointed it out to you before!”

“I’m sorry,” said Moses again.

“Well what’s the matter with you anyway?” demanded Keturah. “It’s not like this is hard! I’ve been doing it since I was four!”

Moses was beginning to get annoyed. “I said, I’m sorry.”

Keturah might have launched into yet another diatribe—certainly she was ready for one—but Zeforah arrived right then and cut her off. “That’s enough, Keturah. He gets the point.”

“But he doesn’t listen!”

“We were patient with you when you were starting out, Keturah.”

“I was four!”

“Keturah, teach with patience, not with anger.”

Disgusted, Keturah stalked away. “You can get the ewes away from here, then.”

“I’m truly sorry,” said Moses. “My mind wandered. She was right to reprimand me.”

“She’s good at starting reprimands,” said Zeforah. “She has plenty of teachers to help her learn that. The hard thing is knowing when to stop.”

“Many a junior officer has the same problem,” said Moses. “He keeps ragging at the offender, waiting until he feels satisfied. But anger only feeds on itself, so the more you rag, the less satisfied you are. It leads to deadly insult, or to blows, or both.”

“Fortunately,” said Zeforah, “my sisters aren’t soldiers. The insults may be deadly, but the blows are light.”

He tried to mimic her deft way of helping the drunken ewes stagger away from the plant, but no matter what he did, he kept knocking them over, sending their lambs away bleating, while Zeforah’s ewes never fell at all. She ended up herding five for every one he managed to get back to the safe pasture.

“I’ll never be good at this,” he said.

“God will give you the skills you need,” said Zeforah.

“It’s God’s fault that I need these skills in the first place.”

“But at least you’re not hesitating,” said Zeforah.

“What do you mean?”

“When you speak. You don’t take those little . . . pauses.”

He looked at her in mortified surprise. “No one has ever . . . spoken to me about that . . . before.”

“Oh, no. There you’re doing it again. I never should have mentioned it.”

“I just . . . you don’t . . .” and he gave up, speechless. Had he really stopped hesitating for a while?

“Father said that you hesitate because Hebrew isn’t your first language,” said Zeforah.

“That’s how it . . . began.”

“And because you spend your life balanced between two nations, two mothers, two languages, two roles.”

“An interesting analysis.”

“But I think it’s because you’re proud and don’t want to get caught making a mistake.”

Did she dislike him? Was that why she delighted in striking right at the heart of his vanity? The other girls seemed to be on their best behavior around him—except Keturah, who spoke her mind no matter what. Zeforah, however, seemed to go out of her way to be completely oblivious to the fact that her father had as much as offered her to him. But of course—she didn’t want to marry him, and so she was as unsubservient, as self-willed as possible.

“No doubt you’re right,” said Moses.

“Which means that when you don’t hesitate, it’s because you’re not being proud. And that’s a good thing.”

“I’m . . . capable of a . . . good thing?” said Moses. “What a . . . surprise.”

She seemed to recoil as if slapped. “What did I do to deserve that?”

“What?”

“Sarcasm. Nastiness.”

“I assure you I was . . . mocking only . . . myself.”

“You were putting me in my place,” she said. “Only I was in my place. I’m your teacher here.”

“Yes, you are,” said Moses.

“I didn’t ask for the job, you know,” she said.

“True.”

“And you’re not trying very hard.”

“I do everything I’m told,” he said. He couldn’t quite keep all the bitterness out of his voice.

“No, you don’t. Shepherding is boring work, but you have to remain alert all the time. Imagine if you left a soldier on watch and he did as badly as you did today!”

“He’d be hanged from the prow of my boat.”

She looked horrified. “No! Please tell me you’re not so barbaric!”

“Not if he’s new. If he’s in training, he gets a taste of the lash. But a soldier doesn’t betray his men. Are these sheep my men?”

“They are,” said Zeforah. “Or at least, you can think of them that way if it helps you.”

“Fat ewes with nursing lambs. Well, they’re like soldiers this far—they get drunk every chance they get.”

She laughed. And so did he. For a moment, at least, it felt as though they were on the same side.

The same side of what?

“Suddenly you look so sad,” she said.

The words surprised him. No, not the words, but real concern in her voice, and the ache that struck his heart, the feeling that tears would come to his eyes if he let them. He turned away from her.

“What’s wrong?” she said.

I don’t know, he thought. Am I so weak that even the slightest sympathy stabs me to the heart? In Egypt, I wasn’t surrounded by affection—it was honor I had there, and obedience. Why should I miss it so much now?

“I didn’t mean to make you angry,” she said.

“I’m not,” he said. “I’m not used to. . . .”

She waited but he couldn’t think what it was he wasn’t used to so he never finished the sentence. He returned to herding the last of the drunken ewes back to the meadow where the rest were gathered.

He saw how desperately the lambs lunged for the teat, nearly knocking over their unsteady mothers. That’s me, he thought. That’s the pain that I didn’t expect. Neither of my mothers was ever allowed to be mine the way these ewes belong to their lambs. I grew up with plenty of people telling me how to be a man, how to be strong and wise and good. But that tone of voice, gentle, concerned, and those words, Suddenly you look so sad, as if it mattered to someone how I felt.

What a baby I am. Cut off from Egypt, I’ve come here to the desert to become, not even a shepherd, but a lamb.

“All done,” said Zeforah.

“All that work because I couldn’t get my mind off. . . .”

She waited a moment, then laughed. “Is this going to be another of those sentences that remains a mystery? ‘I’m not used to . . . ’ and now ‘I couldn’t get my mind off. . . . ’ Or are you just . . . hesitating extra long?”

For a moment anger flashed within him. She was jeering at him! Nobody mocked his stammering!

But these girls all teased each other. It was their primary manner of conversation. The same attitude that let her speak to him with warmth and sympathy also let her tease him. An attitude of . . . intimacy. Like a sister with her brother. That’s why it hurt so much when she was so readily kind. He had plenty of sisters and brothers. Not just the ones by blood, Miriam and Aaron, but also his adopted brothers and sisters in Pharaoh’s house—the children of Tuthmose II by his concubines. He had been teacher and taskmaster to the children of Pharaoh’s house; he had been lectured and whined to by Miriam and Aaron. But no one had been like this with him.

Except his fellow soldiers. The boys who trained with him when he was a child. Of course they knew who he was, but they were freer with him than anyone else ever was, before or since, and he missed it. That’s why it hurt, because he had lost that when he became a ruler of men. The closest he had ever come to having a family was in the exercise yard with a wooden sword in his hand. And now, helping drunken ewes regain their balance. With a young woman who would never have earned a second glance from him in his previous life.

More fool I, if that were so, he thought. Because she is real, more real than any of the daughters and sisters and mothers and wives of noblemen, always trying to impress me. She really doesn’t care whether I approve of her or not, because she has nothing to gain from me. She just . . . likes me.

“Now I’ve offended you,” she said.

“I wasn’t sure how to answer you,” he said. “Tease you back, or finish those sentences.”

“Are you giving me a choice?” she said.

“I think so,” he said. “I’m not good at either one, though. Out of practice with teasing, and I’ve spent my whole life learning how to speak carefully instead of candidly. You can see how much I’m slipping—because I spoke the beginnings of those sentences aloud.”

“What was it,” she said, “that you weren’t used to?”

“Affection,” he said, for now he was sure that was what it was.

But it was the wrong word. Her eyes went wide. “Thank heaven my sisters couldn’t hear you say that!”

So affection was too strong a word for her. This was becoming more and more like a negotiation between ambassadors. “What should I call it then? The way you spoke to me? Friendship. Brotherhood.”

“I wouldn’t know about brotherhood. I just spoke to you . . . like a person.”

“Now who’s hesitating?”

She slapped at him playfully. He laughed. She slapped again, and this time caught him a glancing blow across the cheek. His hand, by reflex, lashed out and caught her wrist in a hard grip. At once the smile left her face and her body froze. Just a moment too late he let go of her arm. Her skin had been cool and warm, both at once, in his hand.

“Sorry,” he said. “Soldier’s training.”

“All right,” she said. “No hitting. I’ve learned that rule.”

“Anyway, you see what happens when I finish my sentences? I was right to leave it as a mystery.”

“What was it you couldn’t get your mind off?” she said.

“That’s easy. I was sitting there thinking through all the awful things that were bound to be happening in Egypt because I went into exile. How my mother—the Pharaoh, Hatshepsut—how she would be crippled, forced to take an obnoxious boy and give him the double crown. And the Israelites—it’s bound to go worse with them, now that I’ve proven myself to be disloyal to Egypt after having the best that Egypt can give a man.”

“What a heavy burden to bear,” she said.

“Heaviest because there’s nothing I can do.”

“Then it’s not your burden, is it?” she said.

“The opposite is true. The burden is heavier precisely because I can’t do anything about it.”

“The guilt is heavier,” she said. “But think about it, Moses. None of the bad things that you’ve mentioned are caused by your leaving. They were always there, waiting to happen. That boy you don’t like—”

“Tuthmose the third.”

“Did you conjure him into being? I thought I heard you telling Father that he had already been conspiring with the priests. Had already been anointed.”

“Well, yes.”

“And as for the Israelites, they were already slaves, weren’t they?”

“There’s slavery and then there’s slavery.”

“I’m sure that’s true,” she said, “but it still seems to me that you didn’t cause any of these bad things. It seems to me that you were preventing them as long as you were there, but one way or another, they were going to get rid of you someday anyway, and those same things would have happened, only maybe worse.”

He could only stare at her in astonishment. She was more like Hatshepsut or Miriam than he could have imagined, for her analysis, though based on only the most rudimentary understanding, was correct. He laughed.

“Oh, now I’ve made a fool of myself.”

“The opposite, the opposite,” he said. “You’ve made a fool out of me.” He shook his head. “No, that’s not it either. You’ve made me wise, that’s what you’ve done.”

“Well, now that I’ve solved your stupidity problem, what’s next?”

“I wasn’t being stupid. I was being vain. Thinking that I caused things that have always been there. Pharaoh’s house has been plagued with politics since before I was born. The very idea of having a woman as Pharaoh is shocking enough—I’m the least of her problems. I helped her last as long as she has, and with the priests conniving against her she couldn’t last forever anyway. And when I was born they were killing Israelite babies.”

She looked shocked. “Oh! They won’t start that again now, will they?”

“I doubt it. The ones who hate Israelites didn’t much like what came of that the last time.”

“What came of it?”

He laughed wryly. “Me.”

“You were supposed to be killed?”

“My mother put me in a basket lined with pitch and set me afloat on the Nile. I could have been tipped out by a crocodile or taken in by some poor family and raised, or caught by the mob and drowned. Instead . . . Pharaoh’s daughter took me out of the water and named me ‘Son.’”

“What a magical story.”

“A true one, anyway.”

“So why are you sad?” she said. “Why do you spend your days mourning whenever we aren’t actually throwing lambs at you?”

“Is that what I do?” he asked.

“Everyone is trying to be nice to you because of all that you’ve lost.”

“How kind.” He didn’t know whether he liked having their pity.

“All but Keturah. She says that you’re being childish about it because you grew up having more than anybody has any right to expect, and when it ended you could have been killed in Egypt or died on the desert but you’re still alive so it’s like you have a second chance on life if you’d just stop sitting around feeling sorry for yourself.”

“She said such a long speech? Practically an oration.”

“Word for word.”

“And you memorized it.”

“She said it often enough, I couldn’t help it.” Suddenly she burst into laughter. “Look at you! Taking me so seriously!”

“I don’t know how else to take you.”

“Not seriously.”

“Why not? Aren’t you serious?”

Now it was her turn to look flustered. “I meant. . . . I mean, yes, I’m serious, but not grim. You’re supposed to . . . I don’t know . . . laugh and pretend you think I’m joking but then really hear what I said and think about it.”

“Ha ha,” he said, voice flat, as if he were reading badly, like a schoolboy. “What a tease you are.”

She laughed again. “There. That’s it. Now I don’t feel like I’ve offended you.”

“You’ve never offended me.”

“Then what were all those silences about?”

“I wasn’t offended.”

“Don’t lie,” she said.

“I wasn’t offended. I was . . . surprised.”

“Don’t fib, either.”

“Embarrassed.”

“Now we have at least the shadow of truth.”

“As if you knew what really happened in my heart.”

“I do know,” she said. “Your face is so easy to read.”

“Is it? A woman who thinks reading is easy?”

“It is easy. And reading faces is easier yet. Men’s faces, at least. Father’s and yours, anyway.”

“Then why do you need me to tell you why I fell silent?”

“Because I want to be the kind of friend you tell the truth to.”

He thought about that for a moment. Why should he be so afraid of this? “I was hurt,” he said. “I was . . . grieving.”

Suddenly the playfulness left her face. “I know,” she said.

“Not for Egypt,” he said. “That was earlier. When you spoke to me, I was grieving because. . . .”

“And again his voice is lost amid the bleating of the sheep.”

“Because I wished someone had spoken to me like that all my life.”

“I would have, but you never invited me over to your house.” She smiled.

He wanted to ask her, Did God take me out of Egypt so I could find you? Did he see what was missing in my life and force me to go to the one place where I could find it?

Instead, being foolish and timid, he didn’t say those things. Instead he teased her back. “Well, if your father has his way, we’ll have our whole lives together for you to make up for it.”

But it didn’t work as he had thought it would. There was no answering laugh, no playful slap. Instead her face froze and she turned away from him. “You may be sure that you’ll have no such burden added to those you already carry, sir.”

“What’s wrong?” he said. “What did I say?”

“Nothing, sir,” she answered.

“What’s this ‘sir’? Am I supposed to pretend he didn’t as much as offer you to me the first night I got here?”

She turned around to him with fire in her eyes. “Father can offer all he likes,” she said, “but he offered what wasn’t his to give.” And she stalked away from him.

Almost at once the other girls emerged as if from hiding. Not “as if”—they were hiding, of course, quite aware that some kind of scene was being played out, and now that Zeforah had clearly put an end to it, they had to know what it was he said or did to make her walk off in such a sulk. She was rejecting their inquiries, of course, but he could only imagine what report might make its way to Jethro.

One thing he had learned: It wasn’t just former sons of Pharaoh who didn’t like to have their pride nicked.

* * * 

On the surface it was a celebration—Tuthmose’s investiture as Pharaoh. To the people it made no difference that because the new Pharaoh was so young, Hatshepsut would continue to guide the kingdom in his name. What mattered was the spectacle, the majesty of gods made flesh among men. What did they know of this boy? The man they knew, Moses, turned out to be an Israelite after all, treacherous, slaveborn; Tuthmose III was of the house of Pharaoh by blood, and now the kingdom was in order again. So the people gladly cheered the processions on land and down the river. Gladly they joined in the prayers and rituals, and gladly they received the extra portions of grain distributed for the grand occasion.

As for Tuthmose himself, the spectacle meant little. He did his part, making sure the people got their view of majesty. Those in the know were aware that he had very little power, was virtually a prisoner in that he could only go where Hatshepsut gave him permission to go, could only see those she wanted him to see. Only he, Hatshepsut, and—if he still lived—Moses knew that Tuthmose had a bit more going for him than appearances would suggest. He had clout enough even now to insist that his mother be allowed the freedom to come and go from him as she liked, and he insisted as well that the priests Jannes and Jambres be permitted to minister to his spiritual needs. To these requests Hatshepsut acceded, but only after Tuthmose made it a life-or-death ultimatum: Let him have free access to these three, or the only way he’d go through the public investiture was as a corpse. No matter that he had to fight to win even these pathetic concessions. What mattered was that Hatshepsut didn’t want him to have his way, and she had given in.

What a weak and womanly thing to do! If she had any brains at all, she would have had Tuthmose killed the moment Moses fled into exile, and claim that Moses murdered him. Then she would have had no rival to share the throne with her, and Moses’ exile would have done her some good. Instead, she nattered on about how one must act for the good of Pharaoh’s house, and since, loathsome as he was, he was the only credible heir, she had to leave him alive. Why? An heir became important only when the king died. Why should the king, being dead, care who came after him, unless it were his own child? She had none; therefore her line ended with her. Yet she still acted as if she had some obligation.

Well, she had one duty, and one alone: To die, not today, but when Tuthmose was old enough to take the reigns of power without the risk of civil war. If she happened to die naturally, that would do; but die she would, and it would be called natural, for what was nature but the will of the gods? And Pharaoh was one of them.

Pharaoh. That is who I am, thought Tuthmose. Pharaoh after my father. He might have been weak enough to let a woman rule above him; so am I, now, while I’m still a child. But he was content to live in shameful submission throughout his adult life. Not that he held it against Hatshepsut for humiliating his father. If Hatshepsut was the stronger, the more ruthless, the more innately gifted by the gods, then she should rule; if Tuthmose II could be dominated, then he was no Pharaoh.

But I am not my father, he thought as the double crown was lowered onto his head by the hands of the woman he would someday bury. I will seem to be just like him, weak and compliant, until Hatshepsut dies or my position is strong enough with the army and the priests to make my move.

His only sorrow was the Moses was not here to see his triumph. Moses, the very model of a man, the perfect son, the perfect teacher, the perfect heir. It was against Moses that Tuthmose always measured himself—his strength, his beauty, his magnanimity, his leadership in battle, his cleverness in tactics, his smoothness in judgment. From earliest childhood Tuthmose had known that he must learn to be everything that Moses was, with one exception: He would not have that fatal sentimentality that made him hold back from the brutality of power. He would not have let the treacherous princess of Saba live! Her disloyalty would have been punished by bringing her dead body home, hanging from the prow of his river barge. Nor would he have restrained himself from killing a young rival who dared to let a priest anoint him as Pharaoh. Oh, it would have been such a pleasure to have Moses there on the day of Hatshepsut’s death, so that he could see how well his student learned from him. He had pictured it so often: Moses on his knees, too proud to beg or weep or even tremble in fear, looking into the eyes of his master Tuthmose III as the man behind him twisted the cord around his neck and strangled the life out of him. Now Tuthmose would have to forego the sweetest fruit of triumph—proving to Moses on his very body which of them was the stronger man.

Down the river in glory rode Tuthmose III, still a child in the eyes of the people cheering on both banks of the Nile, clearly under the power of Hatshepsut. But he knew their eyes saw something else as well: That she was a woman and should never have shamed the crown by wearing it; that he was young and would outlive her. How soon that day would come, they couldn’t guess.

Only a few weeks ago, Moses came down this same river. The cheers he heard were full of genuine love and admiration. Someday, so would the cheers for Tuthmose. But one aspect of Moses’ triumph would remain unmatched: There would never be Israelites lining the banks of the river to cheer for Tuthmose III. On the contrary, the Israelites were too useful for any Pharaoh to waste them by letting them have such freedom. They were the enemy that the people could hate, so they would not resist the Pharaoh’s tax collectors; they were the slaves that the people could despise, so they would not resent their own poverty. Any kingdom that did not have Israelites would have to invent them, they were so useful. Hatshepsut had been wasting them, but that, too, would change.

For now, though, Tuthmose was merely another boy, dependent like every child on whatever he could persuade adults to let him have or do. He might be dressed up in the regalia of Pharaoh and have thousands cheer, but the heat of the sun-god, Amon, still beat down on him as on anyone, and he still had to paint his eyes to prevent damage from the unrelenting brightness of his light. Pharaoh might be a god by title; it would take a little while before the title became the truth.

* * * 

Moses could never get used to the custom of women and men eating separately. Not that Jethro wasn’t charming company, for he was a man of great wisdom, who knew lore of all the desert tribes and wasn’t wholly ignorant of Egypt, which he had visited several times in his youth. But night after night without the company of women, without the relaxed conversation of the table. Here there wasn’t even the table, and the women ate out by the fire, as they cooked. Though he knew it was bad manners to question the local customs, tonight Moses was especially frustrated by his inability to converse with Zeforah, who still seemed to be avoiding him because of that one foolish joke this afternoon.

“Why do . . . people of the . . . desert . . . dine separately?” asked Moses.

Jethro raised an eyebrow. “Why do the people of Egypt shame themselves by eating together? Don’t hold up the customs of Egypt to me as a model, Moses. People there think nothing of traipsing about with no clothes on.”

“Only the lower . . . classes, and then only in the . . . fields.”

“Come now, I’ve seen rich women in gowns of linen so diaphanous that you saw their nakedness as clearly as if they stood in a hot bath surrounded by a bit of steam.”

“Nakedness isn’t an offense to the Egyptians. It’s one of the ways the Israelites . . . make themselves annoying, wearing heavy . . . clothing even during the . . . sweatiest labor.” Moses paused to take another bite. “But this . . . criticism of Egypt seems like a poor . . . substitute for an answer to my . . . question.”

“You asked a question?”

“Why don’t women and . . . men dine together?”

Jethro shrugged. “I did answer. It’s a custom. We grow up this way, so eating together seems about as immodest as if we bathed together.”

“Now that you mention it . . .”

“No, please, no more accounts of how easy and natural the Egyptians are.”

“So if it’s just a . . . custom, Jethro, why couldn’t you change it?”

“And bathe naked with women? My own daughters? Do you want God to strike me dead?”

“Who said anything about . . . bathing? I was talking about eating together.”

“Moses, there’d be no conversation from them because they’d spend the whole time giggling and whispering and being shy and embarrassed or even outraged and offended that you made them do something so crude and ill-mannered. Just because it’s a mere custom doesn’t mean that it has no power. Once you grow up with a custom it’s very hard to change. Even the most reasonable changes can be very disruptive.”

Moses knew that Jethro was right. “I know,” said Moses. “I’m a . . . stranger in a strange land here, and it’s wrong of me even to wish for the . . . customs here to adapt to me. I’m the one who must adapt.”

“Oh, but we are adapting to you.”

“I hope I’m not too much of an inconvenience.”

“Not at all. Your manners are so refined that even my most ill-mannered children are on their best behavior around you.”

“Refined!”

“The way you persist in cleaning yourself all the time. Don’t think I haven’t heard of how you use the trough water to wash your face and hands.”

“The sheep don’t mind . . . drinking it, so it’s not as if it goes to waste,” said Moses.

“But now you’ve got my daughters doing it. How did Hamar say it? ‘Moses is prettier than we are.’ How’s that!”

“Untrue.”

“So what did you and Zeforah quarrel about?”

Moses was so surprised he had to laugh. “Quarrel!”

“You’ve been avoiding each other. You can’t take your eyes off her, but she won’t even look at you. A reversal of the normal situation, I might add.”

“I offended her. Not . . . meaning to.”

“Nothing to do with offensive Egyptian customs, I hope.”

“I thought we were . . . brother and sister. So I tried to . . . tease her as a brother might.”

“Brother and sister! What a silly thought! Not a one of them wants you for a brother, though I dare say at least six of them will have to.”

“That’s part of what . . . bothered her,” said Moses. “Your assumption that I’ll . . . marry one of your daughters.”

“Why not? Somebody’s got to.”

“Zeforah says she’ll make up her own mind.”

“Well, that’s the truth,” said Jethro. “Ever since she was a baby, she obeys only because she understands and agrees with the rule. A swat on the behind meant nothing to her. Shaming her, lecturing her, nothing worked. Only persuasion. Like an adult. The time-wasting tedium of it! The man who has an intelligent child is doomed to spend his life justifying every decision he makes.”

“I can see that you’re . . . proud of her.”

“I didn’t set out to teach my girls to read, you know. What would be the point? There probably won’t be any scrolls in their husbands’ houses. But . . . Zeforah saw me reading, day after day, and there was nothing for it till I taught her how to read.”

“She really can? How recently did she learn?”

“Before she was six. Amazing, isn’t it?”

“Six! Six-year-olds are still . . . trying to make up stories from the . . . pictures instead of reading the hieroglyphs as syllables.”

“Different language, different writing,” said Jethro.

“You don’t write as the Egyptians do?”

“I don’t have a lifetime to waste making all those pretty pictures,” said Jethro. “I tried to learn hieroglyphics when I was in Egypt, but my sheep would grow old and die waiting for me to memorize all those characters.”

“How do you write, then?”

“Letters.”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

“You just ignore the vowels. Instead of writing different characters for ta, te, ti, to, you just write the ‘tuh’ sound.”

“But there are plenty of words that would be written exactly alike.”

“True, but it’s always easy to tell, in the context, which word was intended.”

“So you have fewer . . . glyphs to memorize.”

“Letters. And they’re simpler to draw. Not pictures at all. Maybe they once were, but I can’t begin to guess what the original picture was.”

“You have to show me.”

Jethro beamed. “I thought you’d never ask. Have you eaten all you want? I won’t have food around my scrolls. I spend my lifetime copying them, then somebody spills wine and there I am, having to start over.”

“I’m through eating and . . . drinking,” said Moses. “I haven’t read anything the whole . . . time I’ve been here.”

“You won’t read this right away, either.”

“Oh, of course not, I know. . . .”

Within moments the food was cleared away and Jethro had the scrolls stacked up on the carpet in front of Moses. “These are my copies, not the originals. Those are old and precious. Someday they’ll fade completely or rot or something, I know that, but in the meantime, they may very well be the very originals that Abraham wrote with his own hand.”

“Abraham! Knew this alphabet?”

“I asked my father if it was Abraham or Lot who made up these letters, and he just laughed and said that the prophets were writing down records of what God said to human beings, right from the beginning of time.”

“Who made up the letters, then?”

“Either God or Adam.”

From the tent door came another voice. “Or Eve.” It was Zeforah. Moses was relieved to see her. While she was talking mostly to Jethro, she included Moses in the conversation. The avoidance was over. It hadn’t really lasted all that long. Either he was forgiven now, or she didn’t want to give Jethro an excuse to say something about how it was good for a man to quarrel with the woman he plans to marry, so he can see if he can bear to live with her sharp tongue.

“Come in,” said Jethro. “I want Moses to see how well you read.”

“I don’t want to be the reader,” she said.

“Nonsense,” said Jethro. “If you didn’t want to read you wouldn’t have come in. Here, the book of Enoch.”

“Who’s Enoch?” asked Moses.

“From before the flood. You know about the flood?”

“There’s one every year.”

“A flood that swept away the corruption of the children of men.”

“The Nile does its share of . . . sweeping.”

“It wasn’t the Nile,” said Jethro. “You really are ignorant, aren’t you?”

“All I know of Israelite . . . teachings was what my . . . birth mother taught me. A few stories. The idea of one God over all.”

“Not one God over all the other gods. One God that really exists, while all the other gods are merely imagined beings that never lived.”

“Yes, well, my . . . brother and sister tried to explain all this to me, but I can’t help but think that it’s a . . . foolish idea. All the . . . prayers going to the same god! And there are a lot of Israelites . . . praying to him—not to mention Midianites like you, and those others. The Edomites, right?”

Jethro smiled. “Zeforah knows the answer to that prayer question.”

Zeforah rolled her eyes. “I was a child then. Do you still hold it against me?”

“Not against you!” Jethro insisted. “For you!”

“God’s capacity to love his children and hear their prayers is infinite,” said Zeforah. “He listens to us much better than most of us listen to him!”

“I take it you asked the same . . . question when you were little,” said Moses.

“I knew that the village children talked of many gods,” said Zeforah, “but at home we talked of only one—a god so sacred no one can even speak his name. So yes, I had to know why we had only one God, invisible, nameless. I thought we were being cheated.” Zeforah smiled ruefully. “If it had been a mortal sin, Father would never dream of bringing it up. But because he thought I was cute, asking all those questions in my lisping child-voice, he doesn’t hide my shame.”

Jethro scoffed openly. “You weren’t that cute as a baby, I’ll have you know!”

“I was as darling as they come,” said Zeforah, “or you’d never have been able to persuade Mother to have the other six after me.”

“We were just trying to get it right,” said Jethro. “We kept coming closer and closer, and finally—Keturah.”

Moses noticed that neither one said what had to be the truth—that Jethro and his wife were hoping for a son. Not that they didn’t know it. They had spoken of it openly before. But in this game, the teasing didn’t strike at the hard truth, that might have hurt Zeforah’s feelings or shamed Jethro. That’s what I did wrong, Moses realized. The teasing has to take place within safe boundaries. I crossed those bounds.

“The scrolls,” said Zeforah pointedly.

Jethro grinned like a foolish boy and carefully unrolled the book of Enoch.

The letters were strange. Small and meaningless. “This isn’t even writing,” said Moses. “It’s as if you . . . dipped a bird’s feet in ink and made it run in rows.”

Jethro looked at him in consternation. “Just because you can’t read it, it isn’t writing?”

“No, I . . . didn’t mean it that way,” said Moses. “It just surprised me that it wasn’t . . . pictures. How can you remember them?”

“Because there are fewer letters to remember,” said Jethro. “So the shape comes to mean the sound. You look at it and immediately your mind forms the letter.”

“Is it written in Hebrew?” asked Moses.

“What use would it be to me if it were not?” asked Jethro.

“I just never thought of Hebrew as a language that . . . could be written.”

Jethro shook his head. “Before the Egyptians had stopped running from the crocodiles long enough to scratch pictures on boulders, the servants of God were writing books.”

Moses couldn’t hide his skepticism.

“He doesn’t believe you,” said Zeforah.

“No, he just doesn’t think that anything is older than Egypt,” said Jethro. “Egyptians believe that at the core of their being. But God is older than Egypt, and it wasn’t in Egypt that he first spoke to men.”

“Where was it?” said Moses.

“God spoke to the first man and the first woman when they were first sent out into the lone and dreary world,” said Jethro. “And he commanded them to keep a book of remembrance, so their children could learn the words of God, and their children’s children, forever. Writing is as old as the human race.”

“Then why are there so many . . . people who have no writing?”

“Adam was a godly man, but the evil one, the enemy fallen from heaven, the one we call Satan, tempted his children and grandchildren, and many of them rebelled. When they rejected Adam, they rejected his book. They refused to learn to read it. But they always remembered the idea of writing. They knew it was something holy men did. They just didn’t know any more which men who claimed to be holy really talked to God. So their false holy men, who didn’t really know anything about the true and living God, came up with silly picture writing just as they came up with silly religions.” Jethro grinned. “You should see the way they write in Chaldea and Assyria. Pressing squared-off sticks in clay. A whole book would be a brick wall! You could build a house out of a scroll!”

It was Moses’ turn to laugh. “So now who is it who’s making fun of other people just because they do things differently?”

“Ah, but you were making fun of something that was better. You have to admit that there is no standard of judgment by which those shards of clay are better than writing with ink on scrolls.”

Moses took the challenge. “A man of Akkad would . . . doubtless tell you that as long as he keeps his writings dry, they’ll last forever and don’t have to be . . . copied out by hand every . . . generation.”

“True,” said Jethro ruefully. “But then, no one reads a book as carefully as the man who’s writing it out by hand.”

“I’ve done my share of . . . copying, as a schoolboy,” said Moses. “You just write it down, glyph by glyph.”

“That’s because Egyptian writing is done with little pictures. So you’re thinking, draw a bird, draw an arrow, without regard for the sense. But with Hebrew, you make the sounds in your mind because the letter doesn’t look like anything but the sound.”

But Moses had already thought beyond this playful contest. “Jethro, are you telling me that what you have here on this scroll is an exact copy of the book of remembrance written by the first man?”

Jethro hesitated. “No, not at all. I’d give my life for one look at that book.”

“But it was written in Hebrew? Hebrew is the oldest language?”

Again, Jethro hesitated. “I doubt it,” he said. “Who knows what language Adam spoke? No, if that book is still on the earth, and if that language is still spoken, I don’t know who reads the book, I don’t know who speaks that tongue.”

“And yet you know it once existed?”

“I do know it,” said Jethro. “Because I know that God still lives.”

“And how do you know that?” said Moses. “Every . . . priest can point to things that happen in the world around him and say, ‘God did that.’ And what is his . . . proof? Why, the thing happened, didn’t it? Therefore . . . God did it. Therefore . . . God lives!”

“By that judgment,” said Jethro, “there are no gods at all.”

“No,” said Moses. “I say only that men have no way of knowing what was done by the . . . gods, or what they meant by it. Does a hawk fall from the sky before a . . . battle? Then the . . . priest will say, Look, Horus shows you how you will fall upon your enemies! Then you lose the . . . battle, and the . . . priest goes home and says, ‘Horus warned us that we would fail, for didn’t we see a hawk leave the sky rather than look upon our defeat?’“

“An interesting observation,” said Jethro. “If you ever get tired of shepherding, you would no doubt make some chieftain or king a fine omen-reader. As long as you learn to get away before your prediction comes out wrong.”

“Oh, even that’s easy. You learn to say, ‘Look, a hawk! Horus is watching us!’ And the . . . king says, ‘Is that a . . . good omen?’ And the . . . priest says, ‘If you have been faithful to Horus in your offerings, and have not offended him, then it is . . . good.’”

Zeforah laughed. “Are kings such fools, then, to believe in priests who say such nonsense?”

“Why not?” said Moses. “The . . . king is brought up to believe in it from childhood on. Besides, it throws the . . . burden back on him. He has to search his heart and . . . decide if he’s been pure in his devotion to the . . . god.”

“So if he wins, he was faithful, and if he loses, he was unrighteous?” said Zeforah. “So every battle becomes a judgment of the king.”

“That’s what it means to be a king,” said Moses. “With or without the . . . priest, everything is a test of the . . . king’s worthiness. Good harvest? Good king. Bad harvest? Wicked king.”

“Now, now, Moses, don’t fib,” said Jethro. “Bad harvest, wicked people.”

Moses looked at him sharply, then smiled in defeat. “You’re right, of course. Kings are as good as . . . priests at the game of . . . putting blame on others.”

“The true God,” said Jethro, “holds men responsible for what they choose. Not for the outcome, but for the intent.”

“That’s the mercy of God,” said Zeforah. “For men are weak, and fail, but God judges us by our will to obey.”

“So then if a man does . . . good, but his intention was to . . . deceive his enemy. . . .”

“Then God counts the goodness as a sin, because it was a lie.”

“But how does a man tell the difference?” asked Moses.

“A man doesn’t,” said Jethro. “God judges.”

“Men have to judge, too,” said Moses. “I sat in judgment . . . day after day. Especially in . . . command of an army. Two men have a . . . dispute, they lay it before me. I have to . . . decide.”

“But your judgment is imperfect. Sometimes you’re wrong. God is never wrong.”

“Then it would be . . . kind of him to . . . give us hints.”

“That’s what was written in the book of remembrance!” cried Jethro. “God’s teachings! God’s hints.”

Moses shook his head. “But that book is lost.”

“Lost to us,” said Jethro. “Not to God! He remembers. Every word we write down is written in the mind of God. If all my scrolls were burnt today, if every copy of these books were lost, God could put the words into the mind of a prophet whenever he chose, and have the book written down again.”

“So why write it at all?”

“Because not all men are prophets,” said Jethro, “but all men need to hear the word of God.”

“Are you a . . . prophet?” asked Moses.

The silence in the tent was painful. Tears came to Jethro’s eyes, and slipped down his cheeks. Moses was appalled that his simple question should bring such ready emotion. He was about to apologize, when Zeforah intervened.

“Moses,” she said, “my father is not grieving. He weeps for the love of God in him, for he’s about to tell you something sacred.”

Jethro smiled and touched his daughter’s hand, drew her down to kneel beside him. “I’m not a prophet, my boy,” said Jethro, “because God doesn’t need a prophet for these people—a priest is enough. But from time to time, I have felt the presence of God in my heart. I’m reading, and a passage from the scripture lights up in my mind as if I heard a voice speaking it. Prophets hear the voice of God, full and loud. But a man like me—I hear the whisper of God. He is alive, not made up by priests or kings to serve their purposes, but alive and guiding his children.”

“Who are his children?” asked Moses.

“Whoever will follow him,” said Jethro. “Abraham was promised that his descendants would be the children of God. We men of Midian take that to include us, for our ancestor, Lot, was Abraham’s adopted son and heir during all the long years before Abraham finally had sons of his body.”

“The adopted son was then . . . cast aside?” asked Moses. The question was pathetic, he knew that, since the central fact of his life was his own adoption by Pharaoh’s daughter. But he could say it in front of this man and this woman, because . . . why? Because there was no shame in showing weakness in front of them.

“The adopted son was wealthy in his own right,” said Jethro. “But Abraham assured Lot that his children, too, could partake of the promise if we lived in obedience to God.”

“Are the Israelites the . . . children of God as well?”

Jethro nodded. “If they’ll obey God, then yes, they are.”

“Yet the children of . . . God are slaves in Egypt.”

“The children of God are in school,” said Jethro.

“I grieve for how they must be suffering, now that I’ve . . . brought shame on them.”

“I thought they weren’t really your people,” said Jethro. “I thought you were Egyptian.”

“I didn’t choose to be one of them,” said Moses.

“You did when you killed an Egyptian rather than let him kill an Israelite.”

“I saved a helpless old man from a . . . cruel lout of a . . . taskmaster. I acted as Pharaoh’s . . . son, not as an Israelite.”

Jethro shook his head. “Deceive yourself if you want, but you don’t deceive me.”

“I spoke from my heart.”

“You acted as a son of God,” said Jethro. “Pharaoh’s sons have done all kinds of abominations over the generations. The man who is being made Pharaoh even now, you said he was involved in poisoning his own father.”

“He wasn’t . . . taught to act that way by Pharaoh,” said Moses.

“Wasn’t he?” said Jethro. “Didn’t you tell me that his father became Pharaoh because his mother poisoned the true sons of Pharaoh, the sons of his queen? Sounds to me as if that’s the way the sons of Pharaoh act, killing for their own advantage, or at least taking advantage of killings done for their sake. While you acted very differently, killing a man for the sake of justice and mercy rather than advantage and ambition.”

“Those men and their mothers were . . . corrupt,” said Moses, “but the ideal of Pharaoh’s house is pure.”

“The ideal of Pharaoh’s house is but a pale shadow of what it means to be in the house of God,” said Jethro.

Moses looked at the tent walls around him. “Is this the house of God? Does he dwell in a tent?”

“If the children of God dwell in tents, then God would not be ashamed to dwell in one,” said Jethro. “I know his spirit has been here.” Again tears flowed down his cheeks. “Oh, Moses, let it be true that God thinks of this as his house.”

Moses did not look away, for Jethro did not seem ashamed to weep. Nor was he proud of it. He didn’t even seem to notice that he was weeping. Rather the man was filled with joy, and his body could not contain it.

“Do the words in these scrolls teach a man to be as good and happy as you are?” asked Moses.

“Yes,” said Zeforah. “They do.”

“Teach me to read them,” said Moses. “I would like to be happy. I would like to be such a man as you.”

Jethro took his hands, drew him into an embrace. “As I said when you first came here, Moses—God has given me a son.”

“People keep saying that when they meet me,” said Moses. “They aren’t always glad of it later.”

* * * 

Young Joshua couldn’t understand why the family was leaving their home near Karnak. “How can we move when you aren’t done with the writing?” he asked his father.

Nun tried to explain. “They don’t need me to write on the stone anymore.”

“But you’re the best.”

“I’m the best, but I’m an Israelite, and all the Israelites have to move to Lower Egypt and make bricks.”

“But anybody can make bricks,” said Joshua. “Only a few people can write.”

“Pharaoh has decided that Israelites are brickmakers now.”

“Are you sad, Papa?”

“Not really,” said Nun. “If I stayed, they’d make me write lies. I’d rather make true bricks than write false words.”

When Joshua remembered the move later, he could barely picture their old house or the village by the Nile or the great buildings. What he remembered was his father’s face, and the words: I’d rather make true bricks than write false words.

* * * 

Zeforah watched Moses with fascination, and not just because she knew that Father intended her to marry him. Moses was interesting for his own sake. The body and bearing of a captain of thousands, but the stammer and eagerness of a child. He showed no shame at ignorance, no resentment that Zeforah could read the scrolls easily while he still made them out word by word, guessing often at what vowels should be understood among the letters, struggling to learn nuances of words, or words that weren’t in Hebrew any more at all, so their meaning was lost. He was willing to learn from her, a woman—though the one time she asked about this, he looked at her as if she were insane for asking.

“Why shouldn’t I?” he said. “My . . . mother was a woman. I understand that everyone’s . . . mother is.”

“You speak as if it’s natural for a man to learn from his mother,” said Zeforah. “You need to look at some of the village boys. They don’t think there’s anything they need to learn from women.”

“Then the . . . shame is theirs. And their . . . fathers’.”

“You have to admit that your mother wasn’t typical, either. She taught you skills most women don’t have.”

“Not that these are useful skills to me now,” he said, laughing. “Unless you think the villagers would like to have a . . . king. A sort of . . . toy Pharaoh. I could make them . . . take turns at being ambassadors to the next village to negotiate . . . treaties.” Though he was mocking himself, she could see a glimpse of the life he had expected to lead, and realized that he was probably very good at it, that Egypt could have done much worse than to be governed by this man.

And yet God had brought him here. To Zeforah, this seemed to be proof that God had not struck Moses down from a high place, but had rather turned him away from a wrong road. So God was not punishing him for his sins, but rather giving him another school to learn in. And this was the school! Here in the shadows of the craggy mountains, in the upland meadows where sheep were more plentiful than men, and snakes more plentiful than sheep. A man great in the eyes of the world, but now he must become great in the eyes of God. And it was to my father that God brought him!

She tried saying these things to Sarah, but Sarah only looked at her as if she had lost her mind. “You cannot possibly know or even guess what God is doing,” said Sarah. “You don’t even know what Father is doing from day to day.”

“He’s teaching this man the holy books,” said Zeforah.

“It would be more helpful if somebody would teach him a little more about sheep.”

“He won’t be a shepherd all his life, Sarah.”

“No, not at this rate. You can’t be a shepherd when all the sheep are dead!”

“He hasn’t killed a single one.”

“Because we’re always watching him. He’s more trouble than twenty sheep.”

“No!” cried Zeforah. “He’s being prepared for greatness. I think he might even . . .”

But she couldn’t say it. Not to Sarah, not to this practical, sharp-tongued girl who would laugh at the thought and throw it back at her endlessly.

“He might even what?” Sarah asked.

“I don’t know what I was going to say.”

“Liar,” said Sarah, and the accusation could not be denied. “You’re just not going to tell me.”

“That’s right,” said Zeforah.

“He might even . . . be your husband!” said Sarah.

“That’s not what I was going to say.”

“He might even . . . get bitten by a snake one of these days if he keeps walking around muttering to himself like a madman.”

“I was definitely not going to say that, though he really should be more watchful—”

“He might even be crazier than Father,” said Sarah.

This was beyond joking. “That’s not funny,” said Zeforah.

“It’s what they say in the village.”

“They wouldn’t know wisdom or holiness if it was announced by fifty angels.”

“Oh, fifty? I think they’d know it with fifty.” Sarah laughed. “Oh, Zeforah, why must you be so solemn all the time?”

“I laugh as much as anyone.”

“You laugh sometimes, yes, but not as much as anyone, and it doesn’t last long, and there’s always something solemn inside you watching everybody laugh and not taking part in it, not really.”

The accusation stung, though perhaps it wasn’t an accusation at all, but rather a mere observation. Sarah couldn’t help it that everything she said sounded just a little snide.

“I was just trying to tell you what I was thinking about,” said Zeforah.

“And I was telling you what I thought of what you think,” said Sarah.

And that was that. Zeforah told no one her speculation. But she knew Father had to be thinking it, too. Some of the more obscure passages in a scroll that had no name because the first few columns were missing—how many, no one could guess. Father got it from his great uncle along with some books in much better condition, and when Zeforah asked why it was so much older and in so much worse condition than the other scrolls, Father showed her how difficult the language was. “I don’t know a lot of these words,” he said. “And the letters have changed form. I don’t even know what this one is. Do I sound it? Or not? This word might be the word for angel, but it might not.”

“What language is it?” Zeforah asked.

“Hebrew, I think, or I couldn’t read it at all,” said Father. “But not Hebrew the way we speak it now. A very old Hebrew, or a version of the language as it’s spoken and written in a faraway country. Or both. So I’m never sure if I’ve read it right. But look, there are sections that tell some of the same stories in the book of Abraham. And some things that might be from the prophecies of Enoch. And see where it ends—when Noah comes out of the ark. Yet it isn’t a history at all. It’s more like a series of songs. But the songs have stories hidden in them. But are the stories of the future or the past? The language is so different that I can’t be sure if words that seem the same have the same meaning at all. So I don’t think it’s worth your while wasting time trying to read this one.”

Father might as well have smeared it with honey in order to keep flies away—it was the only book Zeforah could read for weeks. Father was right, of course, it was unreadable, or at least it was impossible to be sure whether she had read it aright. But there were tantalizing glimpses in it, hints of great knowledge that had been lost.

“Whatever was in there is lost, all right,” said Father. “But whether it was great knowledge is hard to say. The previous possessors didn’t value it enough to preserve it or copy it.”

“But only because they couldn’t read it easily,” said Zeforah.

“Whoever made this copy understood it.”

“How do you know that? Maybe they copied it letter by letter, and never understood it at all.”

“And you’ll succeed where they failed?” asked Father.

Stubbornly she continued to read it and it was plain to her that Father was rather proud of her for trying. He enjoyed discussing it with her, too, and that’s how they emerged with the idea that whoever the writer of the scroll might be—and she speculated that it might have been Noah himself, though Father told her not to guess because it might just as easily have been some lonely shepherd with poor spelling and a penchant for writing down his incoherent dreams—whoever the author might be, he had clearly believed that there was a figure of prophecy who would come someday, and he would be known as the Son, and the power of God would be in him, and he would deliver the people of God from their most awful enemy. The writer even said that the Son stood between men and God, protecting men from God’s wrath, and trying to teach men to be worthy of God’s love. Only if he carries them will the words of our prayers be heard in heaven, the writer wrote. So we must pray to God in the name of the Son, as if it were the Son speaking for us . . . or so Zeforah thought the scripture said.

Father told her she was wrong to reach conclusions when the book was so unclear. But ever since then, she had surreptitiously murmured the words “in the name of the Son” or “let the Son carry these words” before she uttered her closing amen. If the others noticed her extra mumbling they never spoke of it. She was sure Father must know what she was doing. If he thought she was definitely wrong, he would stop her. So she took that as a sign that he did not think her understanding of the nameless book was completely wrong.

Moses had only been here a few days before it occurred to her for the first time that perhaps the fulfilment of that prophecy was happening before her eyes. Didn’t his name, in Egyptian, mean “son”? And it wasn’t just a part of his name, the way “mose” was a part of the name of Tuthmose. It was his whole name. And more than that: God had been guiding his life from the beginning, had seen to it that he was born of Abraham’s lineage, and yet was given great power in the most ancient of kingdoms, and had learned all its learning. When he had received all that Egypt had to offer him, Moses was removed from his lofty place in a matter of hours. And where did God send him? To a desert where there just happened to be the perfect man to teach Moses about God. That was why Moses had been given the chance to learn Hebrew as well as Egyptian, so that he could speak to Father and, when he came to the holy books, he could learn to read them relatively quickly.

Everything pointed to the idea that God had a great purpose for this man. And Zeforah could guess what that purpose might be. Wouldn’t the prophecy be fulfilled if Moses went back to Egypt at the head of a mighty army and delivered the children of Israel from slavery? The Israelites were groaning and praying in their bondage, but only when Moses—Son—carried their words to God would they at last be heard and a deliverer sent to them. Oh, it was so plain to her, so plain. Moses was the fulfilment of prophecy!

But she dared not say this; even her halting, hinting comments to Sarah had come to nothing. Father rebuffed her the moment she started trying to ask him about it—she had only to mention the nameless book and he jumped all over her. “Don’t try to distract Moses with that book now! He’s like a baby, just learning the simplest ideas, still struggling with his letters! Why give him a puzzle that even great scholars like you and me can’t figure out?”

Great scholars indeed! Father didn’t realize how it stung her when he teased that way. He thought he was including himself in the joke, but of course she knew that he really was a great scholar, while she . . . if she went to any gathering of wise and learned men, and tried to open her mouth and say, “When I was reading in the book of Abraham,” they would scorn her as an imposter. Reading! What kind of fool does this maiden take us for? So Father’s little joke had too much sting to it.

He was right, though. Without even knowing what she was going to say, he was right. Moses had no need to know of these prophecies now, especially if he were the fulfilment of them. What he needed was to learn to pray and hear the answer of God in his heart. There would be time enough for him to learn about the prophecies after they had all been fulfilled. For the prophecies weren’t clear, and it would only confuse matters if Moses spent all his time trying to decode the nameless book instead of turning his heart to the Lord. She could not help thinking, though, that someday he would open the nameless book and recognize himself in the man of prophecy.

And this man is to be my husband.

No! She tried to strangle that thought before it even entered her mind. It would only set her up for disappointment, to think that way. Moses’ wife would be a queen, if not of Egypt, then of some great kingdom. The best she could hope for was to be treated as a friend. But a wife? She could honor him and help him, and serve God by doing both. But she had better not let herself love him, for it was Moses that God had great plans for, not Zeforah, not the eldest of the seven girls of a shepherd priest. Moses would leave again to fulfil his prophetic destiny, and she was determined to remember him with fondness, not with regret and grief.

That is why Zeforah was fascinated with Moses. Not, as her sisters supposed, because she expected to marry him, but precisely because she did not, and therefore had to watch him and memorize everything he did and said so that she could treasure the memory when he was gone. She would bring out the nameless book and read it again and say, Yes, now I understand this part, and Yes, that obscure word is now clear, for I have seen him do these things, the Son who was foretold. His hand touched mine as we covered the well on the day we met. . . .

So she knew the first time he tried to pray. It was a warm afternoon, the deceptive kind of day when you think you don’t need to come inside because it will be hot all night; but Zeforah knew, as Moses could not, that in late autumn the night would turn cold very quickly, bitterly cold, dangerously cold. She saw how he helped them finish the chores but then slipped away when they were walking home, and withdrew himself into the rocks.

Of course there were a thousand reasons why a man might part with the company of women and hide himself among the rocks of the mountain, and there was not a one of them that Zeforah would not be wrong to interrupt. But what if he lingered too long, and it got cold, and he took sick? She had to stay and wait for him, so that if he delayed too long she could warn him, call out to him to come home now before the night’s chill came. And she could help him find his way home in the dark, for there wouldn’t be much moonlight tonight.

Keturah noticed she was hanging back. “Tell the others to go on without me,” said Zeforah. “I’m waiting for Moses. But don’t tell them that, they’ll only make crude jokes.”

“They’ll make them anyway,” said Keturah. “You keep promising to explain to me what they mean.”

“And I’ll keep that promise. When you’re older.”

“I’m not completely ignorant, you know. I know what sheep do.”

“Well, I can assure you that Moses and I will never do what sheep do. Now go!”

“Sheep eat. Aren’t you going to eat?”

“Go!” Zeforah said, pretending to be pretending to be annoyed. Keturah must have noticed the edge in her voice, for she stopped herself before her next jest could come out of her mouth, and then hurried away down the mountain.

With the girls gone, it became very quiet. Zeforah did not walk around looking for Moses, for she did not want to interrupt his solitude. Instead she sat very still, resting on a sun-warmed rock, lying back and looking at the stars. In that stillness, she could not help overhearing him, even though he spoke quietly. She wasn’t eavesdropping, or at least that wasn’t her intent. But she heard him.

“O G-g-g-g. . . .”

This was not his normal hesitation. Instead of a pause, the word he was trying to say seemed to be hung up in his mouth like cloth on a bramble bush.

“O G-g-g-g. . . . Hear the words of my. . . .”

It was the word God that he could not say. Why? Yes, he was slow and halting of speech, but it was as if speaking the common name of God would tear something inside him.

And well it might. To speak to God might very well require him to tear something deep and strong and well-beloved out of his heart. His love of Egyptian learning, or the arrogance he sometimes put on as a tool to overawe and command others. Or it might be some secret sins that she knew nothing about, perhaps even the killing that had toppled him from power. Or it might be the enemy, the evil one, Satan, tying up his tongue so he could not speak. She wanted to run to him, or even to speak out—in this still evening air she knew he would hear her if she spoke in the mildest of voices—she wanted to tell him that he did not have to speak the words aloud, that if Satan blocks the tongue, God can also hear the thoughts of the heart.

But she said nothing. After a while, Moses’ voice fell silent. A long while later, she heard his footsteps on the path down the canyon. There was still some pink-edged daylight left, so he had no need of her. He would never know she was there, that she had heard him, had violated his solitude at such a fragile time as his first uttered prayer to the Lord.

She lay on the rock and waited until his footsteps faded and she could hear him no longer. Then she opened her own mouth, and whispered her prayer. “O God,” she said. “O Father, open his mouth, ease his heart, give him peace.” And then she added, as she always did these days, “Let my prayer be borne to you in the name of the Son.”

At that moment she almost laughed aloud at her own absurdity. If Moses were the man of prophecy, then she was praying to God in his name to help the very man in whose name she prayed! No, it was too absurd. How could a mere man, like Moses, be at the same time the ambassador between men and God? She must have misunderstood the prophecy. Moses was simply an interesting man with an unusual past and a strange name. The nameless book was not speaking of him; indeed, she had almost certainly misunderstood it in the first place, and anyway, if the book had any value people would have taken better care of it, Moses is a waste of my time and . . .

And she knew where these thoughts were coming from.

“I want nothing to do with you, Satan,” Zeforah whispered fiercely. “I won’t listen to you.”

With that she slid down from her perch and walked home. It was nearly dark now, for night fell quickly in the desert, especially in the craggy shadows of the mountain, but she knew the way, as sure-footed as an old sheep. When she came home supper was already being served, and Hamar told her off for worrying them all, most of all Keturah, who nevertheless insisted that she had been waiting to talk to Moses about something. “But when Moses came home without you and didn’t even know where you were—”

“I was fine,” said Zeforah. “I didn’t stay to talk to Moses.”

Strictly speaking, it was true. She had stayed to listen, though that was not her original purpose. She had stayed to listen, and she had heard—the scriptures weren’t just an interesting project to him. He was taking them to heart. He wanted to pray. He wanted to feel the spirit of God in his heart.

And he had failed. That’s what kept her awake that night, praying again, praying herself to sleep. O God, have mercy on Moses. Even if he isn’t a man of prophecy, he’s a good man who has lost everything. Let him find thee, O Lord, and then he will have everything again, only this time what he’ll have is that which can never be lost, can never be torn from his grasp by those who hate or envy him. For the love of God cannot be interfered with. Let him feel thy love, O Lord.

Just as she drifted off to sleep, she heard the words as if someone spoke them softly into her ear. “He will be your husband,” the voice said. “He will love you, and he will lead a mighty nation in the service of God.”

She must have imagined it. It must have been the secret wish of her heart speaking. It must have. . . .

Why bother coming up with more excuses when she knew the truth: That God had answered her prayer, not with the thing she asked for, but rather the thing she wanted most in her heart. To know that he would be her husband. That he would love her. That he would lead a mighty nation—those were the questions that she really wanted to ask. And yet her prayer had not been a lie. She knew, though not because of words invisibly spoken in the darkness, that if she had not been praying for Moses, God would not have answered her unspoken wishes. It was just as Father said: God hears the words that we’re too proud or too ashamed to say.

Oddly enough, instead of flustering her, instead of making her even more shy in front of Moses, her new sureness of a future connection with this man made her more relaxed and confident in front of him. Her marriage, when it came, would come because God or Moses had decided on it, and either way she would be content. She wasn’t the sort of woman who could ever be a queen, but she would certainly do her best to give him children, and to train them up to be true sons and daughters of this kingly man that God had brought to her. That was all she could do, but if he loved her, then it would be enough.

* * * 

Hatshepsut stood in her chariot, wearing her regalia, striking the pose that her father had told her looked most mannish. She knew that it fooled no one, and outraged some; but she also knew that if she did not strike such poses, affirming her will to rule as a man, then resentment would turn to ambition, and someone, fancying her to be weak and womanly, would strike out to try to take her place.

There were no crowds around her this time, and Tuthmose was in the custody of the teachers she had hand-picked for him because they had the essential qualification: They loathed Tuthmose as a patricide and hated having to associate with him. There was no chance of him charming them, winning them to his side. But even without the crowds and without her dangerous rival, the poses were still necessary, for with Moses gone she was utterly alone. There was no one whose love and loyalty she could trust, for it was in the best interest of the disloyal to behave exactly as loyal men would. She knew that not all the people around her were hypocrites, but she had to act as if they were, for to trust any of them was to open herself up to betrayal. So the poses never ended, even here, surrounded by a few of her most intimate counselors. For all she knew, every single one of them was ready to leap to Tuthmose’s side the moment he called them to act. Every single one of them might have a knife he longed to plunge into her heart.

She stood in her chariot and inspected the carvings in the ravine. Scribes had stood on scaffolding to write the exploits of her reign on the smoothed stone walls, where there was hope that the wind would not scour the words away too soon. Then, in the past few weeks, they had ground away the old writing and replaced it with new, for the name of Moses had to be utterly expunged. Now there was no story of Hatshepsut pulling a child out of the Nile; now it was Hatshepsut herself who conquered the Ethiopians and took Saba by force of arms.

When I am dead, she thought, Tuthmose will do the same to me. I removed Moses’ name because he represents a dangerous mistake that threatens my authority; he will remove my name because he hates me. What will he write? That far from being Pharaoh, I was a usurper. No doubt he’ll declare that his father was the true Pharaoh and not a mere puppet that I controlled. He’ll say that I was his sister-wife, and only when he died with Tuthmose III still a child did I seize power. I’ll be painted as a traitor, when he was the traitor. I’ll be painted as the illegitimate ruler, while he is the son of a son of a concubine in whom the blood of the Pharaohs runs so thin as to be nonexistent. History will believe his lies, and claim that my true history is only propaganda.

Well, it’s what I deserve. As I expunged Moses’ name, so will my name be scoured off the stone.

She wanted to weep for him, could feel the tears welling up inside her. But she refused to let them show. She did not come this far to have it all erased. Whether it was the wind or Tuthmose’s artisans, this writing on the wall was in vain. It would disappear. The stone would become raw stone again. She would be forgotten. She would be denied. She would be vilified after her death, and her great achievement in maintaining Pharaoh’s house and Pharaoh’s kingdom, despite all the disadvantages of being a woman, would be turned into a crime instead of a credit. It galled her. It made her angry. She would shed no tears today.

There had to be a way to cheat them. To send her story forward into the future so they would have at least the chance to know some truth about her. Moses would be forgotten, of course, but that couldn’t be helped, he made that choice himself when he killed the Egyptian for an Israelite’s sake. Hatshepsut, however, would be remembered.

“Bury it,” she said.

The chief of the stonecutters looked at her in confusion. He must have heard her wrong, but it was not his place to question Pharaoh. Seeing his hesitation, she had mercy on him, and made her instruction clear. “Take all the rubble you have cleared away and fill the ravine. As high as you can fill it, covering these inscriptions.”

“But then no one can see them,” said the chief of the scribes, who, being more educated, apparently felt he could speak boldly to Pharaoh.

She looked at him coldly, to let him know that she did not need a fool like him to tell her something so obvious.

“We will fill it,” said the chief of the stonecutters. “We will fill it and cover everything.”

Someday, thought Hatshepsut, someone will be digging here and will discover these inscriptions. It will be long after Tuthmose III is dead, hundreds of years from now. My story will be there for all to read, to tell the truth about my reign.

Of course, it will be a man who discovers it, and men who read it, and so they will probably doubt my story, and believe his. But what they believe is their business. The truth will be told. I will not be slandered without giving my answer to the ages.

If only Moses could have the same power, to write down his story, to tell his life. Oh, my son, my son, why, after a life of such iron self-control, did you have to have such a lapse as that, to let a moment’s compassion throw you into the river of history to be swallowed up and carried out to the sea of forgotten men? You had the seeds of greatness in you, but when they list the names of the great Pharaohs of Egypt, your name will not be there, my lost son, my lost joy, my lost hope.

As she rode away in her chariot, the driver keeping the horse at a stately pace, a dreadful thought came to her. What was to stop Tuthmose from digging up these inscriptions to destroy them?

But then she remembered the kind of man she was dealing with. He had no forethought. He cared nothing about the future, only about his own time, obtaining a kingdom and holding it for himself. What she buried would stay buried while he was Pharaoh. Having her story out of sight was good enough for him. If he had the will to be great, to create something for the ages, she would not despise him, and they would not be at war. But he was a small-hearted man, and so he was her enemy. He would win in the end, but defeating her would not make him great, it would just make Egypt smaller, too.

* * * 

Moses worked hard at learning all the new things in his life. The shepherding was hard, and some of Jethro’s daughters were anything but patient with him, making it clear how stupid they thought he was that he didn’t know the things that any shepherd’s child knew from the cradle up. He never answered harshly, though, and over the weeks and months their scorn became teasing, and now and then even a moment of grudging respect, as he showed that he could, indeed, master at least some parts of their art. The sheep no longer sensed his awkwardness, and would obey him and submit to his care. The girls did not obey him, of course, but they finally treated him as an equal. As a brother.

The other part of his education was more enjoyable but also less important. To help with the sheep was the duty he owed to Jethro for his extraordinary hospitality. To read Jethro’s books was a pleasure for its own sake, and Moses felt guilty for how many hours he pored over the strange Hebrew writing by the light of a floating wick in a lamp of oil.

Why was he so fascinated? The Hebrew language was strange enough to him that he couldn’t hear the nuances in it the way he could in Egyptian; he had no idea if the writing was elegant or plain. The books were so different from the holy writing of the Egyptians. There was no attempt to glorify the men and women in the stories they told. They were shown plain, sins and stupidities along with their moments of godliness. A small mind and a great heart could exist in the same man. How refreshing, to read such plain, believable tales! How it inspired trust, to know that the prophet did not always paint himself as a perfect man. How could the story of Jacob be known, if it had not been told by him? True, there were different accounts, some in which he had a perfect right to the inheritance because he was truly the firstborn, others in which he was the pure trickster, setting out to take the inheritance because his brother was such an oaf and Jacob resented the way Isaac favored the red-haired one. There was no reason, however, why these tales could not all be true. Why shouldn’t the same man be both an ambitious trickster and yet have right on his side? Why shouldn’t God send a vision to the exiled Jacob, showing him heaven and letting him choose? Jacob paid in years of service for his sins—how could he damn Laban for tricking him, when he himself had tricked his father to win his blessing? So he bore the life God gave him, and served him humbly, and in the end he got his beloved Rachel, and his sons. And if the sons in turn caused him grief, they also brought him joy in the end. It was a believable life, not one made pretty for the admiration of others. It was not a hero story. It was a story of a man made good by God. Or rather, of a man who chose to be good when taught by God.

Of course Moses saw himself in all these men. In Abram, laid under the knife in Chaldea, saved from becoming a human sacrifice himself by the intervention of an angel; then, his name changed to Abraham, holding a sacrificial knife himself as he almost, almost gave his own beloved son to God. Lying and putting his wife in great jeopardy, though one account said it was Pharaoh who wanted her and another account said it was another man; and yet a third story said that it was Isaac who lied about his wife. For all Moses knew, the same thing happened three times, for surely God was not afraid to repeat history. Having great wisdom and hearing the voice of God in their ears did not turn these men into something other than men. They could still be unwise sometimes. But their unwisdom did not trouble them: They wrote it down right along with the stories of the goodness and majesty of God. They were not afraid of truth.

And it was true, Moses knew that. Now that the word of God was not being flung at him by Aaron and Miriam in the effort to bend him to their will, he could see that the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was different from all the gods of Egypt, and that the faith required to believe in him was different from the faith he had grown up with. In Egypt, the gods were given credit for everything, but in fact one could never see them doing anything. Moses had realized at an early age that it was the priests and the Pharaohs who decided what it was the gods had meant by what they did. If there were no gods it would not change what was written about them.

But the God of Abraham was not to be tamed by scribes or rulers. His intentions were not invented by men to give divine sanction to their own actions. He spoke his own mind, and it was often at odds with the will of the men who served him, and they had to change their course to fit what he designed. Sometimes they obeyed when he spoke to them; other times he had to shape events against the will of the men who either did not understand him or opposed him openly. This was a God who was alive. This was a wild God, in that no man could ride him; rather it was the men themselves who had to be broken to the will of God, so he could ride in their hearts and guide them as a man guides his chariot.

“Is the age of . . . prophets over?” Moses asked Jethro one night, as Jethro copied a manuscript and Moses studied what was written on another scroll. “Did it end with Joseph? And why are there no . . . prophets of Midian?”

“The age of prophets is never over,” said Jethro. “But sometimes the prophets fall silent because there is no people willing to listen to them.”

“The . . . people of Midian aren’t willing?”

“They don’t listen to the scripture that they have. Why do you think it was Isaac and Jacob through whom the line of prophets descended, and not Ishmael and Esau? My forefather Midian knew of God, but did not devote his life to serving him. Even Lot, who was nephew, brother, and son to Abraham, was no prophet. He tried to be a good man, a decent man, but he was a man of the world. Abraham could never have lived in Sodom, but Lot could, because that’s what his business required of him. That is the lineage through which I come. That’s why the scrolls I copy hold the tales of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of Joseph and his brothers, and not of Midian, Esau, and Ishmael.”

“So why did the . . . prophecies stop? Why didn’t Joseph’s sons, Ephraim and . . . Manasseh, . . . carry on in their father’s work?”

Jethro shrugged. “How can I judge men I never met? Of individuals I can say nothing—they might have talked to God, and God may have told them to keep their mouths shut. But as for why Israel didn’t listen, I can tell you that: Egypt did it to them. Power and prestige did it to them. Civilization did it to them.”

“Took away the voice of . . . God?”

“Took away the will to listen to that voice. Egypt had so much wisdom, the Israelites became ashamed of their own. They despised the lore of their fathers because the Egyptians were so rich and so refined. So the Israelites became scribes and rulers, and fancied that they were as Egyptian as the Egyptians. Not until they lost their wealth and power did they remember God. And by then, these books were lost to them.”

“Lost? But I heard some of these stories from . . . Jochabed and Miriam, and heaven knows Aaron spoke of the . . . promises of Abraham until I thought I had them . . . memorized.”

“They pass on their corrupted stories, yes, by word of mouth,” said Jethro. “But no one ever laid out a scroll like this for you. You didn’t even know that Hebrew could be written down, did you?”

“Some . . . tried to write it in hieroglyphs, but the sounds didn’t . . . fit right, and it was a mess, unreadable by Egyptians or Hebrews.”

“You see how Satan works on people,” said Jethro. “He doesn’t tell them there is no God. He doesn’t fight openly. He just makes them ashamed of themselves. He makes them admire the world. He makes them trust in the learning of the world and despise the primitive myths of their ancestors. And even when they reached out to try to recover those old tales, did they really understand them?”

Moses shook his head. “No, they just . . . picked and chose the . . . parts that were useful to them. Aaron was full of stories of the . . . destiny of the children of Israel, but I never heard him speak of the . . . covenants and . . . commandments. He kept telling me to submit to the will of . . . God, but he never taught me to . . . pray.”

“So it was his own will, not God’s, he wanted you to submit to?”

Moses smiled. “I don’t think it ever occurred to him that there might be a . . . difference between the two.”

“So. Do you?”

“Do I what?”

“Pray?”

“I’ve tried.”

“And?”

“God knows the feelings of my heart, doesn’t he?”

Jethro shook his head sadly. “My son, you don’t know the feelings of your heart until you discover them by praying. You have to ask. You have to choose to speak to God, not just expect him to do what’s right for you. After all, every man has every possible desire. What if God granted all our wishes? Our path would be strewn with dead enemies. The weather would be a nightmare, as one man’s healing rain was another man’s disastrous flood. We have to choose which desires are the ones we want to act upon. Then we put those choices into words and pray them to God.”

“I have no words.”

“I doubt that.”

“I have no choices.”

“And that one I know is false.”

“Jethro, the only life I have is one that’s . . . borrowed from you.”

“Not borrowed, given. And not given, either—I still have it. It isn’t gone. So what you really mean is that the only life you have is the one you learned from me, and I’m telling you that my life is a life of prayer, and you aren’t praying.”

“Teach me how.”

“You hear my prayers.”

“But you . . . pray for your daughters, for the villagers. I’m not a . . . father, and I’m not a . . . priest.”

“Both shortcomings are remediable, but that’s another matter.”

“Why should . . . God hear me, Jethro? He already closed every . . . door in my life. I think what he wants of me now is a life without . . . choices. A life of humility. To be reconciled to my losses until I think of them as . . . gains.”

“Very good. Very plausible. But are you right?”

“I don’t know.”

“And you never will until you ask. Right now you’re just like those priests you talk about in Egypt, always able to invent a story to explain the meaning of omens, to show what the gods meant by everything. You’re inventing your own story of what God wants for you, and acting on it, but I’m telling you again as I’ve told you before, God will not open the next door for you until you choose to knock on it!”

Moses smiled wanly. “Jethro, I’ll . . . try again.”

“Do. And again after that!”

* * * 

Jochabed was too old for these changes. It was a bitter new life that was beginning for the Israelites now. Aaron was all for starting a revolution, but cooler heads prevailed, and instead Aaron submitted, as they all submitted, moving from their homes, scattered throughout the Egypt, and gathering in the wet clay brickmaking lands along the swampy edges of the Nile in the edges of the delta. Miriam was the one who claimed it was the mercy of God. “After Moses fled, the Egyptians were ready to start murdering Israelites again. So gathering us together and separating us from the Egyptians is saving our lives.”

But when Jochabed’s back ached from bending over to pack and smooth the mud in the forms, or from laying out straw on the endless acres of wet bricks to help them dry faster, she did not feel her life was saved. She felt as if the Lord was punishing her and all of Israel, though for what she did not know. Oh, Moses, what were you born for, why did I suffer such pains for you, why was I shown the way to put you in the river, why were you lifted up, when your whole life came to this: False hopes, now dashed, and your people restored to bondage?

And then, when she was feeling most embittered, she would remember that the Lord’s love for Israel was like a parent’s love: Sometimes children had to be set to tasks they hated because the work needed doing, or because it was good for the children even though they didn’t understand. God’s hand has been in our lives, doing extraordinary things, so why should I doubt him now? Somewhere Moses is alive. Somewhere God is working with him, shaping him as I shape these bricks. Moses was simply in the wrong mold here. He had to be cast from it, then kneaded and remade in a new shape. God’s hand is here as well. I’ll certainly be dead before his work is finished, but I have no doubt that from my womb came the Lord’s true servant.

Moses, wherever you are, look for God’s hand in the road behind you—it is so clear, so obvious how God has chosen you. And when you’ve learned to see his hand, look for it in the road ahead. Take his hand, follow where he leads you, for only in God’s hand will you be free. Only God can bring you back to Egypt, to your people. To me.
 

 
 
© 2000 Shadow Mountain 

Printed from Gospelink.com
