# Chapter 8: Fire

### Chapter 8: Fire
Orson Scott Card , Stone Tables (Salt Lake City 2000)
 
 

Chapter 8: Fire

It was the end of the day, and it was spring, and the new grass was so sweetly green that Moses wanted to gambol like the lambs in the meadows. The sun’s ruddy slanted light brought the rocks to blazing life, and the girls were all happy and frolicking, and there were village boys with their hearts set on Hamar and Asa and Sarah and they rather liked the attention and even liked the boys, a little. So there was joy in Jethro’s household from morning to night, and laughter and teasing and fun. And here in the uplands where the sheep nibbled on the new grass, there was joy in Moses’ heart as well. In all his years in Egypt, the seasons had come and gone with no meaning except a change in his duties. In the time of flood, the business of the government was distributing the stores of grain; when the flood subsided, there was planting; when the harvest came, there was gathering and storing. All these things he saw, but his own connection to them was to hear reports of how the harvest went, and what the surpluses were, and where the excess grain might be shipped and sold.

Here, though, he felt the grass beneath his feet, felt the blood and slime of the newborn lambs on his hands as he helped with the hard deliveries. He had felt the trembling flesh of the sheep under his hand as he held them to be sheared by those with some skill at cutting wool without cutting skin. He had smelled the stink of life in his nostrils, and now the freshness of spring came to him with such power that for the first time since coming to Midian he did not miss his old life in Egypt. Indeed, he felt that for the first decades of his life he had been cheated, because he lived a life of words in which his only physical labor was in learning how to fight and kill for the kingdom. Now, though words still filled his mind and heart, his hands were strong in the business of life. The sun beat down on a back that was bent in labor.

In Egypt the rich despise manual labor, he thought, yet they are the ones who are poor because they make nothing with their bodies, but only please themselves. The rich are poor; the poor are rich, the world tells its lies, and the wrong people are envied for all the wrong reasons.

The day’s work was done, but Moses did not want to go back down the mountain to the tents of Jethro, for even though he was caught up in the book of Enoch, that great prophet who led his people to such perfection that God removed them from the world and took them to himself—even though he was eager to read more of that prophet’s words and works, his body could not bear to leave the cool grass. So as the girls put on their sandals for the rocky trek, Moses left his off. “I want to stay till dark,” he said. “I know the way by now.”

“But you must go down,” said Zeforah.

Sarah made a hooting noise, and Hamar laughed.

“Why?” asked Moses.

Zeforah was silent, unwilling or unable to explain.

“Oh, this is stupid,” said Sarah. “Zeforah has always stayed up the mountain after dark on these first green nights of spring. She makes us leave and keeps the meadows for herself.”

Zeforah’s lips were set—she hated Sarah’s tone, but it was clear that what Sarah had said was true.

“Isn’t there room enough for me here, too?” said Moses.

Zeforah rolled her eyes. “Of course. I just didn’t want you thinking I was staying up here to be with you.”

Again, hoots and derision from her sisters.

“Then I’ll go down,” said Moses. “I’m not here to take your customary pleasures away from you, and I understand about the need for solitude.”

“I think the meadow is large enough for the two of us,” said Zeforah.

That had the other girls so amused they could hardly breathe for laughing.

“Do you sometimes think,” said Moses, “that your sisters are insane?”

But after a while the girls left, driving the sheep before them. And Moses and Zeforah were alone. He made as if to walk to the far end of the meadow, but she caught his arm. “No,” she said. “I don’t want you far away from me. I’m here because I love this place in springtime. I wouldn’t make my sisters leave, except they get so silly it spoils the mood. You won’t be silly, I think.”

So she didn’t mind him being there. Like Hebrew letters, her moods were so hard to read. They meant nothing except themselves. They could not be compared to anything. Zeforah was Zeforah.

Moses knew that Jethro wanted him to marry her. But what did she want? He didn’t want a wife who married him out of filial duty. He wanted what he had always wanted, a marriage between equals, the kind of marriage that Hatshepsut should have had but didn’t. He had nothing but contempt for the marriages he had seen, in which middle-aged men married young girls, to father children on them but treat them otherwise as servants or children themselves. It took a weak man to prefer a wife like that, who wouldn’t dare to answer back when he was foolish, or to insist when he had neglected a duty. Zeforah would certainly not be one of those child-wives. Talking about the scriptures with her was often as invigorating and challenging as talking to Jethro. And she was the only one of the girls who was patient with him as she taught him about shepherding—and so he learned more from her than from any of the others. And she was lovely, especially now that she had joined him in his custom of washing his face and hands every day in the sheep’s drinking water. She was not so stubborn that she would not let him teach her, too. He liked her. He could easily love her. If they were supposed to marry, it would be a good marriage, and he would love the children she gave him.

Furthermore, the time of decision was coming near. He had come in autumn, and now it was spring. Through these seasons that sheep were always close enough to be herded home every night. But during the summer they had to take them up to the highest meadows, out of the killing sun, and in those days they would not come home at night. He could hardly sleep up there, night after night, without being married to one of them. The scandal in the village would be impossible. There would have to be a wedding, or Moses would have to stop working at shepherding. Well, that would be fine with Moses.

But what did she want? Each of the other girls—even Keturah!—had gone through a flirty stage with him, trying to catch his eye. But not Zeforah. She was all cool business with him, talking about the question or problem at hand, and when she joked with him, it was like a brother. He did not want to be her brother. But that distance remained between them. That sense that he could stand outside the door but was not quite welcome yet inside. He did not know what the barrier was. But he did know that Zeforah was the only one of the daughters that he could happily marry; and she was the only one who had never given him even a hint that she wanted him as a husband.

Until now. Was this a hint, letting him remain with her in this meadow? Letting him share her ritual of springtime?

And what was that ritual? Did she lie in the cool of evening and count stars overhead? Did she sing with her voice echoing among the stony canyon walls? Did she shed her clothes and prance like a lamb in the grass? That idea had some appeal for him, he could not deny. But no, she would hardly have invited him to stay for that.

So he sat down in the meadow and looked at the sunset. And she came and sat beside him, and watched it, too.

“All that color in the sky,” she said. “And the green of the grass. Why green? Why red?”

Moses was taken aback. “Why not?”

“Exactly,” she said. “God could have made it any way he wanted. He didn’t have to put such fire in the sky.”

Moses pulled a blade of grass and held it up. “The beauty of variety,” he said. “And the beauty of the familiar. This green must come every year.”

“And yet it never grows old.”

Her smile, the tenderness of her voice. How he wanted to take her in his arms. Did she want that, too? Was that why she stayed?

Just as he was about to test the theory with the touch of his hand on hers, she drew herself up to her knees, facing the sunset. Out of reach. Had she sensed his desire and wanted to avoid the awkwardness of refusing him? Or was it pure chance, and she had no idea of what was in his heart?

Even as he thought these thoughts, he babbled something about the sunset. “Of course these colors probably come by necessity. Dust low in the sky turns red when the sun shines through it. The green of living plants is probably part of what makes them alive, and we find it beautiful because we love life. Or because it’s familiar.”

She looked at him with benign pity. “Does anything beautiful come by accident? Toss some stones—will they come up a temple? God made a garden world for us to tend, and then he stepped away to watch and wait. Someday he’ll come to harvest. To weed. But look at the sky tonight. You can’t tell me that all that grace and glory is undesigned and undesired chance.”

“And this is what you stay for?” he asked.

“We sing our hymns to God,” she said. “But on these nights, I hear him singing back to me.”

She turned again to face the sky and when she spoke, her voice was different. Tender, loving. The voice she might be saving to speak to her children. Perhaps the voice she had used with her mother when she was dying. The voice she might be reserving for only her husband to hear. The voice with no hard edge to it, no wariness, just warmth and trust.

“O Father, thank you for the sky tonight,” she said. “The way the sun is red and gold like fire, the silver in the clouds, the bursts of light and the shining rocks of the hills. And for my eyes so I could see it, and for love and peace that fill my life, so I can recognize the white that’s hiding in the dusty fleece. And thank you for the cool of the gathering night.” Then, more softly, she added the words that he had seen her murmuring at the end of every prayer in Jethro’s house, only this time he heard her, this time the words were clear. “In the name of the Son. Amen.”

This was her ritual, then. What she stayed for, by herself. To pray. And she had let him keep this vigil with her, and had let him hear this most private prayer. She did love him, he saw that now; and he also saw what the barrier between them was. She could not wholly give herself to him until he wholly gave himself to God. He was a student of the scripture, but not yet a servant of the Lord. Before she could take him as her husband, she had to know that he could also pray.

And it was not enough, he knew, for him to murmur an amen at the close of her prayer. She heard him, and she smiled a little, but it was not enough.

If only he could pray. If only he could get the words out. But the fear and confusion that made him hesitate in his normal speech had become a terrifying, choking stammer when he tried to pray. Her words flowed so gracefully and naturally—how could she understand how much even the attempt to pray cost him? He knew it was his own unworthiness. He could not utter a word to God; his mouth was shut when he tried.

She turned to him, reached out to him, touched his cheek with her gentle hand. “You haven’t stammered once today,” she said. Then she rose to her feet and walked away from him, along the meadow to the path leading down to Jethro’s tent.

What did she mean by that? Perhaps it was true, perhaps he was confident enough that he no longer hesitated to choose his words when he was with Jethro’s daughters. But no, she meant more by it. It was as if she knew that he longed to pray, but that his stammering blocked the words. It was as if she had heard him struggle. She wanted him to pray. She wanted him to be worthy to marry her. She knew what he had only just realized, that it was the silence between him and God that stood between him and Zeforah.

That was why she had shown him a prayer, and then left him alone to pray himself.

For a moment he wanted to rebel against the assignment, to refuse to obey. But he recognized that as pure foolishness and put it aside. He wanted exactly what she wanted, and if she was trying to help he would have to be a dolt not to accept it gratefully.

He knelt, as she had knelt. He looked at the sunset, as she had looked, though the color was waning fast as darkness came on.

“Oh G-g-g-g . . .”

He bowed over in despair. He could say the word God in conversation, but he could not say it when he tried to speak to God. Why? What was it? The evil in his own heart? Was it God himself who silenced him, forbidding him to speak? Or was it his own fear?

She had used the word Father when she prayed. To her, the word had meaning, for she knew her father, was close to him. What did Father mean to Moses? Stories of Amram, but he never knew the man. Stories also of Tuthmose I, Hatshepsut’s father and first husband, before she took on her weakling half-brother, but all these fathers were only rumor to him.

But he knew what Zeforah meant by saying “Father,” and loved the idea that God might be toward human beings as Jethro was toward his daughters. It was a clear and lovely image, to think of God that way, only even wiser, even more loving, even sterner when the occasion demanded it. That’s who he must speak to. A God who was like Jethro.

“Oh F-f-f-f . . .”

No. He would not be stopped. Not this time, not when he knew his hope of life with Zeforah was on the line. “O F-f-f-f-fa . . .”

Not even his love of Zeforah could bring words to his mouth. Who had the power to open his mouth and let him speak? Only God himself could do that, and how could he ask God to help him ask God to help him?

Why not? Just because his prayer was circular, why not?

“O F-f-f-father give me s-s-s-s-speech!” he cried. “O Father, give me . . . give me . . .”

And then he realized that in the process of asking, his prayer was answered. The realization rushed through his body like fire. When he prayed for the power to pray, it was given to him. God heard him. God was listening!

But now that he was given speech, what should he say? There would be no meaning in repeating Zeforah’s prayer. There was only joy and gratitude in her heart. But Moses’ heart was filled with darker and more complicated things.

“O Father, I didn’t kneel to thank you for the sky. Though I do thank you for it. The sky, the grass, the spring lambs. For these people, these good, kind people. Jethro. Zeforah. Zeforah.”

So there was joy in him, after all. He could pray with gratitude, as she had.

“And for the time to see the world clearly, I thank you for that,” he said. “I never saw anything in Egypt, I never knew anything . . .”

But even as he spoke, he knew that he was pretending. Not lying to God, but to himself. For he did not hate Egypt, did not despise what he had learned there. God must not have despised it, either, if Jochabed and Hatshepsut were right and it was divine intervention that put him in Pharaoh’s house to begin with. So he would not pray his first prayer without speaking his mind; now that God was listening to him, he had some things to say.

“Why did all this happen to me! What was it for, all this lifting me up and knocking me down! Was it you doing it? Or was it my own mistakes? Or was it chance? Bad luck?”

The anger in his own voice surprised him.

“Or maybe it was good luck,” he whispered. “There’s peace here. But I’m not at peace. There must be something more for me to do than sit on rocks and tend sheep! And yet there are times when I think there’s no more important labor in the world. Sometimes I feel that I’ve lost everything that mattered in my life. And then other times, all I want is here, all I want to do is lose myself in the love here. But you know all this. You know all my feelings and I have no choices that are in my power, so why do I bother even praying! Why did you loose my tongue when I have nothing to say! You’re the wind and I’m the grain of sand, you’re the mill and I’m the barleycorn. Well while you’re busy grinding me, you might at least give a hint of what I’m being ground up for!”

His anger surprised him. He had hidden it from himself for so long that the dark power of it was frightening, and he forced himself to be calm. He didn’t know much about praying, but he knew that yelling at God was probably not the best approach.

“I don’t even know if you’re there,” he said. “I’m probably talking to empty air.”

But he did not believe it.

“I hope you’re there,” he said. “I want you to be there, because then there’s a hope that my life and all the million lives before and around me have some purpose to them. If you aren’t real, then life is a cruel joke that’s played on us by a vicious child, and the only way to get the better of it is to die!”

Again, the pent-up rage had found a way out, and again he calmed himself.

“Help me to be patient, Father,” he said. “Whatever you’re doing with my life, I can wait. That’s a choice, isn’t it? To wait. To live in each good moment.”

He wondered when the answers might come. And then realized that perhaps the answers were coming from his own lips. He spoke his rage, and then for some reason it occurred to him to speak of patience. Was that how God answered his prayer, by putting words into his own mouth?

“I don’t know how this is done,” he said. “Is this the way to pray? Did I offend you? Help me not to feel like a fool tonight for having shouted at the sky like this.”

He bowed his head. The sky was dark. The stars were out. He rose to his feet, but then had the nagging feeling that he wasn’t done. “Father,” he whispered, “I know the miracle that came tonight. My mouth, opened. The gift of speech. The gift of Zeforah’s example, her kindness. Thank you.”

It was all he could think of to say, and yet he still didn’t feel that he was done. Then he remembered. Zeforah’s little ritual still waited for him.

“In the name of the Son,” he said, not knowing what it meant, or why she said it. But now the prayer was finished. “Amen.”

* * * 

Jethro was worried. Again Moses and Zeforah had lingered on the mountain, and again they came down separately. The only difference was that this time it was Zeforah who returned first. Did they think he wouldn’t notice that his daughter was alone with a man? He knew Zeforah well enough to know that nothing improper had happened. Indeed, he thought he knew Moses that well, too, and could trust him. But if all was so innocent, why did they return separately? Why did they act as if they hadn’t seen each other on the hill?

Tonight in particular, Moses was almost giddy, garrulous through dinner, talking of nothing, everything, anything, and yet never quite listening to his own words, sometimes saying the same thing twice. Finally, fed up with whatever evasion was going on, Jethro asked him point blank. “What is it!”

“What is what?” asked Moses. Oh, such calculated innocence.

“The thing you’re not telling me. The reason you and Zeforah stayed up in the meadow tonight and neither of you got back till after dark!”

Someone outside the tent dropped a dish. Well, that’s what the girls got for eavesdropping. Let them clean up the mess and pretend they weren’t listening.

“We . . . she wanted to show me . . . the way she celebrates spring. The sunset on a warm day.”

“And did she show you?”

“Yes.”

“And what happened?”

“Isn’t that for her to tell?” said Moses. “It was a private thing, and I don’t know that it’s my place to talk about it.”

“I’m her father!”

“And yet she never told you? Then who am I to presume?”

Jethro leaned close to him, letting a little of his annoyance show. “So you, only six months in my household, are shown what I can’t see?”

Zeforah was standing in the doorway, holding a platter. “I prayed, Father. I never thought to tell you because . . .”

“Because why?”

“Because you know I pray every day. I don’t tell you when I breathe, either. Will you let poor Moses alone? Nothing happened up the mountain today that’s worth making such a fuss over.” She looked at Moses in annoyance. “It was kind of you to be careful, Moses, but I don’t have any secrets from my father.”

Jethro looked suspiciously at the plate of sliced sausages. “How many of these fell in the dirt when that dish broke outside?”

“None of them,” said Zeforah. “It was Moses’ bowl of soup that broke, and we’re getting him another.”

“Well, I’m glad Moses will get his soup, and I’m glad the sausages are clean, and I’m glad that you prayed up on the mountain, and I’m glad that Moses is so careful of your feelings. It’s astonishing how glad I am tonight.”

Moses smiled. Zeforah did not. “I’m sorry you’re annoyed, Father.”

“I’m not annoyed. I’m glad.”

“Father, I didn’t ask Moses to stay with me, he was going to stay anyway to look at the sunset. We are not conspiring behind your back. We did not discuss marriage, and we didn’t talk about you. We talked about the sunset and then I said my evening prayer and I came home. I have done nothing to deserve your suspicions and so I resent it.”

“I wasn’t suspicious.”

“I’m glad to hear it.” She stalked out of the tent.

“Isn’t it nice everyone’s so glad tonight?” said Jethro.

Moses smiled. “We didn’t discuss marriage, Jethro, because I know the custom here is for a man to discuss it with the father first.”

“We’ve already discussed it. I already gave you permission to court her before you even thought of it yourself. I’m not suspicious.”

“I do think of marrying her, Jethro. But until now I knew better than to talk of it with her, because I knew she wouldn’t have me.”

“Wouldn’t have you?”

“Wouldn’t have me.”

“She never said any such thing to me.”

“Why should she? I never asked her, so it didn’t come up.”

“Oh, don’t be foolish, Moses. She likes you.”

“Jethro, I know she likes me, and she knows I like her. We’re good friends. She’s my teacher, my fellow reader, we work together by day and study together by night. I never much liked my brother and my sister because they were always demanding something from me, but Zeforah is brother and sister, friend and teacher, all at once. But she wouldn’t marry me till now, and you know why.”

For the life of him Jethro had no idea what Moses was talking about.

“She won’t marry a man who doesn’t measure up to you, Jethro.”

“But there’s not a man alive who can meet that high standard,” he retorted.

“You think I don’t know that?”

“I was joking.”

“A man jokes by telling the truth lightly. You’re a man of God, Jethro. Do you think Zeforah would consent to have the father of her children be anything less than that?”

“So be a man of God,” said Jethro. “It isn’t hard, if your heart is good.”

“I study, Jethro. I learn all that I can about the Lord and his dealings with his people. I believe that it’s true, all this scripture, at least as far as I haven’t misunderstood it. But that isn’t enough.”

“No?”

“I tried to pray, Jethro, and I couldn’t.”

“Couldn’t? What do you mean, couldn’t? Your tongue stopped working?”

Moses answered cheerfully, “Yes. Exactly. I couldn’t speak. Couldn’t get a word out, if I was talking to the Lord.”

“You mean you were shy about it?”

“I mean I opened my mouth and nearly choked on my tongue. I could not speak. Until tonight. Until I heard her prayer, and I wanted so badly to be like her, to be able to pour out my heart to the Lord. So when she left, I tried again, and this time. . . .”

“This time the Lord opened your mouth.”

“Yes.”

“That’s obvious,” said Jethro. “I’ve been listening to you all through supper. Not once did you hesitate.”

“Didn’t I?” said Moses.

“So you prayed.”

“Yes.”

“And?”

“And what?”

“What happened when you prayed?”

Moses looked at him quizzically. “I spoke to God.”

“And that was all?”

“Yes,” said Moses. “I guess that was all.”

“He didn’t answer?”

“Jethro, I opened my mouth in prayer and words came out. That was the answer to my prayer. To pray at all was the answer to my prayer.”

Jethro nodded. “Well, I’m glad to hear it. So now you’ll marry her?”

“Now I’ve taken the first step on the road to becoming the sort of man that she might consider marrying.”

“Come on now, Moses! Look at the plate she has to choose from! You’ve seen the village clowns! Even if you had a four-pound goiter you’d be at the top of the list.”

“She doesn’t have a list, Jethro. She has a heart.”

“So you’d be at the top of her heart. Or the center of it. Whatever.”

“Just be patient with us, Jethro.”

“I want grandchildren. Preferably including the occasional boy. I’m not a young man!”

“Jethro, I’ll admit that part of the reason I wanted to pray was in order to begin to become the kind of man that Zeforah would be glad to marry. I don’t think the Lord holds that motive against me. Why shouldn’t a man turn to God in order to become worthy of the love of a godly woman? But even if Zeforah still refused me, I would stay on this road for its own sake. God waits for me at the end of the road. I would like to walk the whole way with Zeforah beside me, but I’ll walk the road for its own sake. For God’s sake. Even if I have to walk it alone.”

Jethro smiled broadly and leaned back upon his pillows. “That’s what I needed to hear,” he said.

“What was?”

“That you seek God for his own sake.”

“Well of course.”

“There’s no of course about it. Until this moment, if you had actually asked me for Zeforah’s hand, I would have turned you down flat.”

Moses looked at him in utter exasperation. “You’ve practically thrown us at each other!”

“To see what kind of man you were. Never laid a hand on her, never took advantage, it was as if I had forbidden you even to think of marrying her. I like that trait in you—that you saw what Zeforah needed and knew it wasn’t you. Yet.”

“What, you mean all your marriage talk was a test?”

“Why not?” said Jethro. “Zeforah is the light of my life. You think I’d even consider letting her marry a man who might take the joy out of her?”

“Were you tempting me?”

“Of course not. I knew you had proper manners, and I knew she’d never encourage any liberties. I was tempting you to become your best self.”

“Jethro, are all priests of the Most High God as devious as you?”

“Moses, I’m not devious at all. I speak my feelings.”

“Then wait until the Lord gets used to the sound of my voice. Wait until I’ve had a chance to become more like the man that she deserves to marry.”

“I’ll wait as long as you want,” said Jethro.

“Well,” said Zeforah from the door, “I won’t.”

“Zeforah,” said Jethro. “When did you come back?”

“When Keturah ran and told me you were talking marriage, right out in the open.”

“That little scamp was eavesdropping?” asked Jethro.

“When you’re talking about marriage?” said Zeforah. “When you’re deciding our future? You’ll never have a private discussion of that subject, if we can help it.”

Moses rose to his feet. “Jethro, didn’t you hear what she just said?”

“Yes! She and her sisters plan to spy on me!”

Moses turned to Zeforah. “Won’t you wait for me to become ready?”

“And when will that be? When you’re perfect? When I’m long past child-bearing?”

“Well, that didn’t stop Sarah and Abraham,” said Moses.

“Ask father for my hand,” said Zeforah.

“I want to marry your daughter,” said Moses.

“Do you love her?” asked Jethro.

“At first I admired her, and then I desired her, and then I was in awe of her, and then I honored her, and then I longed for her good opinion of me, and then I wanted to have what she had, which is to have a heart perfect before the Lord.”

“Think again,” said Zeforah.

“You didn’t answer my question,” said Jethro.

“I passed through each of these stages, and every single one of them is a part of love. Better than I loved either of my mothers. Better than I loved any of my friends, better than I love even you, Jethro, I love your daughter.”

“But do you love her as much as you love God?” asked Jethro.

Zeforah rolled her eyes impatiently. “Father.”

“Sir,” said Moses, “I don’t know God that well yet. I really only know that part of him that shines from your life, and from Zeforah’s. How can I love God more than you, when part of what I love about the two of you is God in you, and in your lives?”

Jethro turned to Zeforah. “Well, what do you think? Will he do?”

Tears were streaming down Zeforah’s cheeks. “This is the beginning of my marriage, Father. Couldn’t you have handled it normally?”

“What?” said Jethro. “What did I do?”

Moses walked to her then. “I never knew my father, Zeforah. May I have yours?”

“Gladly,” she said.

He reached out to her, a tentative hand, toward her cheek. She let him touch her, to wipe away her tears; then she turned her face to meet his hand, kissed his palm. “I never had anything like a normal family, either,” said Moses. “But will you help me make one, even though I don’t know how?”

“I don’t have a normal family either,” said Zeforah. She put her hands on his chest. He hadn’t realized until that moment how much he longed for her touch.

“I know why I need you, the thousand reasons why my life could never be complete without you,” said Moses. “You are your own best dowry. But I have nothing to offer you in return, except my love and honor, and all my hope of joy in this life and in the life to come.”

“That will do,” she said.

“Stop talking and kiss her, Moses,” said Jethro.

“With all due respect, Jethro, that’s not for you to decide.”

“Stop talking,” said Zeforah, “and kiss me.”

“Now you, you get a vote.”

With a growl of frustration she flung both arms around his neck, pulled him down, and kissed him firmly on the lips.

“I hear there’s a priest nearby,” said Moses, when the kiss was done. “Let’s see if he’ll marry us right away.”

“Took you long enough,” said Jethro. “Now if you two don’t mind, I’d like to finish my supper.”

They laughed, they embraced him, and then they left together, to walk and talk for another hour in the moonlight. Jethro found he wasn’t hungry after all, and when the other girls, all aflutter with excitement about the first betrothal in the family, finally cleared the supper dishes away, Jethro fell to his knees and wrestled with the Lord about Moses. The gist of his prayer was this: Whatever you have planned for this boy, Lord, don’t let it interfere with my daughter’s happiness. Don’t make a widow of her, don’t make her a lonely woman, don’t break her heart. No daughter of yours or of mine has ever deserved better from you than Zeforah does. I’m not telling you what to do, Lord, but let Zeforah have her time of joy with him, before you call him away to do whatever it is you plan for him.

The Lord didn’t strike him dead for his audaciousness in praying such a prayer. Jethro took this as a good sign, and went to bed.

* * * 

Hatshepsut was not expecting any visitors, but there were footsteps in the corridor. And they were not the quiet padding steps of a barefoot servant. They had the clipped sound of the hard military sandal.

Hatshepsut rose at once from her bed and gathered a robe around her body. She could feel the stiffness in her joints that told her every night and every morning that she was getting old. But she cared little for such minor pains. What mattered was the sound she was not hearing—the soldiers on guard, asking her if she needed something, where she was going, whom she wanted to summon. Therefore she knew there were no soldiers on guard, even though with no moon and no lamps lit, she could not see their places by the walls. And if there were no guards to protect her, it meant that her reign was over.

She had kept Tuthmose carefully pinned down for years beyond his maturity, for she knew he was too young and angry and immature to rule. But this strategy only worked because the others around her—the military leaders, the high priests at Karnak—agreed that Tuthmose III would not make a good ruler. Not that they discussed it. She knew they agreed because her orders continued to be obeyed, and Tuthmose’s were not.

But someone had decided that tonight would mark the change. Tuthmose III was ready to rule. Unfortunately, there could be no sharing of power. Tuthmose would not allow Hatshepsut even to be a figurehead. His hatred of her was unabated, however it might be hidden behind studied courtesy. To decide that Tuthmose no longer needed to be restrained was to decide that it was time for Hatshepsut to die.

Were you in such a hurry, Anubis, to lead me to my father? She could almost hear the breath of the jackal god in the doorway of her room.

But it was no jackal god. It was a mere jackal.

“Hatshepsut,” he whispered.

“Tuthmose,” she said. “So you came to do your murder by your own hand?”

He took the cover off the lamp, and now instead of a faint ruddy glow there was a flickering yellow light that framed his face. A tall man now, taller than his father. And with a pretty face—another legacy of his father’s penchant for bedding only pretty concubines. No political marriages for him! Nor bedtime conversation, either. And this was the result. The murderer standing in the doorway, bearing a lamp in one hand, and in the other . . .

Not a sword or a knife, as Hatshepsut had expected. Rather he held a platter of fruit.

“Hungry?” she asked him. “Come to share?”

“There are two ways we can handle this,” said Tuthmose. “You can eat a few of these very bad figs and die of their unfortunate aftereffects. Or you can be condemned for treasonously usurping the throne of Pharaoh, and be publicly executed.”

“Which would you rather I did?” said Hatshepsut.

“I only care that you die,” said Tuthmose. “I’ve had your talons around my throat long enough.”

“Years. But not enough years for you to learn decency.”

“Are you going to criticize me even now?” said Tuthmose. “Or is this a prelude to appealing to my better nature?”

“Oh, my dear boy, I am well aware that this is your better nature. Your ill nature would be to hire someone to slit my throat in the night. So I’m proud of you for coming to do this yourself.”

He sighed. “Choose, Hatshepsut.”

“What do you think I’ll choose?” she asked.

“More teaching?” he said. “All right, I think you’ll choose the fruit.”

“And why?” she said. “Let’s see how well you understand your enemy.”

“Whatever I say, you’ll tell me I was wrong.”

“Now, Tuthmose, be fair. I’ve never lied to you.”

“I know you’re not afraid of pain, or of death either. Nor are you willing to die, so you won’t see the fruit as a welcome way to end this life. You care about history: You’ll choose the fruit so that your name won’t be shamed by your public execution as a traitor.”

“Perhaps I do care about history,” said Hatshepsut, “but not enough to die for it. No, you still don’t understand me.”

“It won’t matter when you’re dead.”

“It will matter that you couldn’t even comprehend the enemy who was closest to you. How will you do at seeing into the heart of enemies you’ve never even met? I tremble for Egypt with you to protect her.”

He strode to her and thrust the platter toward her. “Just eat the figs.”

“How many?” she said.

“A couple should do it. The more you eat, the faster it will go, and so the shorter the time you’ll go through excruciating abdominal pain.”

“How kind of you to choose a painful one.”

“Even if we handle this privately,” he said, “you are being punished for your crimes. It shouldn’t be painless.”

She took a fig from the plate and popped it into her mouth. It had a bitter taste. “Oh, this is a subtle one,” she said. “Don’t use this one again unless you find a better way to disguise the flavor.”

“Yes, well, Mutnefert died before I could learn the really devious methods of the poisoner’s art.”

“I don’t even like figs,” she said.

“I know.”

“Do you know why I’m eating them?”

“Because you wanted to pretend that you died by your own choice instead of mine,” said Tuthmose.

“No, Tuthmose. I choose this death because . . .”

“Is the pain starting?”

“Of course.” She took another fig. “If you execute me, you would bring turmoil to the house of Pharaoh. It would weaken you and every ruler after you. Once the killing came out into the open, there would be no stopping it. You’d have to kill any potential heir—including sons—that appeared to be vying for power. Your eventual successor would have to kill all his brothers and cousins and nephews. The Nile would run with blood.”

“Why should you care?”

“I think you’ll be a very bad king, Tuthmose. You want power and glory, but glory above all. You’ll plunge Egypt into stupid wars.”

“I’ll win my wars.”

“Perhaps you will, but you’ll end up with conquests you haven’t the firmness or strength to hold. And you’ll never have the wit to yield when it might look like defeat. You would rather bring Egypt to ruin than to humble yourself even a little.”

“Pharaoh does not have to yield to any man.”

“And yet I yield to you.”

“You were never Pharaoh.”

“Even now, I care more for Egypt than you ever have or ever will. I eat these figs because I know that the house of Pharaoh must be very strong to survive your foolish reign. Therefore I will choose a manner of dying that will not weaken the house of Pharaoh. This gives me hope that after you, better Pharaohs will inherit a kingdom that is still governable.”

“I’m really surprised you’re still talking. But I suppose your will to talk is even stronger than your will to live.”

She ate another fig. And another. And another. The pain was terrible, but she did her best to show none of it.

“I have done nothing in my life that I’m ashamed of,” she said. “I’m not even ashamed that you are my heir, for I chose and raised and taught and trained a better man than you, and it was not my fault that he did not last.”

Hatred flamed up in Tuthmose’s face. “You dare to speak of him even now?”

“He was a man, Tuthmose,” said Hatshepsut. “Unlike your father. Unlike you.”

He lost his temper then, and struck her a brutal blow across the face. She crumpled to the floor, and for a moment the pain in her jaw made her forget the agony in her belly. She wondered if the pain of this poison was anything like the pain of child-bearing. That was something she had never experienced. She had had one son, but not from her body. How symmetrical, to feel the birth pangs now, just before her death.

Her jaw did not work. She had to open it with her fingers; the pain shot through her head and made her gasp. But now she could speak, mumbling, barely intelligible, but it was speech, and he would listen, because, despite his hate, he knew that she was Pharaoh.

“Moses fought a strong man with his bare hands, and killed him,” she said.

She wanted to finish by saying, You can only strike a dying old woman. But she hadn’t the strength for speech now. No matter. He knew without her having to say the words.

“You’ll be nothing,” said Tuthmose. “When the history is written, it will call you a usurper who stole my rightful place from me.”

Let him babble. She didn’t care. She had done as well as she could with the time she had as a god upon the land. It was time for her to ascend to the realm of the gods.

Now, Anubis. I’m finished here. Take me to my father.

* * * 

Even the married daughters came home for this. Asa and Hamar both found husbands who turned out not to be village bumpkins after all, but men who could read and write, one a man of trade, the other a stonecutter who was often called upon to carve inscriptions in stone. They were there, with their husbands and their children; Jethro’s other daughters fussed over the little ones until Zeforah’s younger children were quite jealous. But Zeforah’s oldest boy, Gershom, the firstborn, cared nothing for what the younger ones were doing. He thought himself a man now, and to Zeforah’s unaccustomed eye he could well be a man; what was the dividing line, she wondered? If it was character, then he had the character of a good man. If it was size and strength, well, he had a ways to go. Clearly he meant to be worthy of his father. So Zeforah charged the boy with no duties today. Let him give his full attention to his father, to his grandfather.

Jethro looked at his grandchildren scampering around, made his normal pointed remarks to the unmarried daughters, as if it were their fault and not his that they hadn’t married yet. “Look at these children the Lord has given me!” he said proudly.

“We’re your children, Father,” said Dinah. “Those belong to Zeforah and Asa and Hamar.”

Jethro continued, undistracted. “I raised you up, with the help of your mother for a while, and then with the help of God. I prayed you to adulthood, and now look at you, raising your own flocks. I have every intention of sharing all my wisdom and experience with you at every opportunity!” He pointed to Gershom. “This boy! How can I teach him?” And to Asa’s oldest girl. “This girl! I must gather her in. That’s what a father does, and that’s what I am, a father. No matter how old you are, I am still a father.”

“If my children learn from you,” said Moses, “then they can have no better teacher.”

“Of all my sons-in-law, Moses,” said Jethro, “you’re the one who stayed around in hopes of inheriting my secret fortune. Today you’ll have the only treasure I have truly valued.”

Moses stepped forward and knelt before the old man. Zeforah rested her hand on Gershom’s shoulder; she felt Keturah take her other hand.

Jethro laid his hands upon Moses’ head and spoke words that Zeforah had never heard before, for Jethro had been ordained to his priesthood before Zeforah was born, and he had trained no other priests until Moses came. Now Jethro had decided it was time to give Moses not only the priesthood, but also his own new copies of the scrolls. The fading, aging copies that Jethro had collected all his life would stay with the old man—but his copying work was done. It was for Moses, now, to make new copies and pass them on.

It was a simple ritual, the words gentle as birdsong in the still air of the summer morning. They were in a high meadow where the heat did not come so insistently, and where no curious onlookers would come by. Because they were shepherds, even their moments of holiness took place in the presence of the sheep. But the herd was quiet, too, as if they were also reverent before the power of the Lord as it was given from one trusted servant to another.

And then it was done. Moses rose to his feet, embraced his father-in-law, and then came to Zeforah and embraced her, too. “Why am I afraid?” she whispered to him.

“I feel it too,” said Moses softly. “But it isn’t really fear.”

“Moses,” said Jethro. “I dreamed a dream last night. I saw you walking on Mount Sinai.”

“What happened there?” asked Moses.

“In the dream, nothing. But I awoke knowing that this was a dream you should fulfill. Wasn’t it the wind that blew you here? That same wind has come again.”

“It’s time to divide the flock for the heat of summer. I’ll take a portion to the summer meadows on the slopes of Sinai. But why does the Lord want me there?”

“I don’t know,” said Jethro. “God often whispers in the hearts of men.”

“I have felt his presence in my heart,” said Moses.

“But now and then,” said Jethro, “he feels the need to shout. Go and hear him.”

For a moment, Zeforah’s fear seized her. She wanted to cry out to him, Don’t go! I’ll lose you if you go! Our mornings of prayer, our days of labor, our evenings of peaceful study, our nights of talk and dreams and ardor, all will be finished if you go up to the mountain of the Lord.

She forced herself to stay silent. I knew from the start that he belonged to God, and God would someday claim him. I had more years than I ever hoped for. I have these children. I have a place in his heart. And maybe it’s nothing. Maybe he’ll go up the mountain and pray and the Lord will show him that the life of a village priest in Midian is the great calling he was prepared for, that the simple duties here are greater than all the majesty of Egypt.

She knew that if this was the message from the Lord, Moses would be content. But she knew that would not be the Lord’s message.

Moses kissed her, kissed his two sons, Gershom and Eliezer, and gathered the younger children, all girls, into a single vast hug, which left them screaming with laughter. Then he walked off across the meadow, deftly gathering a portion of the flock and guiding them toward the path that would take them along the ridge to the shoulder of Sinai itself.

“Watch for snakes!” Gershom cried out.

“I’ll be watching!” Moses called back to him.

“I want to follow him, Mother,” Gershom said.

“You are following him,” said Zeforah. “That is your life’s work.”

“No, I mean I want to follow him now.”

“It was your father who was called to the mountain,” said Zeforah. “Bide your time. The Lord knows where you live.”

“Oh, Mother,” he said. “You always say that.”

“And it’s always true,” she said. “Come, we have a feast. Time to celebrate!”

“Father took no food with him,” said Eliezer, the younger boy.

“He’s on the Lord’s errand,” Zeforah said.

“But he ate nothing all day yesterday,” Gershom pointed out.

“The Lord will give him strength.”

“It’s dangerous out in the rocks, up on the mountain!” Eliezer had a couple of bad falls that had taught him that lesson.

“Nothing will happen but what the Lord intends. That has to be enough for you, Eliezer, Gershom.

“Is it enough for you, Mother?” asked Gershom.

She laughed then. “No. But I pretend that it is.”

He thought about this for a moment. “Then I will, too. As long as you know how worried I am.”

But Zeforah was not worried for Moses’ safety. The Lord didn’t bring him this far to let him perish in the rocks of Sinai. She had different fears that Gershom and Eliezer could not understand. It didn’t matter. She would be strong to help her fretting boys, and that would help her also.

“Oh Lord,” she prayed quietly, “let him come back to me. Let him still be mine. Yours too. Yours first. But also mine.”

* * * 

The mud huts of the Israelites, hundreds of them, thousands, spread like a rash across the clay flats of the delta. All around them and among them were the fields of brick molds, the ones filled with clay and strewn with straw, drying in the sun; the empty forms stacked and waiting to be filled with river mud. And during the day, the people swarming like termites on the face of a hill, carrying sledges of river mud, bags of water, empty molds, ricks of straw.

Then came evening, and the people returned to their squalid temporary hovels, built in a few hours, to be torn down eventually by the annual flood of the Nile, then built again. Slaves in name and law ever since the Hyksos rulers were driven from Egypt, the Israelites were slaves now in daily, hourly fact, slaves like the prisoners of war who were worked to death, to help defray the cost of capturing them. There were few Israelites alive who could even remember the days of the Hyksos Pharaohs, the glory days when the children of Israel helped rule over the land. Nor were there many Egyptians who had ever seen an Israelite being proud, or exercising any kind of authority. Yet the passion for vengeance was kept alive in the Egyptians’ hearts, not least by the priests who still told their stories of how the gods delivered Egypt from the foreign oppressors. To see the Israelites slaving in the brickyards by the river, that was proof to the Egyptians of the power of their gods and the greatness of their kingdom.

But a strange thing happened among the Israelites. A generation before, their desert roots had been almost forgotten. They dressed like Egyptians, or undressed like them; the Egyptian language was more and more the first language of the children growing up; Israelites married Egyptians, and taught them in Egyptian schools; and Israelites, even while claiming still to serve the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, attended the public rituals and knew the names of all the Egyptian gods.

Now, in slavery, without even deciding openly, the Israelites did not strip off all their clothing as an Egyptian would, to work in the sun; instead they covered themselves as desert people did, even though their light but voluminous clothing was stained with mud by day’s end. The women modestly hooded their heads in defiant contrast to the way the Egyptian women brazenly showed their faces to any man. The names of Egyptian gods stopped being uttered in oaths or figures of speech; the Egyptian language was hardly spoken in the brickyards, except when an Egyptian overseer was making his inspection. Even then, Israelites who were probably more educated in Egyptian than their masters pretended not to understand them when they spoke.

And Miriam saw these things, and rejoiced.

“It really annoys people to have you go about smiling and telling them you told them so,” Aaron said to her. But she only smiled at him and said, “I don’t rejoice at our suffering. But God will cause us to suffer if that’s what we require to remember him.”

Now they stood beside each other, with several of the other prominent leaders of the tribe of Levi. No one questioned Miriam’s right to stand among them. They might resent the presence of a woman, but they knew she had foretold all this. They knew that the light of God was in her, and they clung to whatever light they had, even in the form of this most obnoxious and outspoken woman. They looked out over the river, as they had been commanded to do, to watch as Tuthmose’s barge came down the river.

“It is unseemly,” said one man. “He does not mourn Hatshepsut’s death, but acts as if her dying were a triumph of his own.”

“He probably killed her,” said another.

“Keep that thought to yourself in the future, please, unless you want us all killed.”

“What troubles me,” said Aaron, “is that he particularly wanted us Israelites to line the riverbanks to watch him pass. I’m not sure how much worse our lives could get, but I imagine he’ll find a way.”

“Not necessarily,” said a man. “If we cheer him enough, perhaps he’ll take pity on us.”

“Cheer him?” said Aaron. “I think he wants to see us sullen and miserable.”

“Sullen and miserable would look like proud and stubborn to him,” said Miriam. “But if we cheer, he’ll see that we have lost all pride and are utterly submissive.”

“So you think we should?” asked Aaron, shocked.

“I think we should turn our backs to him,” said Miriam. “And I will do exactly that, though I know none of you will have the courage to do it.”

“Are you mad?” asked a man.

“The oppression of Egypt is making Israel remember their God.”

“But if Egypt kills us all, who will be left to remember him then?” demanded another.

“If we are all gathered around father Abraham, rejoicing, what will we care what happens in Egypt?”

“She wants to die, Aaron. Please try to constrain her so she doesn’t take the rest of us with her.”

“I don’t want to die!” said Miriam. “I want to live in freedom, like any of you! But fools that you were, you thought you were free when you were completely ensnared in the ways of the Egyptians. It took slavery to make us all see that Egypt was not beautiful or admirable. It took suffering to show us that the learning of the Egyptians was foolishness compared to the wisdom of the Lord.”

They seethed, but one of them said what they all knew was true. “You were right, Miriam, all along you were right. We never belonged here. I would to God Jacob had seen Egypt, turned around, and gone home.”

“No!” cried Miriam. “That was God’s plan as well! We have become a mighty nation here in Egypt. In Canaan among the dozens of tribes, who would we be? Here we have learned all the skills of civilization, and our numbers have increased as we ate the corn of this rich land. We had generations of shelter here, and that was what God wanted for us. If only we had remembered who we were. I tell you that the day is not far off when God will lead us out of Egypt and return us to the land he promised to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. We’ll carry the bones of father Jacob back to Canaan, and the nation of Israel will rise in that promised land.”

They heard her reverently, and believed her. “The problem,” said Aaron, “is how to train our men in the use of the sword, without the Egyptians seeing.”

“The sword!” said Miriam.

“Keep your voice down,” said Aaron. “Of course the sword. Do you think they’ll let us walk out of here? We have to be ready to fight. We vastly outnumber any army the Egyptians can bring against us, but numbers are nothing if we have only our hands and bodies to thrust onto the swords and spears of the soldiers.”

“God does not need armies to bring about his will!” said Miriam.

“The barge is coming!” cried someone farther up the riverbank. The cry was carried downstream by voice after voice. Of course, the same thing had happened all morning, since the cry moved much faster than the barge, and it only meant that somewhere many miles upstream, the barge had been seen. This time, though, it turned out to be true for this place, for there shining in the sun was the great barge of Pharaoh.

Miriam and Aaron withdrew from the other men. Miriam climbed up onto the highest point she could find—only a few cubits above the level of the river—and pointedly turned her back to the water.

“Aren’t you even curious to see?” said Aaron.

“I saw when Moses came down the river in triumph, after his victory at Saba.”

Aaron’s face grew grave. “We harmed him, pushing him to go out among the people.”

“He was in God’s hand, not ours,” said Miriam. “We did him nothing but good, helping him remember who he was.”

“I thought it would be so easy for him to rally the people. But he knew,” said Aaron. “He had actually been a leader of armies, and he knew that it could not be done so easily.”

“God is doing it.”

“Yes, we are becoming more unified as we become less capable of doing anything with that unity.”

Miriam laughed. “Don’t you see that it’s when we’re utterly helpless that we’ll turn to the Lord and he alone, by his power alone, will save us?”

“An interesting idea, and if it’s ever put to the test I hope you’re right,” said Aaron.

“I dreamed of Moses last night,” said Miriam.

“Oh?”

She knew he did not like hearing her dreams. It annoyed him that the Lord showed her things that were kept hidden from him. Or else it annoyed him that she claimed to see these things, for sometimes he asked her pointed questions as if he thought she made up these dreams. Aaron was a jealous man, and hated the idea that someone else knew things he didn’t know.

“I dreamed of Moses dressed like a man of the desert, walking among stones. Then a great fire came and swallowed him up. And he came out of the fire all ablaze, but he wasn’t burned. It was as if he had become the sun, and wherever he went there were no shadows, and every corner and crevice of the rocks was illuminated.”

“No doubt you’re going to tell me what it means.” There it was, that skeptical tone.

“I would but I don’t know,” said Miriam. “I only know that I dreamed of Moses filled with light, and then today we stand by these dark waters and watch this evil son of Satan come down the river to gloat over us in our captivity and I can’t help but think God was showing me some portion of his plan.”

“Moses is dead, Miriam,” said Aaron.

“If God wills it so,” said Miriam.

“He went out into the desert in the midst of a storm with scarcely any food or water. No one lives through that.”

“They do if God wills it so.”

“You and Mother,” said Aaron. “She died believing in him.”

“In God? Or Moses?”

“It’s hard to know whom she worshiped more,” said Aaron.

“So Moses lived in Pharaoh’s house and you never had a chance to be great and famous,” said Miriam. “He’s been gone all these years and I haven’t seen that you suddenly blossomed outside of his shadow.”

Aaron glared at her. “I was never jealous of Moses.”

“Self-knowledge can be painful,” said Miriam, “but not half so damaging as self-ignorance.”

“You don’t know everything,” said Aaron.

“I don’t have to know everything to know more than you,” she said. “Moses was a great general so you think you have to be a great general, too. But he studied war, and you never did. He had well-trained armies, and you don’t know how to begin training one. Don’t try to become Moses. The only result will be slaughter.”

“I’m not trying to become Moses! I’m preparing to lead Israel to freedom.”

“Hear yourself: I’m preparing to lead.”

“I know we can’t win by the strength of our own arms. God will give us the victory.”

“God will give us freedom in his own time, in his own way. Instead of making your own foolish plans and then demanding that God fit in with your schedule, why don’t you submit yourself to his will?”

“I don’t know what his will is!” cried Aaron.

People turned to look. They lowered their voices.

“Turn around,” some of them said. “Don’t make trouble for us!”

But Miriam did not turn around. Quietly she said to Aaron, “If you don’t know what the Lord’s will is, why not try asking?”

“He doesn’t speak to me.”

“You don’t speak to him!”

“I pray all day in my heart,” said Aaron.

“You never pray. You just complain and make demands.”

“You don’t know how my heart breaks when I bow before God,” said Aaron.

Maybe it was true, thought Miriam. “No, I don’t know. I’m sorry. I judge you too harshly, because you’re my brother.”

“Because I’m the brother who’s still alive,” said Aaron. “That’s what you won’t forgive me for. Wonderful Moses is dead, and all that’s left is Aaron.”

“Moses wasn’t wonderful,” said Miriam. “He was confused, just as you are, and the Lord has chastened him and brought him low, just as he has done with all of Israel. He does it with all men and women, one way or another—we face our wickedness and weakness. What matters is, do we despair or rage or fight? Do we surrender to our wickedness and fear? Or do we turn to God to put strength and goodness into us?”

“What you mean is, do we turn to Miriam and let her tell us what to do.”

His snideness infuriated her. He still had that knack. “I’ve never asked anyone to do what I want,” she said. “But since no one has ever followed my advice, we have no idea whether things might have worked out better, do we?”

“Moses followed your advice once,” said Aaron.

“Yes. Your advice, too,” she answered. “We were wrong in every detail, both of us, but we were right about the most important things, and we still are. We’re still on the same side, Aaron. God’s side.”

“If only he’d tell us where his side is.”

“It’s not to take swords into our hands,” said Miriam.

“You don’t know that.”

“Yes I do! If you led an Israelite army to victory, the temptation would be too great for you. The story would be told that King Aaron won the freedom of the Israelites.”

“I have no intention of being king of anything!” he snapped.

“When Israel leaves Egypt,” said Miriam, “it will be in such a way that everyone will say, Look what a miracle has happened here. The Lord God of Israel freed his people from bondage in Egypt.”

“That’s what we’ll say when we win,” said Aaron. “Our victory will be a miracle.”

“And thus my brother continues to earn his place at the head of the long line of people who completely ignore me.”

The people around them were becoming quite agitated. “Turn around! Don’t make trouble! Don’t shame us! Don’t make him angry!”

Finally hands were laid on Miriam and Aaron both, Miriam to turn her around to face the water, Aaron to keep him from springing to his sister’s defense. Forced now to face the water, Miriam threw back her head and cried out at the top of her voice, “Tuthmose! God sees your wickedness!”

Thus it was that Miriam watched the passing of Pharaoh imprisoned by many hands, with a rag stuffed in her mouth. But she exulted in the moment, for there she stood, the perfect symbol of her people—bound and silenced, but still defiant. Look at me now and see Israel, ready for the Lord to come and redeem us from captivity.

* * * 

For Moses, tending sheep had now become second nature. He watched them all without even thinking, herded those that strayed without losing the train of his own thoughts. He could sing softly to them, utter a sharp command, touch one with his staff to get its attention, and through it all his thoughts remained his own.

The Lord’s call had come, not to Moses directly, but to Jethro; yet Moses did not mind, his pride was not hurt because he had no pride before God. This time, he obeyed, not because he had no choice, but because he had already made the choice. He knew that whatever God required of him, he would give, if not gladly, then at least willingly, for God would not require of him anything which was not intended, in the long run, to bring joy to the children of men. The only problem was how desperately uncomfortable it could be in the short run, to those who obeyed the Lord.

In his years among the Midianites, Moses had been purged of ambition. All that was left was a heartfelt wish to remain with his family, raising his children, loving his wife, studying the scriptures, ministering to the villagers, and tending the sheep. But he knew that was not what his life pointed to. God did not give him this impossible life in order for him to spend his last years quietly. This call to the mountain meant the end of his peace.

I will give all you ask of me, Lord, but please, please don’t take from me all that I love.

Was this what Abraham said, going up the slope of Mount Moriah? Why am I complaining—has God asked me to slay my boy Gershom?

He found a meadow in a sheltered vale on the mountain’s slope. He labored several hours pulling brush and stones together to make a fence to keep the sheep from straying away from the grassy place. He knelt among the animals and prayed for God to lead him where he was supposed to go. Then he began climbing, through ever steeper, ever stonier terrain, until he was clambering by hands and toes, knees and elbows, up small cliffs, along narrow ledges, going wherever the mountain seemed to be leading him, going ever higher into the mountain.

He should have been weak from fasting, but his hands still had their grip, and he watched his own body as if it were another animal, climbing mindlessly on. He was thirsty and his mouth was dry, his lips cracked with the dust of the climb, but the dryness in his mouth and the soreness of his lips were only interesting facts that he took note of, but cared little about.

The ground leveled out on a shelf of land perhaps six paces wide. The air was cooler here, he had climbed so high, and the leaves on the bushes were green even though it was high summer. Life grew from every crevice in the rock. He stopped and looked around him. Below him the rocky land spread out like a carpet carelessly thrown, looking softer from this distance than it ever did close up. The air was so clear that he could see the blue water of the arm of the Red Sea that separated this land of Sinai from the true land of Midian across the water. Somewhere on the other side of the mountain, across another arm of the Red Sea, lay the land of Egypt. He did not want to look that way. He felt no nostalgia for the place, or for the prideful, fearful, arrogant, stammering man he was when he lived there.

He felt something behind him. Warmth, perhaps, or just a presence. He turned. Far along the ledge there was a bloom of fire enveloping a green bush.

“It burns, and yet it lives,” he said. “Lord, is this the thing you brought me here to see?”

A voice came to him then, though he wasn’t sure he was hearing with the ears of his body, for the sound seemed to come from all around him, from inside him, making him tremble throughout his body, dropping him to his knees. And yet he was not afraid. The voice was not violent. The opposite: It was gentle, yet so strong, so irresistible, that it weakened his body just to hear it. He knew that if the voice were not restrained so tightly, his body would die from the sound of it, for this voice, if it ever shouted, would shiver the stones of this mountain into dust.

“Moses,” the voice said, and his own name sounded strange to him, hearing it spoken by the voice of God. “Moses,” God said again.

“Here I am.” His own words sounded weak and foolish, like the shoddy imitation of a voice, for he had heard what a voice could be, and now his own was nothing.

He tried to rise from his knees and walk toward the burning bush, but the voice came again and stopped him. “Come no closer. Take the sandals from your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.”

Moses sat in the grass and unlaced his sandals. The silence while he did so was overpowering. God was waiting for him to take off his shoes.

At last he was done, and knelt again, so weak he had to lean on his staff, hardly daring to look at the bush, hardly daring to look away.

“I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob. I have seen the misery of captive Israel, I’ve heard them crying to me under the whip, I know their grief, and I’ll deliver them. I’ll bring them to a land that flows with milk, that runs with honey, to Canaan, broad and fine. For they are mine, and you, my son, are mine.”

In his heart, Moses heard these words with rejoicing and with dread: rejoicing, because the longed-for day of deliverance was now at hand; dread, because the Lord would not be telling him if he were not expected to do something to help bring it about.

“Go to Pharaoh,” said the Lord, “and bring my people out.”

Not me, he wanted to cry out. “Will Pharaoh let them go for the asking?” he said.

“He will stand against the will of God, but he will break.”

He, the Lord said. So Pharaoh was a man. Hatshepsut was dead. Moses felt a pang of regret, but then relief as well. She had lasted for many years after Moses went into exile—or came out of exile, as he thought of it now. He hoped her death, when it came, was not bitter to her.

“I’ll stretch forth my hand,” said the Lord, “to strike down Egypt with my wonders, and you will leave with the wealth of Egypt, not stolen, but freely given to you by the Egyptian people, if only you will leave and take the anger of God away from them. It will not be the hand of men that delivers Egypt, but my hand, and all the world will say, The Lord God remembered Israel.”

He wanted to say, You can do this without me, Lord. With all your power, what am I needed for? But what he said was, “I’ve been gone so long, the Israelites won’t know me. They never knew me, I was never a man of faith among them, they’ll ask me, Who are you, that the Lord would speak to you?”

“What’s that in your hand?”

Moses had to look. “A staff.”

“Throw it to the ground.”

With so little strength, Moses could only let it drop. At once it turned into a snake, a large one of the most poisonous kind. Fear gave him strength he hadn’t thought he had, as he scrambled crabwise away from it.

“Take it by the tail.”

It took a moment, but he conquered the fear. If the Lord told him to take hold of the tail, then either no harm would come of it, or it was the Lord’s will that he should be bitten, and it would not be harm in that case, either. So he got back on hands and knees, approached the snake warily, reached out to its tail and took hold.

It was his staff again, the cool smooth wood that he had polished himself.

“Put your hand inside your robe, to touch the skin of your chest.”

When Moses drew his hand out, it was white and scaly. Leprosy. He held the hand away from him, knowing that what the Lord had done to him the Lord could heal, but still frightened by the numbness in his arm. It was as if the hand he saw were someone else’s, because he could not feel it.

“Put it back in your robe.”

At first he was reluctant to touch himself with the unclean hand, but then, knowing that this was how it would be healed, he moved eagerly, and when his hand emerged again the skin was clean.

“If these two signs don’t convince them that you come from me, then take up the water of the Nile and pour it on the ground, and it will turn to blood.”

But it would not be enough to overawe them. They had to know that he came in fulfilment of their faith, not as a new prophet wiping away all that had been taught before. “The elders will ask me, If you have spoken to God, what is his name? I don’t know how to answer them, Lord.”

“I am that I Am,” said the Lord. “Tell them that I Am sent you to them.”

Moses had no idea what these words would mean to the Israelites. Such a phrase did not exist in the scripture Jethro had. But then, if it were written down, it would not be secret.

Moses knew that he would obey, if the Lord really wanted him. But there were so many men whose whole lives had been dedicated to serving the Lord, committed to freeing Israel. Compared to them, Moses was a latecomer. They would resent his being placed ahead of them. “Lord, you could give these powers to any man. I’m not the one to send. You want a prophet, a man of mighty words, an eloquent man! When I speak to strangers I stammer, I’m slow and hesitant. People grow impatient listening to me. How will Pharaoh hearken to the Lord if his messenger is ridiculous?”

“Who made man’s mouth? Who can heal the dumb or the deaf? Who makes some men see, and some blind? Go and my voice will go with you and give you words when you need them.”

Moses knew that the Lord could open his mouth and give him speech—hadn’t he done it before? Wasn’t it already a gift of God that he no longer stammered when he spoke to his family? He didn’t doubt God’s ability to give him words; but why not send one who wouldn’t need such help?

“Send someone else, Lord. My brother Aaron wanted to be the savior of Israel! Or anyone else, anyone—whoever you want, you can make him your messenger. I’m the last man who should show his face before Pharaoh. He’ll refuse most adamantly because I’m the one speaking for Israel.”

Only then did it occur to him that this, too, might be part of the Lord’s plan, for Pharaoh to humble himself before the man he had resented and envied all through his childhood.

“I’ll bring you your brother Aaron to be your spokesman,” said the Lord. “You’ll give him words to say, as I give those words to you, so that you will be to your brother as I am to you.”

Moses saw at once that having Aaron speak for him as if Moses were God and Aaron the prophet would make it even more galling to Pharaoh. Well, it was the Lord’s errand. And it would indeed be a miracle if Pharaoh didn’t have Moses and Aaron dismembered the first time they even attempted to enter his palace.

But the first miracle would be persuading Aaron to take a role subservient to his younger brother.

“What should I say to Pharaoh? How will I even get to see him? Tuthmose hated me before I left.”

“Why do you fear for your life, Moses? No one can raise a hand against you while I am with you. Say to Pharaoh, The Lord God says, Israel is my son, even my firstborn. Let my son go, that he may serve me. If you refuse to let him go, then I will slay your own son, your firstborn.”

Moses imagined himself standing before Tuthmose and saying to the man with all the power of Egypt in his hands that if he didn’t obey God, his firstborn son would die.

To his own surprise, once he imagined himself doing it, the last fear fled from him. For it would not be Moses challenging Pharaoh, it would be the Lord God of heaven and earth commanding Pharaoh, and if there was a quarrel it was between them. As long as he remembered that he was God’s servant in this, God’s messenger, and not speaking for himself, then there was nothing to fear. All would happen according to God’s will. Moses might never see his children again, but that also lay in the hands of God: the children were God’s gift to him in the first place, as was Zeforah, and what God gave him so bountifully, the Lord could take away if it were his will that Moses’ life should end.

Though he did not say it aloud, the Lord heard the thoughts of his heart, and answered him. “Let this be an assurance to you: You will come here again, with the host of Israel, and serve me together upon this mount.”

And with that, the voice let go of him, and left him empty, and the fire surrounding the bush faded, leaving it vibrant and green. Only when the fire left the bush did he realize that what he was looking at was more than fire, was not fire at all, but was the presence of the Lord, if only his eyes had been pure enough to see. Yet burned into his heart was the afterimage of the face of God. Moses felt as if all liquid had been drained out of his flesh, leaving only a dry husk, weightless as chaff. Yet he felt as if the fire from the bush burned inside him, sustaining him, filling him up with light instead of water, instead of blood. He went so easily back down the mountain, for his body had no weight, he had no fear of falling, he moved as gently among the rocks as goosedown gusting in the wind.

He would do what the Lord commanded him to do.

The sheep waited patiently for him, and when he walked among them, they gathered around him. He did not need to speak to them, or drive them. Rather they followed his footsteps wherever he walked. They knew, he was sure of it, they knew whose voice had filled him today, and they followed him as if he were the Lord.

He spoke to the sheep as he led them along the ridge, back toward home. “Now I know that man is nothing, which I never had supposed. I have seen the Lord in glory, I’ve had his glory in me, and the Lord did not despise me.” And the final realization, that he had been given the gift of the prophets—with joy he announced it to the flock: “I have seen his face.”
 

 
 
© 2000 Shadow Mountain 

Printed from Gospelink.com
