# Chapter 9: Reunions

### Chapter 9: Reunions
Orson Scott Card , Stone Tables (Salt Lake City 2000)
 
 

Chapter 9: Reunions

It was only a dream. Aaron wouldn’t even have mentioned it to Miriam, except that he thought she might find it amusing. “I’m dreaming of Moses now, too,” he said.

“Oh.” She didn’t seem all that interested. “What was he doing in your dream?”

“He came out of a sandstorm in the desert. His face was so covered with sand that I couldn’t see who it was. I gave him water, and he washed his face, and it was Moses.”

“Then you must go meet him.” Just like that, from his dream to her assumption that he must go off on some mad errand. But Miriam was sure that it was a true dream, given by the Lord. “It was too clear,” she said. “It couldn’t have been one of the normal dreams of sleep. God is bringing Moses back out of the desert, out of obscurity, and it is you who must meet him and reveal him to the rest of Israel.”

“How am I supposed to find him?” asked Aaron. “There’s a lot of desert, and since I’m an Israelite slave, I probably can’t even get to the desert.”

“Don’t be absurd. As long as we meet our quota, they don’t mind if one Israelite or another goes off on errands here and there.”

Insane errands, he wanted to add. Except that the dream was different. She might be right. “That doesn’t change the fact that Moses could be anywhere.”

“Aaron. You’re deliberately trying to be stupid. He went into the desert from the border outpost at the head of the Red Sea. Where else would he come back?”

“So I go there and sit around for a week and finally give up and come home.”

“A week? You’ll wait until he comes,” said Miriam. “When God gives you an errand, you don’t decide it’s over until you’ve completed it.”

“If you’ve misunderstood my dream, that could be a long wait,” he said. “I have a wife and children, you know. Elisheba doesn’t like it when I’m gone too long. I have responsibilities.”

“Then don’t go,” said Miriam. “All these years, you tell me you wish God would speak to you the way he speaks to me, show you things, give you something to do. All these years, you plot to raise an army to overthrow Pharaoh, you devise these elaborate plans that would only end up getting somewhere between a hundred and a hundred thousand people killed. And now God actually calls you to act, and you remember you have responsibilities.”

The scorn in her voice stung him, but that wasn’t what made him go. It had been an extraordinarily clear and memorable dream, and he wanted it to be from God. Besides, it made a kind of sense. Moses’ name might have been expunged from every monument and every book, but he was well-remembered by Israelite and Egyptian alike. If God wanted to liberate Israel, he could do worse than bringing Moses back from exile. No one could galvanize Israel more quickly, unify all the tribes, and strike fear into the hearts of the Egyptians.

Not that Moses would want Aaron’s counsel—he never had before—but it had to mean something that God sent Aaron to meet Moses. Aaron wouldn’t have to wait for Moses to invite him to take part—he had his own call from the Lord.

So after two days of walking, Aaron showed up at the caravanserai near the desert outpost where Moses had taken his leave of Egypt. Most caravans came through the northern border outpost, the one at the Sea of Reeds, the marshy land on the Mediterranean shore. That was the best route into Egypt if you came from Canaan, and most people did. This southern entry served only the caravans from deepest Arabia, south where the frankincense was harvested. Thus there was little traffic, and the soldiers soon noticed Aaron and asked his business.

Waiting, that’s what he told them his business was. Waiting for my brother to come through.

Are you sure he’s coming this way? What did he say in his letter?

He didn’t send a letter.

Oh. Someone came ahead of him, then. What did his messenger say?

And what, exactly, could Aaron say to that? He wasn’t sure at all that he was waiting in the right place. Nor was he sure that he had understood the message, or that it even was one. So he shrugged at the soldiers’ questions and, when he ran out of food, he began working for them, doing chores in exchange for meals. At home he would have been making bricks all day; here, he was digging whatever they wanted dug, and building whatever they wanted built. It made no difference to him. He was waiting for Moses. Or despair.

Moses came first. One day a caravan was sighted in the distance, and the soldiers made ready. Aaron worked beside them, taking orders from everyone; the soldiers offered him encouragement. “Maybe your brother will be with this one.”

The dromedaries, loaded with bags of precious spices, came through at their stately pace. Aaron looked at the men who walked along beside the animals. As desert travelers did, they all had their heads covered, and all the men of any age had long, full beards. When Aaron saw him last, Moses had been clean shaven. Would Aaron recognize him if he saw him face to face?

It turned out that he recognized Moses before his face was visible. Though Moses was still many rods off, a bearded man dressed in wool homespun bringing up the rear of the caravan, Aaron recognized his bearing, his stride. Moses walked with the strength and vigor of a soldier, and with the boldness of a man who does not think anyone is his superior. All these years gone, and nothing changes.

Aaron strode out to greet him. “My brother! My brother, is it you?”

Moses smiled, threw wide his arms, and when they reached each other, Aaron found himself folded in a vast embrace. Moses must have been this tall and strong when he left—Aaron hadn’t known because they had never embraced as adult men.

“So the Lord found you and brought you here,” said Moses.

“I could say the same to you,” said Aaron.

“I’m not the man I was, Aaron,” said Moses. “Now I know that you were right—I’m a man of Israel, not of Egypt. Nor of Midian, where I’ve lived these past few years.”

“Are you married? Do you have a family?”

“God gave me a splendid wife who is my teacher in everything, and we have two sons and three daughters. My wife and children came as far as the last caravanserai with me, but I sent them home to my father-in-law.”

Aaron lowered his voice into a conspiratorial hush. “I’ve been careful not to tell anyone the name of the brother I was waiting for.”

“Thank you, but that won’t be necessary. I’m entering Egypt as Moses ben Amram. I’m here as myself, on the Lord’s errand.”

“I had a dream from God that brought me here,” said Aaron. “Was it the same with you?”

“Not a dream,” said Moses. “A vision. God came to me on the mountain, in a fire that burned in a green bush but didn’t harm it. He spoke to me in a voice—oh, Aaron, when you hear his voice—but you must know what I mean. Have you felt how the voice of God fills your body so you hardly need to breathe? It becomes your life while he speaks to you, and when he left me I was so weak I could hardly walk, and yet so light I thought I could fly.”

As Moses went on and on about his vision, Aaron felt something break inside him. He should have known. Moses left as an unbeliever, but of course he would come back as a prophet, a greater prophet than any that Aaron had heard of—for which of them ever had the experience Moses was telling about? Aaron had his little dream, but Moses had a great vision.

That’s the story of my life, thought Aaron. I’m the one who feels the pain of Israel, but Moses is the one the Lord chose. From the cradle on. What was I? A spoiled brick, to be tossed back into the river and become mud again? I was invisible to God. Now that he finally notices me, I’m still only a faint shadow in the blinding light that Moses has in him.

They came at last to the checkpoint, where the soldiers greeted Aaron with a smile. “Here at last, eh? Well, we’ll miss your help, Aaron!”

They almost passed Moses through without even asking his name, but the duty sergeant remembered at the last moment. “We need to have your name for the records,” he said.

“Moses,” answered Moses.

Aaron shriveled with fear, but tried to show none of it. It was impossible that the soldiers wouldn’t know his name.

The sergeant laughed. “Moses! There was another Moses, you know. Went out into the desert from this very outpost, in the middle of a storm. He used to be the son of Pharaoh, till he killed somebody and had to flee. We figure the desert got him. The sand, the wind.”

“No, he lived,” said Moses.

“Well, listen to that! Boys, did you hear what he said? This man knows something about what happened to Moses, the general who—”

And then, suddenly, he remembered that it was forbidden to mention Moses by name.

“That is to say, the former son of Pharaoh, whose name we’ve all forgotten.”

The other men laughed.

“So what happened to him? How do former sons of Pharaoh live, when they get out into the desert?”

Several of the other soldiers had gathered around now, and were making mock bets about whether Moses had been sold into slavery or merely forced to marry some toothless desert maiden.

“Actually, he’s become a fairly good shepherd,” said Moses. “And he would have been happy to remain at that labor, but the Lord God of Israel appeared to him and sent him back to Egypt.”

“Sent him back!” The sergeant laughed. “Oh, I’d like to see him dare to show his face here again!”

“Would you?” said Moses. “Then open your eyes, soldier. I’m the one who passed through here all those years ago. I’m the one who’s been tending sheep. And I’m the one who’s here with a message to Pharaoh from the Lord God of Israel.”

The soldiers fell still. They had no idea what to do now.

“I suppose we should arrest you,” said the sergeant, making it sound halfway joking, just in case Moses was only having a jest at their expense. It would be too embarrassing to claim to his superiors that he had arrested Moses, only to have it discovered that it was only some desert rat with a sense of humor.

“Arrest me or not,” said Moses. “Either way I’ll see Pharaoh soon enough. As you can see, I’m not trying to sneak in secretly. Send word to him that I passed through here and that I’m on my way to speak to him, as soon as I visit with my brother and sister. Pharaoh is not afraid of me. If you arrest me, it will look as if he is.”

Aaron had to admire the bold, cool way Moses addressed the soldiers. He spoke to them as an officer, and they were properly subservient. When it was clear that they had no intention of arresting him or interfering with him in any way, Moses bade them farewell and stepped out smartly, with Aaron hurrying a little to keep up. Moses did not look back. They were well out on the road, with Moses trying to learn everything he could about events in Egypt since he left, when a chariot came clattering up behind them. Moses did not so much as glance at it, just stepped out of the road and kept on walking. Aaron forced himself to pretend to be as nonchalant. It turned out Moses was right—the chariot was not coming to arrest them. But could it be that he really didn’t care?

“There went the messenger to report that I’ve entered Egypt,” said Moses.

“The Lord must have shown you everything, for you to know that there was nothing to fear from the soldiers.”

“On the contrary,” said Moses. “The Lord gave me only a few general predictions—that Pharaoh will not let Israel go until he has suffered greatly under the hands of God. And that the children of Israel and I will gather at the mountain of the Lord, after Egypt has let them go.”

“But that conversation with the guards—you can’t tell me you didn’t know it would turn out well.”

“I knew it would turn out as the Lord wished,” said Moses. “Come now, you and Miriam were telling me these things when we were all young. The Lord gives us commandments, but expects us to be resourceful in carrying them out.”

“But you were so confident. Not showing the slightest doubt.”

“I was confident in the Lord,” said Moses. “But I had no idea whether I would come before Pharaoh as a free man or in chains.”

“Well, if it had been the chains,” Aaron pointed out, “they would have arrested me, too. You might have thought of that.”

“I would have, if you had come here at my command,” said Moses. “But it was the Lord who sent you the dream that brought you here, and you came here in obedience to him, not me. If you’re with me, then we must face Pharaoh together. So if one of us is in chains, or both, is up to the Lord.”

“Couldn’t you have discussed it with me first?”

“Aaron, I asked the Lord to send you instead of me. I knew that you were the one who dreamed of leading Israel out of captivity, and I knew you had the abilities that would be needed. But the Lord didn’t take my advice. Instead, he charged me with the task, and gave me a companion—you. You’re to be my spokesman in dealing both with Pharaoh and with the Israelites.”

“It makes sense for me to speak for you among the Israelites, where I know all the leaders of every tribe,” said Aaron, “but I don’t know anyone in the palace. I think you could guess that once you left, we were no longer welcome at Pharaoh’s house. So I can’t think how I’d be helpful there.”

“You are to be my spokesman,” said Moses. “Those were the Lord’s instructions. He said that I would give you words to say as God gives words to me. I was to be to you like God, he said.”

Aaron stopped walking. “Are you trying to hurt me?”

“Why should you be hurt?” said Moses. “I’m telling you what the Lord said. It has nothing to do with us or our feelings. We’ll be meeting with Pharaoh, and Pharaoh’s a god, remember? I come as the ambassador from the most high God, who is king of heaven and earth, and so I will not deign to speak to Tuthmose directly. He’ll have a dozen, a hundred courtiers there who all treat him like a god. I will have only you.”

“I’m a proud man,” said Aaron. “But if it’s the Lord’s will, I’ll serve as your spokesman. To have Israel free, I’d gladly die—so why should I let a little humiliation bother me?”

“We’re brothers, Aaron, as we’ve always been. Back when I was in Pharaoh’s house I was too proud or fearful or—what?—too Egyptian to accept you as I should have. But I know you now as my brother, and you know me. I don’t know how the Lord will bring Israel out of Egypt, but I know he will. I was not glad to be the one called to speak to Pharaoh. I was glad to find out that you would be with me. You have always had courage, Aaron. Boldness that I didn’t have. You have never been afraid to speak your mind, even in Pharaoh’s house, where others were so obsequious and eloquent in their flattery that I could barely comprehend their messages.”

“Yes, I imagine my messages were always clear,” said Aaron, with a laugh. “When I think of the things that Miriam and I said to you. . . .”

“I was relieved to find out that the two of you were still alive. I was afraid that some vengeance might have been taken against you. Hatshepsut knew that you were urging me to act like an Israelite, and mothers are very resentful of those who get their children into trouble.”

Aaron stiffened. “Even now, you refer to that woman lying in her huge stone tomb as your mother, when your true mother lies buried in a grave that no Egyptian will ever tend, and no Israelite will ever visit?”

Moses looked genuinely surprised. “Aaron, do we need to visit that old question? I was told from infancy that Hatshepsut was my mother. I lived in her house. I grew up as her son. Now that she’s been murdered and put in her grave, must I repudiate her in order to keep you content?”

Aaron was startled. “The Lord told you, then, that she was definitely killed?”

Moses laughed. “No, no, the Lord didn’t tell me any such thing. I just know the way that Pharaoh’s house works. Pharaohs who die of sudden illnesses caused by eating bad fruit—that was the official rumor, wasn’t it?—let’s just say that Hatshepsut is the most recent in a long line of sudden deaths in Pharaoh’s house. My only consolation is that those who use poison as a political instrument never eat a meal in peace. Every bout with indigestion will cause Tuthmose to fear that justice has come to him at last. And it will come—but from God, not from poison.”

“Speaking of things that come from God,” said Aaron, “it’s going to take some planning to figure out how to convince the elders of the tribes that you are indeed the Lord’s prophet. They don’t know you as an Israelite, and—”

Moses held up his hand for silence. “The Lord has already provided us with all the persuasion we’ll need. Take your walking staff, Aaron, and throw it to the ground.”

Moses seemed to be amused at Aaron’s fear of the snake, his reluctance to pick it up again by the tail. “No, Aaron, I’m not laughing at you. I’m laughing to remember how I did exactly the same thing—and I was in the presence of the burning bush. Now, for the second sign the Lord gave us. Put your hand into the bosom of your robe.”

Fearfully, Aaron did so; when it came out leprous, he cried out in horror. “Have I failed a test?”

“No test, Aaron. Just put your hand back into your robe.”

Aaron did, and kissed his own hand when it came out clean. “To be cut off from the land of the living, and yet not be dead,” he said. “How could I bear that?”

Moses shook his head. “That’s how most men live, and don’t even know it.”

“Will that happen every time I put my hand in my robe? Do I get a snake every time I drop my staff?”

“Only when I command you to do it, Aaron. It’s not something you can do whenever you feel like it. The elders will see that it’s not some trick I do, like the priests with their carefully staged miracles. I have only to command, and nature obeys—and power like that comes only from the Lord.”

And only to you, thought Aaron.

At once he was ashamed of his resentment. How could he not be glad? Miracles had been done using his own staff, his own body. The Lord was moving to free Israel, and the power of God had flowed through him. If Aaron had power only when Moses commanded him, well, that was better than not having the power of God at all.

“Pharaoh might well try to forbid a gathering of elders,” said Moses.

“He might also forbid the wind from blowing,” said Aaron, “but as the wind blows, so also do the elders gather.” He grinned. “They don’t watch us that closely. As long as we live in desperate poverty, and as long as we labor, all of us, even our wives and children, to meet their tally of bricks, then they’re content to let us govern ourselves how we will.”

Moses nodded, his expression grim. “Governing ourselves—that’s the problem that the Lord will leave to us. When the Lord succeeds in bringing Israel out of Egypt, we have to turn these tribes—half Egyptian in their thoughts and habits—into a single nation that respects and obeys the Lord. I know what it took to prepare me to serve God. I hope they’ll be easier to teach.”

“Nothing’s easy with Israelites,” said Aaron, thinking of the endless quarreling. The saying was that wherever you had two Israelites, you had three opinions—each man’s true opinion, and an opinion exactly opposite to whichever one was stated first, which the second man will immediately adopt as if he had believed it all his life.

“What do we do when someone decides that you and I are not really the ones God wants to rule that nation? What if we face a rebellion? Do we become tyrants in order to hold Israel together as one nation? The Lord will free us from Egypt, but who will keep us at peace with each other?”

“The danger isn’t rebellion so much as division,” said Aaron. “The one thing Israel has maintained far better than our religion is the separate identity of the twelve tribes. Thirteen, really, since Ephraim and Manasseh act as if they were still carrying on their old foolish rivalry and they won’t allow anyone to combine them as the tribe of Joseph. Each tribe has its own leaders, and each one will be afraid that some other tribe will have the ascendancy.”

“So they’ll assume we intend to have our tribe of Levi rule over all the others,” said Moses.

“That’s why I never have a council of fewer than thirteen members,” said Aaron. “I can never afford to let any tribe feel left out, or that tribe will be my enemy.”

“I’m glad to see you’ve already had experience with this,” said Moses. “Governing people is hard enough when they are used to being a nation, and are accustomed to the way government works in their lives. Every person will have his own idea of what freedom means. Most will recognize that we still must have laws and judges, to keep the peace and to protect our nation from enemies. But it’ll take time to bind these tribes into one nation, the children of Israel, the servants of God. A nation of priests and prophets, Aaron, that’s what we must become. When the people all have the spirit of God in their hearts, then we’ll be like the people of Zion or Salem, and without war our enemies will be driven away by the power of God, and without animosity all disagreements will be settled with the love of God in our hearts.” Moses sighed. “In the meantime, I’ll have to rely on your intimate knowledge of the leaders of the tribes.”

Aaron felt his heart racing, to think of the kind of nation that Moses envisioned. He had never heard of Zion or Salem, but he had some notion of what it might mean to be a nation of priests and prophets. To get to that condition, though, they had so far to go. “Now I’m gladder than ever that I’ve worked to make friends with the leaders of every tribe,” said Aaron. “There is none that has cause to hate me, and I think there’s none that does.”

“When they see the power of God flow from your hand,” said Moses, “some of them will remember old offenses that didn’t even bother them at the time, and they’ll say, Who is he, that the Lord has given him power like that? Wasn’t he the one who used to quarrel with me as a child? Didn’t I hear that his own children misbehave? Why did the Lord choose him and not me?”

Aaron flushed with embarrassment. Had Moses read his mind?

But Moses went on as if his words had no application to Aaron at all, and they spent the next several hours’ journey with Aaron telling Moses about all the elders of all the tribes. Whether Moses could possibly remember all this information, Aaron had no idea. But he was glad to have the chance to show how well he knew the leaders of the people. If Moses had some notion that Aaron resented him, Aaron was determined that he would never have cause to think such a thing again. It was the Lord they served, and the Lord’s people. Both of them were called by prophecy, however different their experience might have been. If the Lord had need of any man, he should be glad to serve, no matter how high or low his office might seem in the eyes of others. For in the service of God all offices were made noble by the nobility of their master, and all yet all officers were lowly servants compared to the one they obeyed.

Besides, even though Moses was ahead of him and always would be, Aaron couldn’t help but notice that being second in the eyes of the Lord put him well ahead of everyone else.

* * * 

Jannes and Jambres came to Tuthmose as soon as they were summoned. If they thought of themselves as kingmakers for having helped Tuthmose gain sole possession of the crown, they never showed it. If anything, they were more obedient and subservient than they had ever been with Hatshepsut. This wise humility was an attribute he appreciated in his priests. That way he didn’t have to kill them.

“What service can we perform for our god Pharaoh?” asked Jannes. Jambres, though he was now a man of middle age, still let his father do the talking on public occasions. This was an illusion, of course. In private, it was Jambres whose keen mind was worth consulting. And Tuthmose knew perfectly well that it was to Jambres that Tuthmose owed the support of the priesthood. Jannes was old, just going through the motions.

“Do you remember a slave who pretended to be a son in Pharaoh’s house?” asked Tuthmose.

“Wasn’t that during the time that a woman was pretending to be Pharaoh in Pharaoh’s house?” asked Jambres.

Jannes glowered at his son. “I was commanded to forget any such slave who went into exile some years ago.”

“Now I command you to remember again,” said Tuthmose. “He’s back.”

“We know,” said Jambres. “Our informers among the Israelites told us of a meeting last night on the banks of the Nile. Some magic tricks were done. The bumpkins were impressed.”

“The staff into a snake,” said Jannes, “I’ve been doing that one for years. The snake back into a staff, that’s harder, but. . . .” His voice trailed off.

“I assume,” said Tuthmose,” that you’re speaking of the power of the gods.”

“If the slaves are going to start showing off what their nameless invisible desert god can do, we plan to match them trick for trick,” said Jambres. “My father is an expert at helping the gods show their . . . presence.”

“So you know that Moses has announced his intention of coming to see me.”

“We were surprised that you didn’t have him killed,” said Jannes. “Isn’t he under sentence of death?”

“Yes, well. . . .” Tuthmose stared off into space. “It’s not as if he poses any danger. The army is ready to slaughter Israelites should there be any rebellion. But my observers didn’t mention anything about the Israelites arming themselves.”

“No,” said Jambres. “Incredible as it may sound, my informers insisted that Moses and his hot-headed brother Aaron utterly refused any idea of armed rebellion. They are going to let their god persuade you to let them go. In fact, Moses and Aaron told the tribal chieftains that you will beg them to go, and the people of Egypt will thrust gold and jewels upon the Israelites as gifts when they depart.”

“Moses was a better general than he is a prophet,” said Tuthmose. “There’ll be begging, but it won’t be from any Egyptian.”

Jambres made as if to speak, then said nothing.

“The priest of Amon is shy before the god Pharaoh,” said Tuthmose.

“Does a man counsel a god?” said Jambres.

“You shouldn’t,” said Jannes. “The gods don’t need counsel.”

“I take counsel all the time,” said Tuthmose.

“But this is personal,” said Jambres.

“I forgive you before you speak,” said Tuthmose.

“Kill him now,” said Jambres. “Whatever game you’re playing is too dangerous.”

“Dangerous? What, do you think the military will follow an Israelite traitor who’s been tending sheep in the wilderness all these years? Do you think I can’t crush any revolt he might raise? Do you think my guards won’t stand ready to stop any attempt at assassination?”

Jambres nodded and looked at the floor.

“Answer me!” said Tuthmose.

Jambres sighed.

His ancient father laughed. “I told you not to try,” said the old man.

“Try what?” said Tuthmose.

“To persuade you when your mind is already made up,” said Jannes.

“Persuade me not to see Moses? Why! Do you think I don’t know the man, every corner of his mind? I was his best student. He didn’t know that—I pretended to be dimwitted, not to understand half what he said, so he wouldn’t see the danger that I posed. But I learned everything he had to teach. Do you think he can surprise me now?”

“Of course not, Pharaoh,” said Jambres. “Thank you for forgiving me.”

“No, I want your warning! I want to hear it so I can laugh at you later.”

“But you have already answered my fears. I have no more. I am at peace with the wisdom of Pharaoh.”

“Do you know what I think, Jambres? I think that whatever it was Moses did at that meeting, the sticks-and-snakes thing, you don’t believe it was a trick, the way your little demonstrations are. I think you’re afraid his god is more powerful than yours.”

“God is God,” said Jambres. “Amon is the name for him here, and Ptah is also his name; he wears many faces in many lands. But behind all images and dreams and tales and powers of the gods there is the same creator god, the father of all. We know that this creator has stepped away, and left this world to the lesser gods. This nameless Israelite god might be one of those, or might be a name for the first God of gods. But the underlying power is the same. Can God be more powerful than God?”

“Am I supposed to make any sense of this priestly nattering?” said Tuthmose.

“You admired Moses as a child,” said Jambres. “You said so to me, even as you told me how you hated him.”

“What I said then, I said as a little boy, not as a man, and certainly not as Pharaoh.”

“But it is on the head of the little boy, and the man, and the Pharaoh, that the crown was set.”

“You think I still admire Moses? He turned out to be weak. Soft-hearted. A follower, like one of those poor little calves or lambs the Israelites cut open and let bleed to death on their altars, back when they were still allowed to do that.”

“I think you want him to admire you,” said Jambres.

“Wrong,” said Tuthmose angrily. “I want him to see me where he thought to be! I want him to see all his ambitions fulfilled—but by me, while he’s a rustic, a pastoral clown. Admire me? No, I want him to see what he lost! I want to fill his heart with regret! I only wish he had come back before Hatshepsut died. He missed her by only a few weeks, isn’t that amusing? I wish he could have been here to see her, and then the next day, see her dead. But this is the next best thing. To see me in my glory, and know that he is nothing!”

Tuthmose was standing now, roaring, his voice filling the empty hall. The last echo rang through the room after he stopped speaking. When it was still, Jannes bowed low, and Jambres bowed, if possible, even lower. “We must make ready,” said Jannes, “to match him power for power, to show him that Amon is as capable as his nameless god.”

“Go on, get out,” said Tuthmose. “I wish I had been upriver at the palace in Thebes instead of down here in Memphis, so near to where the Israelites do their labor in the lowland mud. The stink is in my nostrils day and night.”

They were already at the door, but Jambres turned and spoke. “Then why not let them go, when Moses asks?”

“Hush,” said Jannes, looking terrified.

“Because he is the one asking me,” said Tuthmose. “Is that what you expect me to say? Is that the kind of Pharaoh you think I am? Well, I am the god of Egypt, caretaker of this land. Do you think I don’t feel that as surely as that sanctimonious Hatshepsut ever did? I will keep the Israelites here because there are hundreds of thousands of them, and if we let them go, they would immediately be an enemy outside of Egypt, an enemy that knows every road, every city, every treasure house, every granary, and every military outpost in the Two Kingdoms. They will never leave Egypt. Egypt didn’t invite them here, but Egypt nurtured them and taught them and fed them and helped them become numerous, and Egypt will not let them go to stand outside our borders and spit on us.”

The priests left, father and son. Feeble Jannes leaned on Jambres’s arm. When Tuthmose was young, he had envied them their closeness. A father training his son to become his replacement. Tuthmose’s father barely knew he existed. At first this hurt Tuthmose, for he was sure that this meant his father did not mean him to be Pharaoh. Later, he understood that what his father did required no training—play with the trappings of power, indulge the appetites of your body, and let usurpers do the real business of government and military leadership. His father’s every breath was a waste of air. That was why Tuthmose had arranged for his mother to learn the poisoner’s art from Mutnefert, and to use the knowledge to strike his father down. A bad father is a bad Pharaoh, that’s what Tuthmose understood. Jambres had a good father, who did his work well and taught his son with love and rigor. So he could honor the old man until his natural death.

That was why Tuthmose had been so eager for his queen Sakhmet to bear him a son, which she did on the first try. Little Ptahmose had been a squalling nuisance for the first while, loud when he wasn’t inert. But gradually he became more like a human being, learning to smile, to play with his hands, to laugh. Then to walk, to speak a few words. A miracle every day, and every day Tuthmose went to him. No one but Isite ever saw how Tuthmose got down on his hands and knees to romp with the child. And not even Isite knew that when Tuthmose watched the baby nursing, he sometimes felt so bitter, for the more Tuthmose gave to his own child, the more he realized how easy it would have been for his father to do the same for him.

The only one who ever showed any interest in him, who ever demanded that he become something, that he make use of his mind, that he meet some standard of achievement, that he obey any kind of rule, was a certain Israelite interloper who had no right to be in the house of Pharaoh in the first place.

I will be the father I wish I had, that was Tuthmose’s iron resolve. My son will grow up knowing that the gods have smiled on him by giving him to me.

As for Moses, I’ll show him that I learned all his lessons well. Every move he makes, I’ll counter exactly as he taught me to. I’ll cut his support out from under him. By the time I’m through with him, the Israelites will be eager to drive him back out of Egypt into exile—if they don’t kill him themselves. Let him see what a real son of Pharaoh can do with power.

* * * 

In the morning Moses and Aaron set out together, staves in hand, to make the trek to the palace at Memphis. It was to be a journey of several hours, and they had to carry their dinner with them, since there would be no friendly house to take them in, and no innkeeper that would dare have them under his roof. Miriam saw them off from the door of her hut, laughing and singing as they departed. Neighbors looked on in awe, and Moses suspected that it was because they had never seen Miriam happy before.

As they passed along the sledge road where the brick forms were hauled, the people looked up from their labors. There were no cheers, as there had been when Moses returned in triumph from Saba. Instead there were isolated cries: Go with God! God protect you! Let God deliver us from bondage! God is merciful!

Moses stopped only once, where the workers were especially numerous, and murmured words to Aaron. Aaron stretched forth his arms and addressed them all in a booming voice. “Hear, O Israel! The Lord our God, the Lord is one!”

They repeated the phrase. Repeated it, chanted it behind them as they walked on toward the house of Pharaoh. Hear, O Israel! The Lord our God, the Lord is one.

* * * 

Pharaoh sat on his throne, but he did not even look up when Aaron preceded Moses into the hall. The old priest Jannes stood a few yards in front of Pharaoh.

“The name of Moses was once familiar here. A common murderer, I think he was, who ran away to escape justice.”

Moses murmured to Aaron, “Don’t play this game. We have a message.”

“The Lord God of Israel,” said Aaron, “has sent his prophet Moses with a message for Pharaoh.”

“Ah, yes,” said Jannes. “I heard of this god. I never quite understood—does he love his people, but hasn’t the power to free them? Or is he powerful, but hates Israel so much that he leaves them in bondage?”

“Is Pharaoh ill,” said Aaron, “that he must send an old frog to croak for him?”

All the assembled priests, officers, and courtiers went still as stone. Apparently no one had ever spoken to Jannes so rudely. Aaron worried that perhaps he had gone too far—but Moses had told him that he was to be scornful of everyone but Pharaoh himself, and was to speak to Pharaoh as an equal, not a superior. “You can handle scorn, can’t you?” Moses had asked. “I was born for this,” Aaron had replied. Now Aaron was having second thoughts. But he knew not to turn around and look at Moses—that would show weakness. If Moses wanted him to tone down the arrogance, he had only to ask.

Pharaoh lifted his head and looked at Moses and Aaron for the first time. Aaron had not realized how young a man he was. He still had his youthful slenderness, and there was a sadness and a hunger in his eyes—just what Aaron would expect from someone so consumed with ambition that he had killed for it.

“Pharaoh is a god,” said Jannes. “Why should he speak to you?”

“Moses has heard the voice of the living God,” said Aaron. “There is no one else worth hearing.”

Pharaoh spoke softly. Jannes turned and knelt to him as he listened to Pharaoh’s instructions. Then he arose and turned to the court. “In his magnanimity, Pharaoh is willing to hear your god’s petition.”

That little show could not go unanswered, Aaron decided. He turned and knelt to Moses.

“What are you doing?” asked Moses softly.

“If Jannes kneels to Pharaoh, I kneel to the prophet.”

Moses did not smile, but Aaron could see that he wanted to. So my little brother likes how I’ve gotten into the spirit of this. Aaron couldn’t help but be pleased, and he ignored the tiny stirrings of resentment at the thought of Moses condescending to him. Remember, Moses, Aaron said inwardly, I’m doing this for show.

“You know the message,” Moses murmured.

Aaron arose and, as he had done out in the brickyards that morning, he spread wide his arms and spoke loudly. “The Lord God of Israel has said, My people will have a feast to honor me!”

Jannes replied at once. “If the slaves are planning a feast, clearly we have been giving them too much grain.”

Aaron ignored the interruption. “Let my people go, the Lord has said, three days’ journey into the wilderness to offer sacrifice before the Lord.”

Jannes turned and knelt again to Pharaoh. His answer, when it came, was intoned in the same declamatory style he had used before, but Aaron could hear the smug delight in his voice. “It is well known that Israelites are thieves and idlers, and Pharaoh knows that this is just a trick to get away from work. Pharaoh has been too generous and lenient with you. Since you have food to waste on feasts, your ration will be reduced, and you can eat those extra animals to keep up your strength. Since you have time to waste on sacrifices, you will no longer have straw delivered to you to help in the drying of the bricks. You must send men to fetch it yourselves. But your daily tally of bricks will stay the same. You can come present your petition again, if there are any Israelites left who still want to sacrifice.”

Pharaoh arose from his chair and left the room.

Immediately Moses whispered, “Let’s go.” Aaron followed him as he walked boldly but unhurriedly out of the hall.

“How did I do?” asked Aaron, when they were outside.

“Fine,” said Moses. “You have a flair for this.”

“What now?” said Aaron. “They didn’t even try to negotiate.”

“This is negotiation,” said Moses. “He’s trying to cut off our support. The plan is to get the Israelites so upset by the new rules that they send us back to beg Pharaoh to remove the extra burden. Or—and this is what he’d prefer—they repudiate us entirely and send other emissaries to beg forgiveness. Then, when we’ve lost all support or have abandoned our mission, he sends soldiers to arrest us and kill us. When we’re dead, Pharaoh mercifully restores the old work rules and he emerges stronger than ever.”

“How do you know that’s his plan?” asked Aaron.

“Because I taught him that myself. When faced with a rebellion, don’t attack the leader—that makes a martyr of him. Instead bring harm to the people he represents, and blame their own leader for it. Get them to turn against him, discredit the leader completely, and you don’t have to use a single soldier to bring down the rebellion. They’ll beg you to forgive them and take them back.”

Aaron thought about this for a moment. “Explain to me now what our plan is.”

“I don’t know,” said Moses.

“You know his plan, and you don’t know ours?”

“I’m just guessing, mind you, but I think that this is the part where you hold the Israelites together in spite of Pharaoh’s harassment.”

“Me!”

“You’re the one who understands the Israelites,” said Moses. “We have to get them to trust in God and stand firm with us.”

“If I’d ever been able to get them to stand firm on anything, we’d be free already,” said Aaron.

“This time it’s the Lord who’s leading them. If they won’t stand with the Lord today, they aren’t worthy to be free.”

“But what can I promise them? If they stand firm now, things will get better?”

“In all likelihood, they’ll get worse,” said Moses. “But they’ll see the hand of God reveal itself in due time. After they’ve proven their faith in God.”

“It’s possible to have faith in God,” said Aaron, “and not have much faith in us.”

“We’re the ones that God chose to do this,” said Moses. “If they repudiate us, they repudiate God.”

“You don’t expect me to say that to them, do you?”

“Why not?” said Moses. “It’s the truth. And even when it’s offensive, the truth still sounds good to godly men. If you try to deceive them or bribe them or threaten them or shame them, some will stand with you and some against you, just as they would with any other man. But if you tell them God’s plain truth, Aaron, they’ll feel it confirmed in their hearts by the spirit of God, and if they love God they’ll follow us.”

“You’re sure of that?”

“Aaron, God promised me that I would celebrate with the children of Israel at the mountain of the Lord.”

“Yes, but did he specify that you’d be doing this in the flesh? Or in the spirit, having died first?”

Moses laughed. “Aaron, you’re the spokesman. Speak boldly.”

* * * 

Miriam was used to people whining and complaining and doubting and raging, so as they began to gather around her house when at the end of the day’s work, she was not at all surprised to hear every possible nasty comment about those meddlesome fools, her brothers. Why did Moses return to Egypt, to make their lives even more miserable? To take away the last scraps of leisure in their lives? To make their children hungry? On and on and on. The choir of complaint. Someone bring a zither, we need to get everyone on the same note.

By the time Moses and Aaron themselves returned, the crowd was surly and very large. The leaders of the other tribes were notable for their absence. Clearly they didn’t want to be around to face the outcry.

So it was amusing to see how jaunty Moses and Aaron were as they strode along the road, planting their staves and pushing off with every other step. Hadn’t they heard what Pharaoh’s messengers had declared? About having to procure the straw instead of having it delivered? About the shorter rations?

“I’m glad you’re here,” cried Aaron to the crowd, smiling broadly. “You should have been there! Pharaoh’s lackey, Jannes, the priest of that false god Amon, almost croaked when I called him an old frog!”

A few laughed, but one cry from the crowd silenced them. “That insult cost us hours of extra work every day!” Cries of angry assent swept the crowd.

Aaron laughed and shook his head. “Don’t you see that God is showing all the people of Egypt how weak and ineffective Pharaoh is? He thinks that he can come between the children of Israel and the prophet the Lord has sent to them. On the contrary! God will come between Pharaoh and his people, until they groan for him to let Israel go. Israel will stand together! But Egypt will fall apart.”

“What’s going to make them hate Pharaoh!” demanded a woman.

“The power of God,” said Aaron. “Stand firm, and let the Lord work his will.”

“In the meantime we work ourselves to death!”

“For a few days we work harder,” said Aaron. “Is that too high a price to pay for freedom? I’ve heard many a man among you say he’d gladly die to win our freedom from bondage. Is death so easy? The extra bricks you make will show your faith in God! Every brick is a gift to God!”

“It’ll go into Egyptian buildings all the same,” someone called.

“Egyptian buildings that your children will never have to look at, because they’ll be in the promised land! Moses knows that you’re suffering! That’s why the Lord sent him here—to change that suffering to joy. Be joyful as you work now, for you are not working as slaves! Pharaoh is no longer in control of you. He can only respond now, to what the Lord says to him. God rules in Egypt now!”

The hecklers were still there, but now the bulk of the crowd was with Aaron. Miriam had to admire how smoothly Aaron handled it, turning Pharaoh’s punishment into a heroic burden borne for God’s sake. This is fine today, she thought. But what speech will you give the next time, when Pharaoh makes it even worse?

“I look out upon the people,” cried Aaron, “and I see the children of Israel, men and women of every tribe. But where are your leaders? Why are they hiding? Why do they not stand beside the prophet of the Lord? The day will come when every man will claim that he stood beside Moses the whole way. But you are my witnesses—they were not here today!”

“Not true!” cried a man.

“Ephraim is here!” cried another.

The first man came forward. “I’m Caleb, and I stand here for Judah.”

“Caleb,” said Aaron, “I should have known that of all the elders of Judah, you would be the one to stand with us.”

The man from Ephraim also came forward. He was painfully young, hardly more than a boy.

“I don’t know you,” said Aaron. “You weren’t at the meeting of the elders.”

The young man nodded. “My father was, and told me all that took place. Today he was plagued with pain in his knees and elbows and fingers, so he couldn’t walk, but he sent me in his place. My name is Joshua. My father is Nun.”

“That grand old man!” cried Aaron. “Israel, do you hear? Joshua stands up for his father Nun, an elder of Ephraim. And Caleb stands up for Judah. Men of Judah! Men of Ephraim! Your tribes are known to have faith in God! And I stand here for Levi. But you men of other tribes, where are your elders? When God brings Israel out of Egypt, do you want your tribe to be left behind because you repudiated the prophet instead of trusting in the Lord?”

At once there was a flurry as men ran off in search of their tribal elders. Miriam caught Aaron’s eye and smiled at him. Well done, brother.

The meeting lasted an hour, as each of the tribal elders arrived and tried to outdo the others in affirming how loyal they were to Moses, and how firmly they would all endure Pharaoh’s persecution without complaint, because they trusted in the Lord to deliver them.

Miriam did her part. She refrained from laughing in their faces. Weak and frightened men—soon enough new leaders would emerge from the tribes, while the timid old ones drifted off into meaninglessness. That elder of Judah, Caleb, he was a good one, Miriam knew he had a name for courage. And the young one, the boy Joshua—what a surprise he turned out to be. A son of Nun was bound to be bookish and quiet, she would have thought. Instead, he outdid Aaron in fervency until Moses had to silence him by gathering him into his embrace and taking him aside to talk in private.

Afterward, when the three of them were alone in the moonlight, sitting on the ground outside Miriam’s hut, she asked Moses what he said to the boy.

“Not a boy, Miriam,” said Moses. “A man. I told him Aaron mentioned that his father, Nun, was a painter, writing inscriptions on stone. I asked if he had learned to read and write, and he said yes. I’ve made him my scribe.”

“A mere child!” said Miriam.

“Why, did you want the job?” said Aaron.

“I wanted your job,” said Miriam. “I never would have thought you had it in you, Aaron. Standing up to all that heckling without letting them bully you.”

“I don’t let people bully me,” said Aaron.

“Not anymore, anyway,” said Miriam. “I’m praising you, Aaron, so please don’t argue with me about this.”

“Sorry,” said Aaron. “I didn’t know what praise sounded like, coming from you.”

“I was just as surprised to see courage and vigor coming from you,” said Miriam.

Moses roared with laughter. “Nothing changes! Gone for all these years, and nothing changes!” He threw his arms around Miriam. “Have I ever told you how I honor you, for speaking honestly when no one wanted to hear? The Lord’s will has not been forgotten in Israel, not by anyone within the sound of your voice.”

Miriam was taken aback. No one ever embraced her, not since she started speaking so boldly in the name of the Lord. But startled as she was, she rather regretted it when he released her. And his praise brought tears to her eyes. No one had ever thanked her or honored her—they had only avoided her or tried to get her to hold her peace, or at least speak more tactfully.

But then she realized: He was handling her, dealing with her. “I think you’re flattering me, Moses,” she said acidly. “I don’t do what I do to be praised.”

Moses smiled, a little sadly. “Can’t trust anyone, can you?”

“You’re still the same man you were when you left, Moses,” said Miriam. “Look what happened today—it was Aaron who saved the situation with the crowd. You didn’t even raise your voice.”

“The Lord gave me Aaron to be my spokesman,” said Moses. “It would be foolish of me, then, not to let him speak.”

“You’re so complacent,” said Miriam. “You have nothing at stake here. Your family is in Midian, safely out of harm’s way. While we have everything on the line!”

Moses shook his head. “My life is on the line, Miriam. If I seem complacent, it’s because I believe the Lord’s promise, spoken to me in his own voice. Why should I be afraid? And you, Miriam, haven’t you known from childhood on that God would do the things that he’s doing now?”

“Yes!” she cried. “I loved the Lord and I loved Israel when you were playing at being Pharaoh’s son in the palace!”

Moses regarded her in silence for a few minutes. “And now the Lord has shown himself to me, and called Aaron in a dream. We’re the ones who were called, and not you. Which is it that galls you more, that God chose us for the job, or that we’re doing it better than you thought we could?”

“I don’t know how you could do it worse!” said Miriam. “There isn’t even a glimmer of a plan in what you’re doing. Despite Aaron’s fine words, it’s Pharaoh who’s in control of the situation.”

“I’ve spent years of study and prayer, learning how to turn my life over to God, without trying to make plans of my own,” said Moses. “As for Pharaoh, he’s in control of nothing. God rules Egypt as he rules all lands. Generally he doesn’t interfere, letting the fools be foolish while the wicked do their worst. Miriam, God called me and Aaron because he wanted us to do something different from what we were doing before. You, however, have been serving him exactly as he wished, from childhood on—from the day you spoke boldly to Hatshepsut and brought our mother into the palace to be my wet-nurse. Why should the Lord call you again, when you’re already on the right road?”

Miriam glared at him. “More flattery.”

“More truth,” said Moses. “We need you to listen to the complaints of the people, and assure them that their suffering is worthwhile because God is turning all their pain and grief into a miracle.”

“That’s fine for you to say,” said Miriam. “But when does the miracle start?”

Moses sighed. “Some people can’t see miracles when they’re right in the middle of them.”

“Better than seeing miracles where they don’t exist,” said Miriam.

“You’re determined to stand entirely alone, aren’t you,” said Moses.

“That’s where I’ve always stood,” said Miriam. “And isn’t it just typical that when you decided to turn to the Lord’s way, you couldn’t come stand beside me, you had to leap on ahead and play the prophet as if you were the first person ever to speak the words of the Lord to this people.”

“What you don’t understand,” said Moses, “is that if they’re the words of the Lord, what does it matter who says them? I am standing beside you. So stop trying to elbow me off. There’s room for all of us in the Lord’s service, not just us three but every man and woman of Israel.”

“Is that what you think? That you can turn Israel into a nation of prophets? Go back to Midian, Moses, but stay in the shade, the sun has been cooking your brains.”

Moses patted her hand. “Stay alone, then, if you want.”

“I don’t want to be alone, I am alone, and I always have been.”

“That’s how it feels,” said Moses, “to everyone who hasn’t found the Lord.”

“I’m alone because I found the Lord.”

“That’s why you’re not alone. But if you insist, we’ll all be very quiet and pretend not to be here, so you can go on believing in your own isolation. In the meantime, I hope you’ll help us with the people.”

“I’ll help the Lord.”

“Good,” said Moses. “He loves you even more than I do.”

With that, Moses got up and went inside the house.

“Well,” said Aaron, “that was as childish as I’ve ever seen you act.”

“Shut up,” said Miriam.

“Envy is so ugly, especially when it’s so nakedly expressed.”

“While your envy is all dressed up as loyalty,” said Miriam. “But some of us see through the costume.”

“Aren’t we the complicated family,” said Aaron. “We chased Moses all those years, and now that we’ve finally caught him, we don’t want him.”

“But we’ve got him anyway,” said Miriam.

“The truth is, Miriam, that Moses is not the same man he was. None of that I-know-everything attitude. He really does live for the Lord now. He’s humbled himself. I’m trying to do the same.”

“I live for the Lord, too.”

“I know,” said Aaron.

“I did sound envious, didn’t I. But that wasn’t how I really feel. I’m tired. I can’t believe I said the things I said.”

“Miriam, everyone who knows you often has said the same thing: I can’t believe Miriam said the things she said.” Aaron laughed and gripped her hand a moment, then got up. “I hope Elisheba has heard the rumor that I got back from the palace alive. She was worried when I left her this morning, and so were the children.”

“I know,” said Miriam. “I helped her care for your children half the day. Nadab and Abihu are useful at making bricks, but the younger boys can’t stop scampering right through the bricks before they’re dry, leaving little footprints.”

“Thank you for watching out for my family,” said Aaron.

“Your family is my family.”

“Do you think we’ll ever meet Moses’ wife and children?” asked Aaron. “Or even that father-in-law he can’t stop talking about? The one who taught him to read Hebrew?”

“Didn’t you hear the prophet? We’ll all be together to serve God at the holy mountain.”

“Or die trying,” said Aaron.

“Do you think he really saw the Lord? Or just a bush on fire on a hot day?” Without meaning to, Miriam had blurted her own worst doubts.

But Aaron only chuckled. “It’s not the way I would have done it, but Miriam, he got us in to see Pharaoh, we spoke boldly to him—it was exhilarating. Why shouldn’t it be true? Maybe my dream was just a dream and Moses only happened to be returning to Egypt while I was there waiting for him. But I think God’s hand is guiding him. If I’m wrong, you’ll be burying me quite soon.”

“If I’m not also dead because of Moses.”

“Good night, Miriam,” said Aaron. “I have to hike all the way to the palace again tomorrow.”

“What, aren’t you going to haul straw for us?”

“I’m a talker these days, Miriam, not a doer.”

“In other words, you haven’t changed a bit,” she retorted.

He laughed, kissed her on the cheek, and went back to his own hut, leaving her alone as always.

But no, not alone. Moses was asleep inside her house.

The Lord’s prophet—and he told her that the Lord chose her, that she had done well, that he loved her, that the Lord’s cause needed her.

Maybe it was all flattery to try to persuade her to help him keep the people calm. But she knew in her heart that it wasn’t flattery, it was the truth. God did love her. God had noticed her, and all her faithful service.
 

 
 
© 2000 Shadow Mountain 

Printed from Gospelink.com
