# Chapter 10: Blood

### Chapter 10: Blood
Orson Scott Card , Stone Tables (Salt Lake City 2000)
 
 

Chapter 10: Blood

It was the younger priest, Jambres, who spoke for Pharaoh this time, greeting Moses and Aaron with a bright, cheerful smile. Pharaoh, too, seemed in good spirits as he gazed at them.

“I’m happy to tell you that we are getting remarkable savings from the changes you encouraged us to introduce,” said Jambres. “Are you here to tell us that you’ve found even more leisure time, so that we can get the tally of bricks for even less expense?”

“The Lord God is angry at your rebellious spirit,” said Aaron. “The Lord has said to Moses, Tell Pharaoh he has one last chance to let the children of Israel go.”

“Is this a threat?” asked Jambres. “The god whose people don’t even know his name is going to do what, exactly? No doubt you’re going to tell me that your god is so powerful he holds the clouds up in the sky! Your god makes it rain! Your god makes the wind blow!” He laughed. “I’m sure he does all those things. Now, if you can speak a word and get him to stop.” Jambres laughed. “Do you think you can frighten us with threats of what your god will do?”

Moses whispered to Aaron for a moment. “We don’t want you to obey out of fear,” said Aaron. “We want you to obey because what God commands is right and good. But if you do not choose to do what is right for its own sake, then fear will have to do.”

“Throw your staff to the floor,” said Moses.

Aaron obeyed, and it turned into a hissing serpent.

Jambres laughed again. “Any god can do that,” he said. He and Jannes stepped forward, brandishing rods of their own. They spun around and threw down their rods and they, too, were snakes.

Aaron was startled, but Moses whispered to him, “They made the switch while they were spinning around. They were already holding snakes before they threw them down.”

Aaron was relieved—he had never expected the priests to match what God had given them power to do. He was about to reach down and take his serpent by the tail when it slithered away, rushing toward the priests’ snakes. In moments it had seized one by the head, and then, in a few writhes and twists, it swallowed the whole thing. It did the same with the other snake. Then Aaron picked it up, and it became a rod again in his hand.

It was Aaron’s turn to laugh. “Did you think you could fool God?” he asked. “You know that what you do is only illusion. But what God does is real.”

Jambres was putting a good face on it, though. “So far all I’ve seen is that your snake was hungrier than ours. In Egypt the gods with power are Egyptian gods.”

Moses whispered to Aaron.

“Moses is grieved that you don’t care about the welfare of your people,” said Aaron. “The Lord God told us to demonstrate his power in this harmless way, so you would have the chance to repent of the evil you have done to the chosen people of the Lord, without bringing harm upon your people. Instead you answer him with these childish illusions. Very well, Pharaoh. Tomorrow you will see the power of the Lord stretched out over Egypt.”

“If you’re thinking of rebellion, Moses,” Jambres began.

But Jannes touched his arm, interrupting him. The two priests turned and conferred with Pharaoh.

“No straw at all,” said Jannes. “Let the bricks dry by themselves in the sun. The Israelites will be told that this was because you continued your insulting ingratitude, instead of doing homage to Pharaoh for his great mercy in allowing the Israelites so much leniency and freedom.”

Moses and Aaron wordlessly turned their backs and left.

* * * 

At dawn, Pharaoh and his wife and son went down to the river to drink, to pray. Soldiers stood guard nearby, but as always many people were gathered to present petitions on the riverbank. Tuthmose found these intrusions tiresome, but it was good for Ptahmose to see his father being magnanimous to the common people. It set a good example.

He should have expected that among the petitioners were Moses and Aaron. To the captain of the guard he said, “Those two—why were they allowed here?”

“We inspected them for weapons,” said the captain. “You’ve been seeing him in court, so I thought . . .”

“No, you did well,” said Tuthmose. “It’s good for my son to see this, as well.”

Tuthmose took his son up onto his shoulder and walked to the petitioners. “I see that two slaves have come here, perhaps to apologize for their foolishness yesterday. Pharaoh is a forgiving god. I will hear their petition.”

Aaron’s voice rang out. “The Lord God of Israel says, Let my people go.”

Pharaoh shook his head sadly. “How much must your people suffer, before you learn?” he asked.

“That is the question God asks of you,” said Aaron.

Moses spoke loudly to Aaron, this time intending for all to hear. “Aaron, the Lord God commands that you stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt. By the command of God, all the water of Egypt, in all the channels of the Nile, in every pool and pond, in every jar and vessel, every font and cup, will turn to blood.”

Aaron thrust out his arm over the water of the river. Then, pulling a cup from his shoulder bag, he reached down and scooped water from the river. When he poured it out, the other petitioners gasped, and one cried out. For in the first light of dawn, the liquid was bright red, like blood from a fresh wound.

At once the petitioners knelt on the steps and touched the water, cupping it in their hands, tasting it on the tips of their fingers. “It’s blood!” they cried. “It’s all blood!”

“Blood,” said Ptahmose.

Tuthmose was filled with loathing. Moses and Aaron had done this in the sight of his beloved son. His first instinct was to order them arrested. But that would look like weakness. It would look as if he believed in this trick of theirs.

“Your petition is not granted,” said Tuthmose. “I’m not impressed by these foolish tricks.”

“For seven days,” said Aaron, “the Nile will run with blood.”

Ignoring Aaron, Tuthmose carried Ptahmose back up the steps to the palace. Sakhmet, the queen, followed him, wisely refraining from any comment.

Throughout the land there was no water, and within hours the clamor became desperate. Only when someone noticed that water seeping into a deep hole was pure enough to drink did the complaints give way to a plan. All through Egypt, wells were dug, and water was hauled with desperate haste to the places where people could not find new water no matter how deep they dug.

And the story spread that the god of the Israelites had done this, because Pharaoh refused to let them go out into the desert to offer sacrifices.

Jannes and Jambres made a great show of turning water into blood in front of hundreds of witnesses in the great hall that afternoon, and the official line was that once again, the god of the Israelites had done nothing that Egyptian gods couldn’t do. But when Tuthmose was alone with the two priests, he had a very different opinion. “Are you trying to make me look stupid?” he demanded. “What good is it to prove that you can also turn water to blood, if you don’t have the power that I need, which is to turn blood back into water!”

To that, Jambres and Jannes had nothing to say.

“No more of these demonstrations,” said Tuthmose. “I’m sure you can come up with convincing illusions every time, but as long as you don’t have the power I need, I don’t want to see you showing off a power that no one wants. It makes me look pathetic.”

The priests bowed.

“Moses thinks I’m going to send for him and ask him to remove this curse. But the people are getting water by digging holes. He can make blood rain out of the sky for all I care. The Israelites will stay in Egypt. He’s lucky I don’t start killing a hundred Israelites a day until he stops this nonsense.”

“Why don’t you?” asked Jambres.

“Because I’d be making a hundred martyrs,” said Tuthmose, “and even if Moses complied, it would only demonstrate that he was the one with the power, while all I could do was kill.”

“Very wise,” said Jambres.

When the priests had left the palace, though, Jambres had a different opinion. “Tuthmose is confused. It bothers him that Moses’ god has such power.”

“I’m not sure,” said Jannes. “I think it’s not the Israelite god that Pharaoh fears, but the Israelite himself. Moses is the one who is driving us all before him, and Pharaoh hates that. No matter what he does, he’ll look weaker than Moses. In front of another man, Pharaoh might humble himself. But he would rather die than humble himself in front of Moses.”

“Then the Israelites have made a mistake, choosing Moses as their prophet,” said Jambres.

“He was chosen by their god,” said Jannes. “And who knows what their god intends? As long as it’s Moses who faces Pharaoh, Pharaoh’s heart will remain hardened against all pleas or demands. What I fear is that this god wants Pharaoh to refuse, so that the power of the god will be shown at its fullest.”

“Father,” said Jambres, startled. “You believe in this Israelite god, then?”

“Haven’t you tasted the river?” said Jannes. “It’s blood. Pure blood. The fish have died because they can’t live in it. Their corpses line the river’s edge and the stink is already rising. This is not trickery.”

“But the Israelites are suffering right along with our people,” said Jambres. “They’re out there digging wells like anyone else.”

“Digging wells,” said Jannes, “but not making bricks.”

“Ah,” said Jambres. “Not meeting their tally. Shall we remind Pharaoh of this?”

“What can he do about it? Being harsh with the Israelites has brought this plague on us. I don’t think he’s willing to face the consequences of being harsher still.”

“And what do we do?” said Jambres. “This is making us look weak and ineffectual, too.”

“We say nothing,” said Jannes. “We give no counsel, unless asked. It’s Pharaoh who is getting the whole blame for provoking this plague. Why in the world should we bring any part of that down upon ourselves?”

“That’s one reason why I admire you, Father,” said Jambres. “You always remember to keep first things first.”

“I still think it’s unwise of Tuthmose to keep letting people see him with Moses. The contrast is painful.”

“I don’t know, Father. If they remember what Moses was, perhaps so. But Moses is no longer the powerful general or the wise ruler.”

“No, he’s a priest now,” said Jannes. “And to tell the truth, my son, I don’t much like having people see the contrast between him and us, either.”

* * * 

Miriam tried to be patient with the complainers, but as each day wore on, her temper wore out. “Yes, it’s miserable having to dig new wells every day! Yes, the water is brackish and it still tastes like there are traces of blood in it! But try, try to remember two things: This is a miracle! It means that God loves us! And the Egyptians are having to dig wells just like us, and drink the same miserable fluid that we’re drinking. They are feeling the mighty hand of God. Is there nobody who thinks this might just be a change for the better?”

* * * 

Now when Moses and Aaron entered the hall of judgment, the courtiers were silent, sullenly respectful of the men whose god had the power to make their lives miserable for seven long days. Privately, many of them were impatient with Pharaoh for not killing these men so this nonsense would end. The other half, fearing the wrath of the Israelites’ god, were impatient with Pharaoh for not letting the Israelites leave . . . so this nonsense would end.

No one said any of this to anyone else, however, for the words would surely be repeated to Pharaoh, cutting short a career at court.

Aaron’s words were simple. “Pharaoh, will you let the Lord’s people go?”

Pharaoh sullenly said nothing.

Jannes was all simpering kindness. “Moses, Aaron, what have the people of Egypt done to you, that you treat them so unkindly? Didn’t Egypt provide succor for your ancestors when they were starving in the famine in Canaan? Haven’t you enjoyed the best that Egypt had to offer for generations? And this is how you return thanks.”

Aaron ignored him. “Speak now, Pharaoh, to permit Israel to go worship God in the wilderness, or frogs will cover the land of Egypt. There will be frogs in your house, in your bedchamber, in your bed, and frogs also in the houses of all your servants and all the people of Egypt. They’ll have to sweep frogs out of the ovens to bake, out of the troughs to knead, and shake frogs out of their clothing at every hour of the day.”

Jannes chuckled. “The old frog trick,” he said. “Look.” A frog plopped out of his sleeve and into his hand. He tossed it into the air, and when it came down, there were three on the ground where it landed, hopping and leaping. “The Nile runs clear again. The frogs will also come and go.”

“The wrath of God will only grow greater because of your mockery,” said Aaron.

Aaron turned and led the way out of the hall. This time, though, many of the courtiers slipped out after him, and outside the palace a large crowd waited. Many groaned when they saw that Moses and Aaron seemed angry. And when Aaron reached the bank of the Nile, there was a crowd of many hundreds gathered to watch.

“Please! Not blood again!” cried someone in the crowd, and many murmured their agreement.

Moses spoke. “Stretch out your hand, Aaron, over the waters of Egypt, and bring forth a plague of frogs.”

Aaron stretched out his hand. “Frogs,” he cried. “Serve the Lord God of Israel!”

At once the water seemed to bubble and froth. But the bubbles streamed toward shore, and soon thousands of frogs were jumping out of the water. Nor were these timid animals—they jumped up onto the people, then climbed higher, tangling themselves in hair, plunging into clothing. Many tore their clothing off rather than have frogs inside it. In moments, the crowd had dispersed and fled. The frogs moved on like a green sea over the surface of the ground.

Moses and Aaron were also covered with frogs, but they made no effort to remove them. “Aren’t you just a little disgusted to have these things crawling on you?” Aaron asked quietly.

“These frogs serve the Lord. I’d rather have their company than any number of rebellious or wicked people.”

“May I pluck a few from me now and then, without harming our mission?” asked Aaron.

Moses chuckled. “I think the question of how to deal with the frogs is an individual one. I don’t recall any scripture that says the righteous must lie down with frogs.” As if to demonstrate, Moses pulled one off his beard and tossed it lightly to the ground.

“Miriam won’t like this,” said Aaron, pulling frogs out of his robe and shaking them off his staff. “She bears the brunt of the complaining. Isn’t there some way to make the plagues strike only the Egyptians, and leave the land of Goshen alone?”

“When Israel submits gladly to the will of God, the Lord will no longer need to afflict them with the plagues.”

“Are the frogs going to make them gladder to submit?” asked Aaron.

“I think this number of frogs is rather an impressive sight,” said Moses.

“Oh, I’m impressed,” said Aaron. He made a disgusted sound and bent down to pull a crushed frog from between his sandal and the heel of his foot. “I hope it’s all right that some of them die.”

* * * 

Ptahmose cried all night, terrified of the frogs. Hundreds of servants kept watch all around his room, but even when every frog had been found and the bed made afresh, Ptahmose still wept in fear and kept feeling frogs on him; and though sometimes no frog could be found, other times a frog had somehow gotten in between the sheets. Finally Ptahmose fell asleep in his father’s arms, as the Pharaoh of the Two Kingdoms walked the floor late into the night with his firstborn son.

It was still dark when, sleepless and despairing, Pharaoh sent servants to fetch Moses and Aaron. This late at night, there was no public meeting in the hall of judgment. This time they were brought into a small room, one that Moses remembered well, for it was here that he and Hatshepsut had counseled with each other about the government of Egypt. He was surprised that, except for some nostalgia for the woman who had been his mother and teacher, he had no regrets about leaving this place. He hadn’t realized it at the time, any more than Pharaoh understood it now, but in these rooms in the palace there could be no vision. The world was small here, and the decisions made within these walls were also small. It took the Lord to drive Moses out of this narrow pen into the wider world of God’s creation, but he was glad now that the Lord took such care for him.

Pharaoh came in almost as soon as Moses and Aaron arrived. There were no intermediaries now—Jannes and Jambres followed him into the room, but they were silent.

“Moses,” said Pharaoh. “Ask your god to take away the frogs from me and my people.”

But it was not Moses who answered him. “That will be easy,” said Aaron, “when you let the children of Israel go out to offer sacrifice in the wilderness.”

Pharaoh’s mouth set hard when he saw that Moses was not going to speak to him directly. “When the frogs are gone, I’ll let your people go.”

Aaron turned to Moses, waiting for an answer. Moses put his hand on Aaron’s shoulder, and spoke directly to Pharaoh. “The Lord knows how much it cost you to make this promise,” he said. “When do you want me to ask the Lord to rid the land of frogs?”

“In the morning,” said Pharaoh.

“It will happen at the time you said.”

Many sleepless people saw Moses and Aaron emerge from the palace, and they saw that the prophet and his brother were smiling. “Will the frogs be taken away?” they asked.

“Pharaoh has promised that when the frogs are gone, the children of Israel can also go,” said Aaron.

But Moses whispered to him, “Of course you know that once the Lord takes away the frogs and he can get a good night’s sleep, Pharaoh won’t feel the same sense of urgency about letting us go.”

“Pharaoh will go back on his word?”

“I know he will,” said Moses.

“Then why remove the frogs?” asked Aaron.

“Because he hasn’t broken his word yet. We must treat him as a man of honor until he proves he doesn’t deserve it.”

As the first light of dawn came up on the sleepless people in the land of the Nile, the frogs in their houses and their fields, in the streets and in their clothing, became sluggish, then inert. They were dead, killed by the light of day.

But the problem wasn’t over. There were all those dead frog bodies to dispose of. Huge piles of the corpses were gathered, far too many to be buried, nor was there fuel enough to burn them. By nightfall the whole land smelled of decomposing frog bodies. But at least there were no frogs in their beds, and the people could sleep.

The next day, Moses was awakened by the shouting of people arguing with the overseers. “The frogs are gone,” the chief overseer declared, “and there are bricks to be made!”

Moses came out to find Aaron and several of the tribal elders arguing with the man. “Pharaoh promised,” Aaron said.

“I have my orders. My most particular orders that the Israelites are to make a double tally in the next week to make up for the time wasted by these plagues.”

Moses intervened. “You may tell Pharaoh that the people of Israel will gladly obey him. There’s no quarrel between the Israelites and Pharaoh, only between Pharaoh and God. It is the Lord God who will act.”

“Well, don’t go thinking you can bother Pharaoh any longer,” said the overseer. “I’m to bar you by force from leaving Goshen. You won’t be at the palace again.”

“But I have no need to go there,” said Moses.

“I’m also to keep you from going to the river,” said the overseer.

“All right,” said Moses. “Not the river, and not the palace.”

The overseer glanced around to see who was listening, then spoke quietly. “Please, I’m only doing what I was commanded to do. Don’t bring back the frogs.”

“You can tell Pharaoh that if his word isn’t kept, there are worse things than frogs that the Lord can send.”

No sooner had the overseer gone, than Moses took Aaron with him and began walking a circuitous path along the outskirts of Goshen. The Egyptians saw that Moses was on the move, and that soldiers were watching him. Soon a crowd fell in step behind him, and by noon there were so many thousands of Egyptians crowding around him that the soldiers could not come near, and a cloud of dust arose from the shuffling feet on the dry soil. The people kept calling out to Moses, sometimes pleas, sometimes threats.

Aaron was uneasy. “Moses, these people are angry at us. Are you sure we’re safe?”

“We’re as safe as the Lord needs us to be,” said Moses. “And we need witnesses.” Then, loudly, so all could hear him, he said: “Because Pharaoh broke his promise to let the children of Israel go, the Lord commands you: Aaron, stretch forth your hand over the dust of Egypt, and the Lord will bring lice onto the bodies of all the beasts and human beings in the land.”

Grimly Aaron stretched out his hand, turning a full circle as he did. Even those who hadn’t heard Moses’ words soon learned what he had said, as the dust was transformed into lice. The people, immediately covered with the tiny creatures, inhaling them with every breath, ran shouting from the place—raising more dust, and more lice, as they ran.

* * * 

Tuthmose paced up and down in the room as a slave combed lice out of the Queen Sakhmet’s hair. “Do you think I cause these things?” he said. “Do you think I had the priests conjure lice out of the dust of the ground? Jannes and Jambres took such pride in making snakes from sticks, blood from water, frogs from their sleeves—I told them to make lice, and all they did was scratch themselves and say, ‘If you want more lice, these were made by the finger of the Israelite god.’ They were on the edge of mockery, those baboons.”

“You’re the one,” she said, “who came railing to me about Ptahmose crying all the time. All I said was, I didn’t make the lice.” She never raised her voice at him. She knew—everyone knew—that after Tuthmose’s lifetime of experience with Hatshepsut, he did not want any hint of a strong-willed woman around him now.

“But what you meant was that I did.”

“You are a god,” said Sakhmet, “but as far as I know, not a lice-making god.”

“You think I should let them go!”

“All I think about is, what strange new marvel will happen next?”

“Well I can’t let them go. And even if I could, I wouldn’t!”

“Then don’t complain to me when the child cries because there are bugs crawling all over his head.”

“I won’t see them. I won’t talk to them. They can’t make more demands if I cease to listen to them!”

Sakhmet looked down at the pile of nits, lice, and lice eggs that was building up on the floor behind her stool. “All this from my hair,” she said. “Who could imagine.”

Tuthmose stormed out of the room.

* * * 

On the day Moses declared that it would happen, the lice died off as suddenly as they had come. But when Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh’s door, they were turned away with a threat of imprisonment if they ever came again. Aaron smiled and said, “Pharaoh will hear the message of the Lord, even if it sounds like the buzzing of flies. And this time, the Lord will make a division between the Israelites and the Egyptians. Every Egyptian will see that among the children of Israel there is no plague.”

And so it was that the fourth plague came, flies swarming everywhere. Within a day, every bit of meat and bread was crawling with maggots. The grain had to be sifted before it could be ground into flour, and the flour sifted again before it could be made into bread. Through the open doors and windows of every Egyptian dwelling the flies came, until the entire land was corrupted with maggots. But among the Israelites, not a fly buzzed, not a maggot hatched and crawled.

On the third day of the flies, a messenger came to Moses and Aaron. They followed him to the palace.

“Pharaoh has no quarrel with your god,” said Jannes. “Like all the gods, he should be worshiped. We’ll give you a feast day, right there in Goshen. Sacrifice all you want.”

After a brief conference with Moses, Aaron answered, “In Goshen we live under the eyes of the Egyptians. Our sacrifices are an abomination in their eyes. Israelites have been stoned before, for offering sacrifice here in Egypt. There would be riots, and some of our people would be killed. We must go three days’ journey into the wilderness.”

Jannes returned and knelt before Pharaoh, who refused to speak, or even meet his gaze. Finally the priest stood and glared at Moses directly. “All right, you can go a little way into the desert. Just ask your god to get rid of these flies while we still have any stores of grain left.”

“We’ve heard such a promise before,” said Aaron. “And yet on the morrow, we were held again to our tally of bricks.”

Jannes leapt into the fray. “Pharaoh didn’t break any promise—that would be unthinkable! He is a god! He promised that you could sacrifice, but he never said when. He waited for a more convenient time.”

“Tomorrow the flies will be gone,” said Aaron. “So tomorrow we will expect to go out and offer sacrifice.”

In the morning, the flies were dead, but Pharaoh refused to see Moses, and though the overseers did not come to insist on the tally of bricks, there were soldiers on watch, to warn if there were any attempt by the Israelites to leave. The sight of the soldiers made the people afraid, and many of them pled with Miriam and Aaron to intercede with Moses. “He’s going to get us all killed,” they said. “He’s got to stop.”

“Moses isn’t doing this,” they answered, again and again. “God is doing this, and he promises that if Israel obeys, not one soul of you will be lost.”

But the people would not consider preparing to leave, with the soldiers standing watch.

* * * 

Moses stood at the border of Goshen, where a mob of Egyptian herdsmen, armed with clubs and hoes and makeshift spears, clamored and howled. “You killed our cattle! You poisoned our herds!”

Aaron’s voice roared above the tumult. “You have seen the power of God! I warn you not to set a single foot beyond this point, for God will not allow you to harm his people!”

That stilled them, for they had learned, even if Pharaoh had not, to fear the power of Israel’s god.

“Moses!” called an old man. “I was a captain under you in Ethiopia! You’ve made me a poor man, half my cattle dead this morning, the rest dying! What did I ever do to you, except serve you loyally!”

Moses answered, “If Pharaoh had kept his word, my friend, your cattle would all be alive. How can I restrain the anger of the Lord, when Pharaoh promises one day to let us go out and offer sacrifice, and the next day breaks that promise?”

“But I never broke a promise!” the man said. “And it’s my cattle that died! While we know perfectly well that a lot of Israelites aren’t faithful to your God—they worship our gods, or the calf of the Hyksos. Yet even the most openly rebellious of your people still has his entire herd today. Is there no justice in your god’s heart?”

“These are questions that only Pharaoh can answer,” said Moses. “If it were up to me, no harm would come to anyone in Egypt. But look at you—armed to attack my people! If God had not made you afraid of his power, how many Israelites would you have slain today? If you don’t want the punishment of God to come upon you, look to your own hearts, and see how much harm your hatred has caused to the people of the Lord.”

And the Egyptian mob dispersed to their homes, bowed down by the consciousness of God’s justice.

* * * 

The fires that burned the bodies of the dead cattle had no sooner subsided than Moses had Aaron take ashes from the furnace where they burned, and together they went to wait on the road where the Lord told them Pharaoh would pass. Pharaoh commanded his men to ride on, but the horses drawing the chariots would not obey, and Pharaoh was forced to wait and watch as Aaron scattered the ashes toward heaven.

At once painful boils and sores broke out on the skin of man and beast. The horses were crazed by it, and had to be unhitched from the chariots. Pharaoh’s chariot was drawn back to his palace by his soldiers, all of them suffering greatly. In his house, his son wept and scratched himself until his body was a mass of scabs and bloody sores, and Pharaoh was filled with hatred for Moses and Aaron and the god they served.

When Moses and Aaron came to the palace again, no one barred the way. Jannes and Jambres weren’t there—the slave who painfully carried a tray of food told them that Jambres was caring for his father’s awful sores at home. “Has Jambres no sores of his own?” asked Aaron.

“As I have mine,” the slave said. “I am not your enemy, but look at my body.”

“But see how the Lord has blessed you,” said Aaron. “Clearly you’re not suffering as badly as Jannes and Jambres, because they can’t even rise up and come serve in the king’s house—but here you are, serving in spite of your pain.”

The slave smiled at the irony. “Yes, now that you put it that way, I see that my case is much lighter than theirs.”

“Whom is that food for?” asked Moses.

“For Pharaoh and his queen,” the slave said. “And their little boy.”

“Then let us help you,” said Moses. “As you can see, we have no sores, and I know the way.”

Gratefully the slave handed the tray of food to them. “If I thought you meant harm to Pharaoh, I would die before I let you touch his food. Even now, he won’t eat it unless I taste it first. And normally I’m watched by guards the whole way.”

“The only food that Pharaoh does not have to fear,” said Moses, “is the food he takes from my hand.”

Moses carried the tray himself, leading the way, until they came to the inner chamber where Tuthmose and Sakhmet watched over their son, who slept fitfully. Tuthmose leapt to his feet when he saw Moses and Aaron, preparing to fight; but Sakhmet saw that they had brought the food, and she laid her hand on her husband’s arm to restrain him.

Solemnly Moses took a taste from every dish and put it in his own mouth. “The cooking here is better than ever,” said Moses. “And under the trying circumstances today, that’s remarkable.”

“Speak quietly, please,” said Sakhmet. “Ptahmose gets so little sleep.”

“The sores will heal now,” said Moses. “And the itching will stop.”

Sakhmet nodded; any word of gratitude she might have said would have infuriated her husband.

Tuthmose reached out and seized Moses by the arm. “Come,” he whispered, “look at what you’ve done!” He drew him roughly to where the child lay. The sores were indeed pitiable, and the child winced even in his sleep. “Your god makes war on children!”

Moses looked at the child and remembered his own sons, how tender-hearted they were when they were young. He remembered other children, too, and spoke of them—softly, so Ptahmose would not be wakened. “I’ve seen thousands of Israelite children working all day in the heat of the sun, making bricks because you decided to punish them for no crime at all. And yet even though I’ve seen far greater suffering than this, I also know that this child was born to a house of comfort and power, and he was not prepared to suffer anything at all. The Lord loves little children, Tuthmose, and blesses them with forgetfulness. His suffering is but a moment, and the Lord promises him eternal joy.”

“You defile my son even to look at him,” said Tuthmose.

“Seeing such a beautiful child,” said Moses, “it’s hard to believe that any child would ever grow up to murder his father.”

Tuthmose recoiled as if he had been struck. “Get out of my house. Out of my child’s bedchamber!”

Aaron stepped between Moses and Tuthmose. “Softly now, please. Let the child sleep.”

“Give Pharaoh the Lord’s warning,” said Moses.

“You have nothing to say that interests me,” said Tuthmose.

“Your kingdom has already lost a large portion of its cattle to the murrain,” said Aaron. “Any cattle or other animals, and for that matter any man or woman that you wish to have survive, bring them in to shelter before morning. For tomorrow any living thing out in the open will be crushed in a storm of hail.”

“Why do you tell me this!”

“To show your people the mercy of God,” said Moses.

“And to show you how your own people believe in the power of the Lord God of Israel, even if you don’t,” said Aaron.

During the rest of the day, Moses and Aaron warned anyone who would listen, and the word spread throughout Egypt. The boils and sores were healing; the pain was gone. But there was no time to celebrate. Flocks and herds were brought under shelter, and families provisioned themselves so there’d be no need to go outside.

Ten thousand stars glowed brightly through cloudless night. But no one doubted the power of God to make it hail, even out of a clear sky. The only reason many herds and many servants were left outdoors was because many wealthy and powerful men feared to let Pharaoh see them heed Moses’ warning, showing their belief in the power of Israel’s god. And the hailstorm couldn’t be that bad, could it? The frogs, the lice, the boils, the flies, even the blood in the river—none of them had killed anybody. Even with the murrain that afflicted the cattle, those beasts that didn’t die of it at once soon recovered. Thus they talked themselves into disaster.

The hail, when it came, was brutal. Stones the size of a man’s head fell among the thousands of smaller chunks of ice. The wind bent ancient trees and then tore them from the ground. And lightning started fires all over the kingdom.

But in Goshen, no hail fell.

Moses and Aaron stood in the threshold of the house of Pharaoh, waiting . . . and sure enough, he sent for them. Thunder roared outside, and cold wind howled through all the windows and doors of the airy building. Pharaoh paced fretfully in front of his throne when Moses and Aaron entered.

“Yes, I admit it!” cried Tuthmose. “I sinned when I didn’t let your people go. The Lord God of Israel is righteous, and my people and I are wicked. Please, make this storm stop before the entire crop of Egypt is destroyed.”

Aaron cocked his head, calculating for a moment. “I’d say it’s too late to save the barley and the flax,” said Aaron. “But the wheat and the rye are still green. They’ll probably recover.”

“I don’t need your crop assessment,” Tuthmose hissed at him. “I need you to stop this storm. I’ll let your people go and sacrifice.”

“Keep your word this time,” said Aaron, “or the disaster that will fall upon Egypt will make all these plagues look like a holiday.”

“Stop the storm!” roared Tuthmose, but his voice was swallowed up by a clap of thunder far louder than any human voice could hope to overpower.

Moses and Aaron went outside, and Moses spread his arms before the Lord, supplicating him. As suddenly as it had begun, the storm ceased. The clouds dissipated, the air stilled. The ice on the fields melted, and where the fields were still green, many plants rose up, healing themselves from the damage of the storm. But in the fields where the ears of grain were already set, the destruction was nearly total.

All the rest of the day, Tuthmose and his officers, now healed of their boils and sores, labored to calculate how much grain and linen they’d have to import to make up for this damage, and how this would deplete the treasury. “They cost us too much, these Israelites,” said Pharaoh when the meeting ended. “They can go when their labor has repaid the losses, and not before.”

His officers heard this decision with fear and anger, but they had long schooled themselves to let their faces show nothing of what they felt. So Pharaoh heard not one word of opposition. Until Sakhmet spoke from the doorway. “Which will cost more? To let Israel go? Or to keep them here and face even more terrible damage tomorrow?”

“You don’t understand affairs of state,” Tuthmose snapped. “You don’t understand anything.”

But then he looked around the room, and saw that his men all thought as Sakhmet did.

“Is there no loyal man left in Egypt?” said Tuthmose. “Has Moses stolen all your hearts?”

“Pharaoh accuses when he has no enemy,” said Jambres. “We want only good for you and for your kingdom. But how much more devastation can the people endure?”

“Why do they turn against me?” demanded Pharaoh. “Why don’t they put the blame where it belongs, on Moses! He was always a traitor, yet they loved him; and now he brings destruction down on Egypt and they still love him!”

Jambres rose to his feet. “We have served Pharaoh badly. He has charged us to give wise counsel, but we have all been so fearful of the wrath of Pharaoh that we have given foolish counsel, or none at all. Now I’ll say what we all think, even those who deny it, and if Pharaoh kills me for saying it, me and all my family, then I would still say it, for I would rather die with truth on my lips than live as a man who lied to his king.”

“Say what you have to say!” shouted Pharaoh.

“We have seen the river run with blood. We have been covered with frogs and lice, with flies and maggots, and finally with boils and sores on our bodies. Our cattle have died of a sudden disease and our crops have been pounded into the ground by hail or burned by lightning. In all of these, the forces of nature have been arrayed against us. Our prayers to the gods have gone unanswered. Clearly the Lord God of Israel has taken over the land of the gods and all of them bow before his power. We are helpless to defend ourselves against these plagues, and it will take years to recover, years in which we’ll deplete the treasury, divert our soldiers to labor in the fields, and become an easy target for the enemies of Egypt. And we endure all this so that lazy, rebellious slaves can make our bricks for us?”

“Does Pharaoh rule in Egypt or does he not?” cried Tuthmose.

“I waited for Pharaoh to stretch forth his hand and stop the hail,” said Jambres. “All my prayers to Amon couldn’t do it. So I waited for you. All the people wait for you. One way or another, we all wait for you to end these plagues, because you are the god we trust in to care for us. We pray to you: don’t make us endure any more. Kill the messenger if you want, but hear the message.”

“Tomorrow,” said Tuthmose, “you’ll see what answer I give.”

The next day, Moses and Aaron returned to the palace. “Your soldiers still keep watch,” said Aaron. “They still bar the way.”

“They won’t bar the way,” said Pharaoh. “All your men can go out to the desert to sacrifice. But leave behind the women and children, and all the old men. You don’t need them. We’ll keep them safe here in Egypt, waiting for your return.”

Aaron conferred with Moses for a moment. “We will go with our sons and our daughters,” said Aaron, “with old and young, male and female, and with all our flocks and herds. We will be feasting in honor of the Lord, and we are forbidden to leave any of our people behind.”

Pharaoh almost screamed his answer. “I will never let you take your little ones out of Egypt!”

“Then prepare for a plague of locusts,” said Aaron. “See if any green thing grows in Egypt after they pass through.”

* * * 

The wind blew from the desert, all the rest of the day, all that night, and into the morning. And before noon, there appeared a low cloud on the horizon, growing and growing, dark and threatening. Only it didn’t cover the sky. When the cloud came nearer, the people could see that it covered the ground and filled the air only thirty cubits or so above the earth. And when it was closer still, they could see the individual locusts leaping, flying, bouncing off the ground and soaring again.

They covered everything, swarming through the houses, over the fields. Where they lingered, every leaf was eaten, every blade of grass, every stalk of wheat and rye.

In the midst of the devastation, Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron. “I confess my sin!” he cried. “My officers warned me and I didn’t listen. Forgive my sin, only this once, and I’ll let your people go!”

So Moses once again prayed to the Lord to remove the plague. A west wind came up, as strong as the wind that brought the locusts, and swept them all toward the east until all of them had plunged into the Red Sea.

But when Moses and Aaron returned, they were met only by Jannes and Jambres. “Pharaoh commands us to tell you,” said Jannes, “that with the entire year’s harvest destroyed, it would be an affront to the people of Egypt to let the Israelites go out and feast as if there were still plenty to eat. Pharaoh says that it isn’t enough for your god to send away the locusts, he must restore what they consumed or he’ll never let your people go.”

“Jannes,” said Moses kindly, “I know that you counseled against this.”

Jannes held his tongue, neither affirming nor denying.

“Pharaoh is like a blind man,” said Moses. “So let the world be as dark as his own vision. For three days, no light will be seen in the land, not of sun or moon, not of stars or any fire made by man.”

Tears flowed down Jannes’s face. “Moses, why doesn’t your god soften Pharaoh’s heart? If he has such power, why doesn’t he make Tuthmose feel compassion for Egypt?”

Moses shook his head. “The Lord God treats no human being as a slave. We are all his children. He would see all his creation brought to ruin before he would take free will away from even the most rebellious of men. Men must bear the consequences of their choices, and they can choose only what is within their power. But choose they may, now and always. This world was created for humankind to dwell in it; if humans lose the freedom of choice that separates them from the animals, then this world has no purpose.”

“Let God have mercy upon the innocent,” said Jambres, catching Moses by the hand and gripping it in supplication. “Let the punishment fall only on those who rebel.”

“It was the people of Egypt who goaded Pharaoh into mistreating the Israelites. Should they now be spared the consequences of their choices?”

“Darkness!” said Jannes. “Who will care for the sick and dying? What if a child wanders from its parents in the dark?”

“Give warning, then,” said Aaron. “Let the people block their doors to keep their little ones inside. Let them gather food and water for three days, as quickly as they can. Tomorrow the sun will not appear in the sky, and no light will be seen in all of Egypt.”

“Except,” said Moses, “in the land of Goshen where the people of the Lord are waiting for Pharaoh to let them go offer sacrifice.”

Jannes’s voice fell to a whisper. “Then go in the dark of night. Sweep the soldiers away before you.”

“No Israelite will raise a hand of violence against any Egyptian. When we have our freedom, it will be because Pharaoh bent to the will of God and gave that freedom to us.”

“Tuthmose does not bend,” said Jambres. “Especially he doesn’t bend to you.”

“Let him bow to God,” said Moses. “I never asked a soul to bend to me.”

“Or let him break,” said Aaron.

“You’ve made new Pharaohs before,” said Moses quietly, “and swept away old ones.”

“Do you think I don’t repent of my part in that?” said Jambres. “Do you think all of Egypt hasn’t wished that Hatshepsut were still alive? She would have let your people go, simply because it was you, her beloved son, asking.”

“Did she still love me, even after I went into exile?” asked Moses.

“She never spoke of you again,” said Jannes. “But I believe she thought of you all the time. Whenever she got a sour look on her face, watching Tuthmose, we knew she was thinking: If Moses were here, it would all be different.”

“I’m here now,” said Moses, “too late for Hatshepsut, but not too late for Egypt. God is my only parent now, and I obey him like a son.”

“Do you want us to overthrow Tuthmose? Because you know we can’t. Look how young his son is. Who would be regent? All the obvious candidates are dead.”

“Let Pharaoh serve God, and all that you have lost will be restored.”

Jannes and Jambres looked at each other. “It’s cheap to make a promise that you know you’ll never have to keep,” said Jambres. “You might eventually bend him to your will, but he will never serve God.”

* * * 

The next morning there was no dawn. People awoke in dark houses. No fire would light, no lamp, no spark. Farmers heard the cattle complaining in the barns, and had to go out and feed them and milk them by feel, as their wives and children cowered in their pitchblack houses.

In Goshen, though, while the sky was dark, lamps could be lit, and fires; food was cooked, chores were done, all by the flickering light of burning oil.

When the three days were nearly up, Moses and Aaron made their way out of Goshen, carrying lamps. As the road led them past Egyptian villages, their light drew the attention of the villagers, who came out of their houses weeping for joy at the sight of even such a feeble light. A multitude jostled along behind them, all of them blind as before, except for the few near the front who were close enough to see by the light of Moses’ and Aaron’s lamps.

In the house of Pharaoh, Tuthmose saw the light and cried out. “Moses! Lamps will light for you!”

Moses laughed. “A lighted lamp? After all you’ve seen, and this is what amazes you?”

“I’m ready to keep my word,” said Pharaoh. “Go, all of you, every Israelite. But leave your cattle behind, as an assurance that you’ll return.”

“We’re going to feast and offer sacrifices,” said Moses. “We will take our flocks and herds.”

“Why do you still lie to me?” said Pharaoh. “You complain that I don’t keep my word, but what about you? Saying that you just want to go out and sacrifice, when you know that your plan is and always has been to leave Egypt and never come back. My informers have told me everything—the promises about Canaan, the land flowing with milk and honey! Shame on you for a liar!”

“I never promised that we’d come back,” said Moses. “All I promised was that one way or another, the Lord God will send his people out of Egypt into the wilderness, and we’ll offer sacrifices when we get there.”

“You’re the same man as me,” said Tuthmose. “I learned everything you taught!”

“You don’t have the slightest inkling of the things I learned while I was gone. The knowledge I taught you was of another time and place.”

“I have the blood of Pharaohs in my veins! I will not have it said that the kingdom of Egypt was diminished during my reign!”

“These plagues have diminished Egypt far more than the departure of the Israelites ever would. Keeping a nation bound in slavery diminishes Egypt, also. What I ask you for is largeness of soul, greatness of heart. God will forgive you even now, if you turn to him. You can be a great Pharaoh, if you submit yourself to the Lord God of heaven.”

“My greatness does not depend on your god,” said Tuthmose coldly. “My greatness depends on what I do.”

“That’s true enough,” said Moses. “As long as you understand that how you respond to the Lord is the most important of your choices.”

“Here is how I respond. I will never let Israel go. There is nothing you or your god can do to me to make Pharaoh bow down before a sheep-herding slave. Now get out, and trouble me no more. The day you see my face again, you’ll die.”

“You’re right,” said Moses. “You’ll never see my face again, though you spend your whole life searching. What God does now will close the door on your heart forever, even as it opens the door to set Israel free.”

“Your god can do nothing!” shouted Pharaoh. “He has no power over me! Your people are my slaves forever!”

His cries echoed through the palace. Servants and courtiers, officers and priests all peered from doorways or knelt in the corridors, eager and fearful to see Moses and Aaron with their lighted lamps. Pharaoh’s desperate cries were plainly audible to all; more affecting, however, were the tears that streamed down Moses’ face. They knew then that after nine plagues, the Lord had lost patience. To the people that they passed, Aaron spoke softly. “Ask for the news of what you must do to save yourselves. When we tell Israel, ask for word of what to do. God will spare all those who obey him.”

* * * 

“From now on,” Moses told the elders, “this month will be the first month of the year, and on the tenth day of this month, let every man take a lamb without blemish, and kill it on the eve of that day. Take the blood of the lamb and smear it on the doorpost of your house, to show the angel of the Lord that here is a household of faith.”

Miriam listened beyond the firelight, where none could see her, or if they saw, they tolerantly said nothing. She knew what Moses was telling them, knew it because she had seen it again and again in dreams.

“Then roast the lamb, and eat it with bread. But the lamb must be roasted quickly with fire, not boiled and not raw. And the bread cannot be given a chance to rise, but must be made in haste. Eat everything; leave nothing for the morning, and anything that remains uneaten, burn it in the fire. And eat it with your traveling clothes on, your sandals on your feet, your staff in your hand, and eat in a hurry, for you are about to begin your journey.”

This was Miriam’s dream: Everyone in traveling clothes, eating in haste. She knew that it was important every time she saw it. But not until tonight did she understand. This is how Israel will eat on the night before they leave Egypt.

“On this night,” said Moses, “the angel of the Lord will pass through the land of Egypt, and will take the life of every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast. But where the angel sees the blood of the lamb, he will pass over that house, and spare the firstborn who are inside.”

The elders murmured. The Lord was taking terrible vengeance on Egypt for the slavery of the chosen people. But if they had let Israel go, this last plague would not have come upon them.

“Not only this night, but from now on, forever, Israel will keep the feast of the Passover. For seven days you will eat unleavened bread, and on the first and the seventh day Israel will meet in holiness. For you must never forget that for the sake of the blood of the lamb your lives are saved, and that God had mercy on his people and brought them out of bondage into the land of promise.”

So this is what began when Mother labored to bear her son, and had me follow the ark she made, to see where God took the boy. This is what God planned: A night of dire judgment; a morning of bright deliverance.

It was Aaron’s turn to speak. “Let no household go unwarned. In every tribe, let no man or woman say that they didn’t know what God expected of them. Nor will you keep it a secret from any Egyptian. For now is the day for anyone who will serve the Lord to join with Israel.”

Moses spoke again. “Generations from now, in the land of promise, as you kill the lamb and mark the door with blood, as you stay indoors all night, as you feast on the unleavened bread, wearing traveling clothes, your children will say, ‘What does this mean?’ And you’ll say to them, ‘It’s the sacrifice of the Lord’s Passover, for the Lord passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he took the lives of the firstborn of the Egyptians and set Israel free from bondage.’”

The elders rose to their feet, then, and obeyed Moses and Aaron, and spread the word of the Lord’s commandment throughout the land of Goshen. Word of the warning spread also among the villages of the Egyptians. But Pharaoh warned that anyone marking his house with blood would be considered a slave, and would be forced to serve with the Israelite slaves in making bricks.

As the day of preparation began, Miriam heard the chatter of the women, hushed at first, in awe of what had already happened, at what was about to happen. But soon the familiar task of grinding the grain and making the dough brought back familiar conversations, and she heard their light laughter, the meaningless jokes that passed the time.

For a moment Miriam was resentful. Couldn’t they remain solemn on this holiest day in the history of the people of Israel? Didn’t they know that tomorrow all dreams and prophecies would be fulfilled, and Israel would be led out of bondage by the power of God?

But of course they laughed. Of course they were giddy. Everything was going to change, and in strange ways. Yes, they had endured change before—from freedom to slavery, from homes scattered throughout Egypt to confinement in the land of Goshen, and from labor at every honorable task to the backbreaking work of making bricks. But with all these changes, they had remained in Egypt. Now they would be going out into the desert, a forbidding place where no Egyptian willingly went. The only life they knew was life within reach of the Nile, and now they would leave the river behind and go into the country of sand and stone and sun, of brutal wind and killing heat and permanent drought. Yes, the Lord would be with them, but they were afraid; and also they were delighted that their long period of enslavement was over; and so they joked with each other to cover their fear and contain their happiness.

Didn’t Miriam’s own hands tremble at the kneading trough?

The afternoon waned into evening. Lambs were butchered. Blood was smeared on the doorposts. Every Israelite was indoors and would not come out through all the hours of darkness. For the destroying angel was coming to Egypt, and all that was in anyone’s power now was to save himself and his family, by obeying the Lord. Those who refused to take part in the feast, out of fear or unbelief or stubborn rebellion against God, had made their own choice.

* * * 

Tuthmose found Sakhmet with the cooks, watching as they butchered a lamb.

“What are you doing?” he asked coldly.

“Preparing supper,” said Sakhmet.

“A lamb?” asked Tuthmose.

“That was the meat I fancied tonight,” said Sakhmet.

“And was it without blemish?” asked Tuthmose.

“I would hardly choose less than the best for our supper.”

Tuthmose raised his hand and struck her across the face, struck so brutally that she fell to the ground and hit her head. She lay there, moaning and writhing, curling herself into a ball.

To the terrified cooks, Tuthmose’s orders were brief and clear. “Burn this lamb. Pour its blood on the fire. If one drop of blood is seen on any doorway in the palace, I’ll have you and your families killed.”

By now, Sakhmet had struggled to rise to her knees. “Tuthmose,” she groaned, “it’s the life of our son!”

“I forbid this to happen!” cried Tuthmose. “I forbid you to speak of it!”

“Kill me then!” cried his wife. “Kill me now so I don’t have to watch our sweet Ptahmose die because you were too proud and stubborn to bow before the power of the Lord God of Israel!”

“This isn’t a god we’re dealing with!” shouted Tuthmose. “It’s Moses! I know Moses! He was always weak and merciful. Making and keeping promises to people so weak that it didn’t matter whether he kept his word or not. All these other plagues, they killed no one who was careful.”

“I was being careful,” murmured Sakhmet. “I was trying to be careful for our boy.”

“Power comes from the willingness to kill,” said Tuthmose, “and that’s why Moses lost his power, and that’s why he still has no power in Egypt.”

“No power! When he can blot out the light of the sun! Make the river run with blood!”

“Moses is no killer,” said Tuthmose. “Our son will not die. His people will not go free. He has reached too far this time.”

“No, you have! You have gone too far!” She was frantic now, screaming, her face dark with rage, tears flying from her eyes as she flung her head back to look her husband in the face. “When our son dies, I will say nothing to you,” she said. “But every time you see me looking at you, you’ll remember this: I tried to save our son’s life, and you stopped me. You are the one who decided he would die. You are the one who killed. And that is what you call power.” The contempt in her voice was like an iron blade.

“You’re no queen,” said Tuthmose. “You are not a queen!”

“I don’t care about queen or wife or any other name you can give me. At this moment all I am is Ptahmose’s mother. But you are not his father. A father keeps his child safe, a father does whatever it takes to save his child’s life. You are not a father! You are nothing to me!”

The cowering cooks, trying to be invisible against the walls of the kitchen, thought for a moment that Tuthmose would take one of their bone-cutting hatchets and kill her on the spot. They saw him get control of himself. Instead of violence, he turned to the cooks. “Remember. Burn it all. Pour the blood on the fire.”

* * * 

Moses and Miriam ate their small feast together in her hut—there was no room for them in Aaron’s tiny, crowded house. So no one but Miriam saw how Moses spent the night. He tried to sleep, and so did she, but as the night wore on, she awoke often, hearing some distant cry, some far-off wailing, and whenever she woke up she saw Moses, kneeling beside his pallet, praying, or lying on his bed sobbing quietly. Once she heard the words he prayed, though he whispered very quietly, trying not to waken her. “O God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, take me instead, leave my children fatherless, but let me die in place of all these others. It’s too hard a punishment for them to bear.”

Miriam heard him, but knew that the Lord would not grant any such prayer. If God were to take Moses’ life, it would be for his own sins and mistakes, and not for the crimes of others.

Would some firstborns die innocently tonight? Of course, and Miriam didn’t have a heart of stone, she knew that such losses were unbearable. But why did this bother Moses so much, and so personally? He knew that this was ordained by the Lord. Wouldn’t the innocent ones be caught up joyfully to the beautiful heaven Jacob saw in the vision that came to him when he was fleeing the anger of his brother? While those who died with no such joyful hope had decreed their own end, and what difference did it make whether it was tonight or later?

She even thought of saying all this to Moses, but as she rehearsed the word in her mind, she knew that he already knew these things. It wasn’t for the dying that he grieved, anyway. It was for the living. He grieved because he was a father and had children; she had none. So he could easily imagine the agony of a parent whose firstborn was taken from him, while for Miriam it remained a mystery. She had seen how parents became frantic when they didn’t know where their little children were; how they worried, how they thought of nothing but their children, how unhappy it made them; and how they rejoiced unreasonably over even the slightest achievement of their children until Miriam was unutterably bored. And whatever the bond parents felt for children, it wasn’t reciprocated. Children were an ungrateful, careless lot, Miriam believed. In the end, there was no rational way to comprehend what parents felt. You had to be one.

That’s why she felt so little sympathy for the parents whose children were being taken tonight. There had been lambs enough for all, if they had wanted to obey. The parents made their choice.

Tonight was a night for rejoicing; tonight God was finishing the miracle and bringing Israel out of bondage. Miriam couldn’t sleep because she wanted to dance, to sing, to parade all through Goshen. Instead she had to remain within the house, had to try to sleep or at least pretend to sleep, and because of Moses’ compassionate grief, she had to pretend to be solemn.

His tears were holy, she knew. But so were the dances and songs she felt in her heart.

* * * 

Tuthmose and Sakhmet might be at war with each other, but neither could force the other to stay out of Ptahmose’s bedchamber that night. Guards stood around the room, watching. Sakhmet, sitting rigidly in her chair, and Tuthmose, pacing up and down, circling the room, never took their eyes off the boy, never spoke to each other. All they saw was the peaceful look on his face as he slept—his first night without fear, without pain, since the plagues began. All they saw was the steady rising and falling of his chest as he breathed in and out, in and out.

And then, with no sign from heaven, no clap of thunder, no tumult, no cry, not even a sigh or whisper from the sleeping boy, nor a twitch of his finger to show that he even knew what was happening, he let out a breath . . .

. . . and never took another.

* * * 

They heard him before he found Miriam’s house. The messenger from Pharaoh walked through the Israelite settlement in Goshen, calling out, “Where is Moses! What house is Moses in!”

Moses got up and arranged his clothing and smoothed his beard. Miriam half-rose from her bed.

“Stay,” he said to her, “and when the people awaken, remind them that the Lord said they should go to the Egyptians and ask what they will give us, to offer to the Lord in the wilderness. Whatever gifts the Egyptians give them for the Lord’s sake, they are to take and carry with them. Have the herdsmen gather their herds. When Aaron and I come back from the palace, we must be ready to leave at once.”

So . . . it was done. Miriam got up and prepared to go out, house to house, rousing the people and telling them that the time was here at last, arise and make ready to go.

* * * 

When Moses and Aaron reached the palace, they could hear the distant wailing of women in grief. Was one of them the voice of Sakhmet?

Pharaoh was not in the great hall. Instead, Jannes met them, looking far older than they had ever seen him look before, as if he had one foot in the grave.

“Pharaoh says for you and your people to rise up, take your flocks and herds, go out and offer your sacrifices. Cover yourselves in blood.”

Jannes turned away.

“Jannes,” said Moses, “I would never have brought harm to your house.”

Jannes turned back to face him. “Jambres chose,” he said.

“To die?” asked Aaron.

“He was less afraid to face your God as a dead man, than to face Pharaoh as a living firstborn, on the night when Pharaoh’s own firstborn son would die.”

“Would that be your choice, now?” said Moses.

“Get out of Egypt,” said Jannes. “Now, before his grief gives way to rage.”

* * * 

Sakhmet wailed and wailed over the boy’s body. She would not look at Tuthmose, would not bear his touch. Nor would Tuthmose leave the room. He kept looking at the body, remembering the voice, picturing the legs running, the hands grasping, playing, the lips smiling, laughing, jabbering, eating, the eyes angry, sleepy, alert, happy, mournful.

If he could picture Ptahmose clearly enough, would he come back to life?

If he was a god, why was the most useful of godly powers denied to him—to raise the dead?

He imagined his son speaking to him. Father, why is the sky so grey? And he would answer, A storm is coming. Father, his son would ask, why can’t I open my eyes? And he would answer . . . would answer not at all. Father! he imagined his son saying. Father, why is Mother crying so bitterly!

Because I did not believe that Moses’ god would kill a child.

Pharaoh left the bedchamber and walked out onto the steps leading down to the river. The night was clear. Perhaps the eastern sky was growing a little lighter; perhaps not. He could hear keening and crying from every nearby house, it seemed. A choir of lament. All grieving for my son. All other deaths were nothing compared to the death of my son. All Egypt mourns because my son, my beloved son, is dead.
 

 
 
© 2000 Shadow Mountain 

Printed from Gospelink.com
