# Chapter 12: Men and Women

### Chapter 12: Men and Women
Orson Scott Card , Stone Tables (Salt Lake City 2000)
 
 

Chapter 12: Men and Women

For the long months that Moses was gone, Zeforah’s only word of him came from the Lord, who told her little, but it was enough. She knew that he was on the Lord’s errand. She knew that the Lord would bring him back safely. So when she led the children in prayer for their father, and for their people, the Israelites, the answer she received was a feeling of peace in her heart. All was well with him and with his work. She could be patient with that.

Gershom was not satisfied, however. “Why is Father bothering with slaves?” he asked one day. He had seen slaves, with the occasional traveler that passed by—they seemed to be treated like animals, less sturdy than camels, but more dextrous. Zeforah had to explain to him that slaves were people just like any other, who had been unfortunate enough to be captured in war. She didn’t know enough about the Israelites in Egypt—or about Egypt itself, for that matter—to explain much more about their slavery than that they had been taken into captivity in Egypt and Father was going to tell them that the Lord would set them free.

“Then they must be happy to see him,” said Gershom.

“I hope so,” said Zeforah.

“Why wouldn’t they be?” continued her inquisitive firstborn.

“Because when your father lived in Egypt, he wasn’t a slave like the rest. He was adopted by Pharaoh’s daughter and lived in the palace and commanded armies and was very famous and powerful.”

“Why didn’t he set the Israelites free himself?”

With Gershom, the questions only got harder. “Because he wasn’t the Pharaoh, he was only the adopted son of Pharaoh’s daughter.” No use trying to explain how Pharaoh’s daughter became Pharaoh, including the shocking behavior of dressing as a man. Especially since Zeforah didn’t understand it herself.

“Didn’t Pharaoh like him, then?”

“Pharaoh’s daughter loved him, Gershom, because he was her only son and he was good and wise. But he still had to obey her, and not her him. I don’t obey you, do I?”

“I don’t always obey you, either,” he answered.

“But you’re sorry when you don’t.”

“Not always,” he said. “Sometimes I’m right and you’re wrong.”

“Yes, that’s true,” she said. “But I’m always your mother. Besides, there was more to it than that, when your father was in Egypt.” She did her best to explain that Pharaoh could not lead the people where they didn’t want to go, that it was all Moses’ Egyptian mother could do just to stop the Egyptians from killing the Israelites’ boy-children.

By the end, though, she knew she must have made a muddle of it, because Gershom’s response was to nod wisely and say, “So Father was a slave, after all, just like the rest of the Israelites.”

“What? Why do you say that?”

“Because he had to do what other people told him all the time, and never got to choose for himself.”

“No, he wasn’t a slave, or else all adults are,” she said. “Think about it, Gershom. When do I get to choose what I’m going to do? Every day I have to provide a meal for you and the other children. There are duties to take care of with Grandfather’s flocks. I have to watch the little ones all the time so they don’t play with snakes and scorpions or tumble off cliffs. When during the day can I do what I want?”

“When you read the scriptures,” he answered promptly.

“Your father had moments like that, too,” she said, “when he could be himself. But the rest of his life was filled with duty.”

“I don’t want to grow up,” he said. “I don’t like chores.”

“But when you’re older, you understand the purpose of your work, and so you take joy in it. That’s why I’m not a slave, because when I married your father I knew I was making the choice to have wonderful children and care for them, and work hard all the days of my life.”

“You didn’t know we were going to be wonderful.”

“Yes I did. Gershom, slaves work because they’re afraid of being punished. I work because I rejoice in the lives of the people I serve.”

“I don’t rejoice in Eliezer’s life,” said Gershom.

“But you will,” she said, “when he gets older and he’s the most fun person to play with.”

“Am I an Israelite?” asked Gershom.

“Yes,” said Zeforah.

“But you’re a Midianite, like Grandfather.”

“I was until I grew up and married your father.”

“So I’m half Israelite.”

“It doesn’t go by halves,” said Zeforah. “Because the Israelites are the chosen people of the Lord, you either serve and obey the Lord, or you don’t.”

“But Grandfather serves the Lord and he’s not an Israelite.”

Zeforah despaired of making things clear to a child. “Then I guess you have to grow up and adopt Grandfather as your son, so he can be an Israelite, too.”

It took a moment for Gershom to realize she was joking. For that moment, his eyes wide, she knew he was imagining blustery old Grandfather as his own little boy. Then he got the joke and laughed and ran off to tell Grandfather that he would have to call him Father from now on, so he could be one of the chosen people, too.

Sure enough, within a few minutes, Jethro came charging into her tentyard. “What’s this I hear about you planning to become my grandmother?”

“If I were your grandmother, I’d get you to bathe more often.”

“I’m willing to become an Israelite,” said Jethro, “but I’m not willing to become an Egyptian.”

“I hope it’s not dirt that separates Hebrews from Egyptians,” said Zeforah.

“Dirt and water, as a matter of fact,” said Jethro.

“What is that supposed to mean?”

“They’re coming.”

“Who?” And then she realized. “Moses?”

“And a horde of Israelites. They’ve been seen on this side of the Red Sea, heading toward the mountain of the Lord.”

“So they did come out.”

“And the stories that are being told about them are so fabulous as to be irresponsible. I won’t even repeat them.”

“Yes you will,” she said.

“You need to show more respect for your father.”

“You need to tell me.”

“It’s utter nonsense,” said Jethro. “Supposedly the Israelites not only left Egypt, but they’re bringing half the gold of Egypt with them, which was given to them by the Egyptian people as presents! I’m sure that one’s likely to be true, Egyptians are always giving gold to departing slaves. And then they supposedly didn’t go around the Red Sea at all, or even across it, they went right through it. And they don’t carry grain with them, they find bread on the ground in the morning every day and just gather it up, and when they need meat, flocks of quail come and land among them, waiting to be knocked in the head and cooked for supper. I know the Lord is with them, but people should keep some degree of reason about the rumors they spread.”

“The Lord’s power is great,” said Zeforah. “Maybe it’s all true. Such a large number of people must be eating somehow, and there’s not much food to be found here in the wilderness of Sinai.”

“Yes, well . . . but bread on the ground like dew! Well, it doesn’t matter. Time for you to pack up. The day is young, and we can reach the camp of Israel before noon tomorrow.”

“Do you know where it is?”

“It isn’t two tents and a dozen shepherds, Zeforah. It’s a million people, more or less. And all their herds and beasts of burden. We’ll smell them before we see them, and we’ll see them from many miles away. They can’t exactly hide, at least not from those of us who know this land.”

“But . . . Moses hasn’t sent for me.”

“A husband doesn’t have to send for his wife. You know he wants you there. You belong there at his side. And his children need to see their father being the Lord’s servant and the leader of this multitude. They need to learn what it means to be Israelite.”

“But it’s not safe for a woman and her children to travel alone.”

“Who said anything about alone? I said we would reach the camp of Israel tomorrow. Do you think I’d miss this? Moses needs me to tell him what he’s doing wrong.”

Zeforah was horrified. “Father, you aren’t going to criticize him in front of everybody, the way you used to do here!”

“Give me credit for a little tact,” said Jethro.

“I would if I’d ever seen you use any.”

“I was joking. I’ve been priest for this village most of my life, and the one thing I’ve never lacked was villagers willing to provide me with long lists of my faults and failings. The one thing Moses won’t need is one more person telling him what he’s doing wrong.” Jethro made a show of suddenly thinking of something awful. “Oh no! A man who doesn’t need criticism, and I’m bringing him his wife?”

“Very funny,” said Zeforah. “We’ll be ready in three hours. Two, if you can get any of my sisters to help me with the tent.”

* * * 

Visitors came to the camp of Israel every day, on foot, mounted, alone, with company. It bothered Joshua that no effort was made to secure the boundaries of the camp. He brought this up with Hur and Aaron, and both of them looked at him with some puzzlement. “The Lord watches over Israel,” said Aaron.

“Well, shouldn’t we try to do some things for ourselves?” Joshua asked.

“Like what?” asked Hur.

“There’s gold in this camp,” said Joshua, “and people make no effort to hide it. And since it belongs to no one in particular, no one has even tallied it so if half of it was stolen we wouldn’t even know.”

“Who would steal it?”

“These strangers! Gold has value, even here in the desert—and if they had enough gold, a good number of these people might well leave the desert.”

“If it can change their lives,” said Hur, “then aren’t they welcome to it?”

“No, Joshua has a point,” said Aaron. “A man in need is not helped by becoming a thief. We shouldn’t be tempting people.”

“And it’s not just the gold,” said Joshua. “There are children who’ve lived in trust of their neighbors all their lives. What’s to stop some desert vagabond from kidnapping one or two and selling them into slavery? Things can be bad enough in Egypt for slave children, but there are worse places, I’ve heard.”

“These are all good points,” said Aaron. “I’ll take it up with Moses, as soon as I get a chance.”

“No,” said Joshua.

“No?”

“I don’t want to wait until Moses has time to talk to you. He never has time, he spends every waking moment judging disputes and answering questions.”

“He’s the prophet,” said Hur. “He can’t help it that he’s busy.”

“This won’t wait,” said Joshua. “You’re his brother, Aaron. You give me permission, and I’ll organize the young men in every tribe into boundary patrols.”

“Soldiers? What do you know of soldiering?”

“Nothing,” said Joshua. “Neither did Adam. Somebody had to be the first soldier. We have all these young men who spent every day hauling clay or bricks or water, and now they have nothing to do and they’re getting quarrelsome. I bet half the problems laid before Moses come from some stupid dispute because people are irritable and feel useless. So I’ll give them something to do—walking the boundary, two by two, questioning all comers and escorting them to you, so they never get to wander the camp without someone watching them.”

“Sounds like you thought it all out,” said Aaron.

“No,” said Joshua, “I’m making it up as I go along. But I think it’s a good plan anyway.”

“Go ahead and begin,” said Aaron. “I’ll check with Moses, and if he wants to make changes later he can. I think the Lord put this idea in your mind.”

Joshua laughed. “I’m no prophet,” he said. “I’m just as bored as any of the other young men. Moses used to have time to teach us. Now I spend my days wandering around, trying to think of some reason why a woman would want to marry me when I have no land, no wealth, no trade, and no future.”

“You have a great future,” said Hur. “What are you talking about?”

“We have a great future. Israel has a great future. But what makes me worth noticing? Women don’t want to marry a man, they want to marry a man who’s going to provide for them and be a good father and husband, and I have no way of showing them I’m worth anything. That’s when I came up with this idea.”

Aaron and Hur broke up laughing.

“It’s serious to me,” said Joshua. “You’re already married.”

So it was that Joshua began to distinguish himself in the camp of Israel. In a single day he got more than two thousand recruits, and instead of picking among them, he took them all. He divided them into four shifts to cover the four watches of the day and night, and the division was not by tribe, but arbitrarily, so that each shift contained older and younger men and the eager boys who insisted on being included. The boys were used as messengers between the patrols and the elders of each tribe, and the young men who weren’t on duty would train together, practicing with such weapons as were included with the wealth brought out of Egypt, as well as clubs and tools, stones and slings. They had all seen Egyptian soldiers and had some idea of what soldiers had to do—they all mastered the swagger and brag of a soldier from the first.

His patrols had been on duty not many days when a particularly rude and surly group of armed men showed up at the camp. The leader proclaimed himself to be Amalek, and he declared that the land where the Israelites were camped belonged to him and his people. Instead of arguing, the patrol was cheerful and began to lead the men to Moses, meanwhile sending messenger boys to assemble all the off-duty soldiers and alert Moses to what was happening. By the time Amalek and his men reached Moses, all two thousand of the patrol were gathered around, armed and watchful, and clearly well-organized into companies that obeyed their officers promptly and completely. Amalek’s tone remained belligerent, but his men didn’t have the same contemptuous grins they had worn when they arrived.

Moses explained that Israel was here on the Lord’s business, heading for the holy mountain. “We aren’t eating your food, our animals are grazing only a small portion of your land, and the spring we’re drinking from didn’t exist until the power of God broke it out of the rock that confined it. We’re causing no harm and we mean to move on peacefully. So I can’t think of a reason for there to be a quarrel between us.”

Amalek was surly but he agreed to tolerate the Israelites’ presence. Most of the patrol surrounded his men and peacefully escorted them to the borders of the camp. Moses turned to Aaron and said, “I didn’t know we had an army.”

“Joshua asked me if he could organize a patrol for the boundaries of the camp. I thought it was a good plan.”

“I don’t know what the Lord plans,” said Moses, “but this Amalek is plain enough to understand. He’s going to come back with a large group of armed men, intending to raid this camp. He’s the kind of man who lives by raiding, we’re the richest prize that’s ever come through here, and he saw that our soldiers were young and untrained.”

“I doubt his men are particularly well-trained either,” said Aaron.

“But they think they are. And they aren’t used to seeing civilized self-restraint. We look weak to them—numerous but weak. So they’ll be back.”

“What will the Lord have us do?” said Aaron.

“I don’t know,” said Moses. “I only know that whatever we do, the Lord’s people will prevail. But in the time we have left before they return, it would be foolish if we didn’t train these men in battle.”

As soon as Moses took a personal interest in the training, the number of soldiers swelled to nearly four thousand, but Joshua took this in stride, and as he learned what Moses wanted them to do, he drilled the soldiers ruthlessly until they had a kind of rough skill. The few swords they had, they passed around until everyone had some skill with that weapon; the plan was that anyone who fell, Israelite or Amalekite, his sword was to be taken up and used. In the meantime, they had the more boyish weapons—staves, slings. They had the massive strength they had built up during their slavery in Egypt. And they had faith that God would deliver them from these ruffians as he had delivered them from Egypt.

One morning the early watch reported that armed men were picking their way more or less secretly among the rocks near the camp of Ashur. Immediately Moses gave his instruction to Joshua. “These Amalekites will fight with no subtlety at all—man to man, by brute force. But they’ll be determined, and won’t give up easily, and they have more skill than any of you. So tell your men that I will stand on that hill, where all can see me, and as long as I hold my hands high, Israel will prevail in battle by the power of God. It wouldn’t hurt if you made sure the Amalekites knew this, too.”

Joshua went to his men at once, and within minutes their officers had passed Moses’ words along to the whole army. Then, with their ragged arms and unskilled awkwardness, they advanced to meet the Amalekites on open ground.

Amalek laughed aloud at the sight of them, for though they outnumbered his force greatly, they were young, lightly armed, and lightly dressed. “What do you girls plan to do, spit at us until we drown?” he taunted them.

Joshua answered calmly but in a voice that all the ruffians could hear. “The prophet of God stands on that rock. As long as he holds his hands high, the power of God will be with us and we will prevail.”

And so it happened. The Israelites with swords fought at the front, but behind each of them were at least two men with staves, who watched closely and jabbed low and poked high and swatted down at the Amalekite so that he could never aim well at the poorly trained swordsman facing him. It was almost comic, but the Amalekites became angrier as the battle wore on and they seemed to make no headway against these dancing lightweight boys. More and more they began to cast their eyes up toward Moses, seeing that his arms remained high. It must be the power of God thwarting them, they realized, and their attack became less confident, more timid, and they gave ground. Some even threw down their swords and ran—and when they did, on the instant there was a young Israelite with a blade in his hand.

Up on the hill, however, Moses was becoming almost frantic as he called in vain for Aaron, for Hur, for someone to come help him. Finally Miriam heard him and summoned his two closest counselors, who hastened up the hill. “My arms are growing tired,” he said. “I didn’t expect Amalek to fight so stubbornly, giving ground so slowly, and when they see my arms grow slack, they take courage and attack and our men fall back.”

Immediately Aaron and Hur brought a large stone for Moses to sit on. Then they stood beside him and each held one of his arms, keeping it high, so both sides could see that God was still with Israel. The battle lasted a good while after that, but finally the power of the Amalekites was broken. A large group of Israelites threatened to cut them off from their line of retreat into the hills, a good number of their comrades had been killed while hardly an Israelite was even injured, and it seemed like a good idea to go somewhere else seeking easier prey.

Finally they were gone. The Israelite soldiers were better armed, better trained and more experienced than they had been before, and while some of them had taken painful wounds, not one was killed, and even among the wounded none would be maimed. Moses knew enough of battle to recognize a miracle when he saw it. Yes, his arms in the air, that had been a device to terrify the enemy and give confidence to his own men; but the fact that the Amalekites hadn’t been able to stop one Israelite from journeying on to meet the Lord at the mountain—that was only possible because of the intervention of God.

He said as much to the soldiers when he addressed them by the light of the pillar of fire over the camp. “You did fight bravely, and you learned something of war today, but what you did not see was the horror of having your comrades die or be maimed beside you, because the Lord protected you. As long as you’re faithful to God, his power will be with you. But when you rely on your own strength, or when you fight in wickedness, your strength will be no different from any other man’s, and what happened to those dead Amalekites can then happen to you. Don’t ever come to love war, you sons of God. Love your Lord, the God of heaven and earth, and fight only in his cause, when he fights beside you.”

But he could not keep his voice from showing how proud of them he was, and they couldn’t keep from smiling back at him, so he dismissed them with thanks and joined with his closest counselors inside his tent.

This time, though, there was a difference. Joshua didn’t lurk outside the tent, hoping to get invited in—Aaron and Hur practically thrust him through the door. He had earned his place at council.

A few days later, Hur had occasion to notice Joshua practically fleeing from a young woman of Gad. “What’s the matter, Joshua? I thought you wanted to distinguish yourself in the eyes of the young women.”

“I get no peace,” said Joshua. “I have fathers and mothers practically throwing their daughters at me. I have women talking to me as if we were planning to have children together. I never get a chance to have a normal conversation with any of them. How can I possibly choose a wife when they’re all acting like that?”

Hur couldn’t answer, he was laughing so hard. Joshua gave up in disgust and fled the scene before two more young women converged on him, each trailing a chaperoning relative behind her.

* * * 

Joshua avoided his new popularity by immersing himself in duty, working three shifts a day, walking the perimeter with team after team, getting to know the young men, asking them for ideas, listening to their experiences. Some of them had been quite shaken by the experience of fighting, and not just the ones who had killed or drawn blood. Some worried, Am I a coward? Others asked, Will God forgive me for having killed a man? Some thoughts were more random: I wonder if my father might have looked like him, if he had lived long enough for me to know him. Were these men married? Why did they want to kill us? Joshua didn’t pretend to have answers, though sometimes he promised to pass a question along to Moses. What he offered was his attention, proof that their thoughts and observations, their questions, their lives mattered to someone in authority. Perhaps more than anything else, more even than the battle experience, it was Joshua’s attentive leadership that kept the peace among these men. Everything else could be borne if they knew that their lives had meaning beyond the moment.

After all, that was what Joshua needed, too.

Sometimes, though, he walked the perimeter alone, and sometimes walked out beyond, into the trails made perhaps by animals, perhaps by marauders, perhaps by shepherds. Maybe Moses walked here with his sheep one summer, thought Joshua. Maybe the Lord spoke to him here, or heard his prayer. He even thought of praying here himself, but then scorned his own thought. Was it the stones he knelt on that made a man a prophet? Not likely. It was the purity of his heart. And Joshua knew his heart was not pure, that it was filled with such a mixture of desires and dreams, not all of them noble, that he doubted the Lord thought much of him at all. Instead of trying to become like Moses, the best he could do was try to be useful to Moses in trying to accomplish his work. If only Joshua could understand what, exactly, that work was supposed to be. Israel was out of Egypt, yes, but what now? Why were they going to the holy mountain? The Lord had obviously chosen the Israelites as his people, but was that an end in itself, or were they supposed to accomplish something in his name?

He was on one such contemplative, self-doubting walk when he came across an old man, a middle-aged woman, a donkey bearing a tent and supplies, and a flock of children, the oldest of whom was a twelve-year-old boy.

“Peace be unto you,” said Joshua.

“And to you,” said the old man, “peace.”

“My name is Joshua, the son of Nun, of the tribe of Ephraim in the house of Israel.”

The old man’s smile broadened considerably. “Israel!” he cried. “Then we’re here!”

These didn’t look like ruffians—indeed, they looked like people who needed protection from men like Amalek’s crew. “You haven’t told me your name, friend.”

“Jethro. I’m a priest, a Midianite. I serve a village not far from here as the crow flies, but several days’ journey when you take back trails to avoid the robbers who prey on travelers.”

“You’re not a half-mile from the camp of Israel,” said Joshua. “I can lead you there.”

“Do you know Moses ben Amram?” asked the old man.

“We all know him,” said Joshua. “He’s the prophet of the Lord God of Israel. He leads us and judges us in the name of God.”

The old man and the middle-aged woman exchanged smiles. “Well, Joshua, son of Nun, I’m bringing you some stray children of Israel.”

“Of Israel? Israelites, already here in the desert?”

“Israelites who have been waiting for their father to come home, and now he’s here, and they’ve come to join him.”

“Who is he? I can take you directly to him, if I know his tribe.”

“Levi,” said the woman.

“Then I can take you to Aaron, he knows everyone in Levi.”

“No,” said the woman, “I think you should take us directly to my husband.”

Joshua was about to protest that he couldn’t be expected to know every member of every tribe, when it finally dawned on him whose family would have been waiting here in the desert for him to return from Egypt.

“Are you Zeforah?” he asked her. “Are these the children of the prophet?”

“I am Zeforah,” she answered, “but these are merely the children of shepherds.”

The oldest boy spoke up. “My father is the prophet!”

But a stern look from his mother silenced him. “What he means is that his father, a shepherd, was given a message by the Lord, which he took to Egypt several months ago. Will you take us to him?”

And as Joshua led the way back along the trail to the camp, he heard Zeforah, with gentleness but great firmness also, tell her children that while their father was doing important work in the camp, this did not make his children more important than any other children. “You are the most important children in the world to your father and to me,” she said, “but to other people, you’re simply the children of shepherds.”

“Father’s a shepherd and a prophet,” the boy said. “Aren’t we just as much his children?”

“But a shepherd, just like a king, can pass his possessions on to his children. A prophet, on the other hand, teaches what he knows of the Lord to everyone, for it doesn’t belong to him or his family, and those who are faithful become the heirs of God, not of the prophet.”

“So Father doesn’t love us any more than any other child?”

“Father loves you more than life itself,” said Zeforah. “But if you are ever to join him in his great work, it has to be because of your own faithfulness in serving the Lord. It’s between you and God, not between you and your father.”

“But if somebody asks us, Is the prophet Moses your father, are we supposed to lie?”

“Gershom,” she said sharply, “you understand me perfectly. You’re just being contrary.”

Sheepishly the boy said, “Oh, I know. You don’t want us strutting around acting important.”

A younger brother piped up. “Gershom doesn’t know how to do anything else.”

“See how I’m not hitting him, Mother?”

“Let me not hear of you punishing him later, either. As for you, Eliezer, I’m ashamed that I heard you speak ill of your own brother in front of a stranger.”

Joshua realized, with amusement, that he was the stranger.

“Sorry, Mother,” said Eliezer. “Sorry, Gershom.”

“I forgive you,” said Gershom, but in deep round tones that made it a joke. “I forgive, I forgive, I forgive you.”

Zeforah only sighed, while Jethro chuckled. “How much farther?” he asked Joshua quietly. “I’ve already spent two days hearing the conversation of children.”

Despite old Jethro’s wry comment, Joshua had heard enough to know what the prophet’s children were being taught, and what kind of woman Moses had married. He resolved then and there that if he could not do as well, he would not marry, for he would never be happy with a woman who lacked such wisdom and patience.

* * * 

In front of Aaron’s tent, in the scant shade of the awning, three women sat together, carding wool and gossiping. “I was embarrassed for her, the poor thing.”

“I suppose it’s the way all the shepherd women dress, but—such coarse cloth!”

“Not that we’ll have fine looms to work with this wool.”

“The children were dirty.”

“I saw that.”

“Of course, out here in the desert all the children are dirty, since there’s not enough water for bathing.”

“But I’ll bet those children have never bathed in their lives. They must have dirt on them that’s as old as they are!”

“Well, if we didn’t know it already, seeing his wife and children made it plain as day that Moses is just a man like anybody else. He was in the desert, he had his needs, and so he married what was available. I’ll bet it isn’t long before he takes other wives, much more educated and sophisticated women, out of Israel.”

“Aaron says that Moses told him his wife is educated. That she taught him to read Hebrew.”

“Reading Hebrew isn’t reading. Hebrew’s just the language we speak. All the books are in Egyptian.”

“Well, do you read?”

“No, but I know the manners of Egypt. I know how to speak Egyptian, and very high-class Egyptian, too. I’ll bet she doesn’t know a word of it.”

“I know you have to defend her, Elisheba, because she’s your husband’s sister-in-law, but we’ll just take it for granted that you said all the nice things. It’ll save time.”

They laughed.

“I’m sure she’s a sweet girl,” said Elisheba. “I haven’t had much chance to talk with her yet. Her children are modest enough, though the oldest boy is a talker, speaking right up in adult company as if he expected his opinions to be heard.”

“Well there you are, no discipline.”

“I suppose it’s natural for the son of the prophet to be full of himself.”

“Well, just because somebody’s related to the prophet doesn’t mean he should lord it over other people.”

There was a moment’s stunned silence, and then the woman realized her mistake. “But you can’t think I was referring in any way to your husband Aaron! Why, he earned his own place in Israel long before Moses came back from the desert—in fact, before Moses even left the palace.”

“I think Aaron would have been important in Israel even if his brother hadn’t been a prince of Egypt and then the prophet of God. He earned his place.”

“Now, please, don’t worry that you’ve offended me,” said Elisheba. “I know my husband’s true worth.”

“And so do we. So does everyone! In fact, some of us have been saying it’s quite shameful the way Moses has to do everything and Aaron is just there to run errands for him.”

“I never thought of it as errand-running,” said Elisheba.

“Well, no, I was only repeating what others have said, who don’t understand how important Aaron’s work is . . .”

“In fact, many of us feel that Aaron has been shamefully neglected. Does Moses think he’s the only one the Lord has ever spoken to? Didn’t Aaron’s own staff turn to a snake?”

“Aaron doesn’t care about who gets the credit,” said Elisheba. “All the glory belongs to the Lord.”

“Well of course he’d feel that way.”

“Not everyone does. Some think Moses takes too much upon himself.”

“Setting himself up as a judge. As if just because he grew up in the house of Pharaoh he has some special wisdom.”

“Or pretending that God gives him every judgment he makes! Why, it’s well known that he plays favorites. If you just talk piously enough and bow down then he’ll decide your way—”

“Honestly, Elisheba, we don’t know how Aaron keeps his patience. Aaron’s the one who shared Israel’s burden all those years while Moses was getting flies fanned away from his face. And while Moses was out in the wilderness herding sheep and making babies with his little shepherd girl, Aaron was there in the brickyards, bearing the burden of slavery. It just makes my blood boil sometimes, to see Aaron put in second place—”

“It was all well and good for Moses to lead us while we were escaping from Egypt. But now it’s just Israel, and we should be led by a real Israelite who understands us.”

“And the way Moses puts the tribe of Levi last all the time. When a man has some authority, he’s supposed to use it to help his kinfolk, isn’t he? He simply has no sense of how things are done in Israel.”

“I tell you, Elisheba, Israel would be better off if Aaron were the one in charge of things.”

“Now, please, I don’t think I should hear things like that,” said Elisheba.

A fourth woman emerged from the tent. It was Miriam.

“Oh,” said Elisheba. “Miriam. Did you have a nice sleep?”

“Yes, I did,” said Miriam.

“I didn’t know you were inside the tent,” said one of the women.

“Clearly,” said Miriam. “But you did know that the bright cloud of the Lord’s presence stands almost directly overhead.”

The women glanced up. “Well, if a person can’t speak her mind . . .”

“Perhaps a person should clean up her mind before inviting others in to see it,” said Miriam.

“I’m not going to apologize for a thing I said.”

“Certainly not to me,” said Miriam. “I’m not the one you were stabbing in the back.”

“I think you’re a fine one to talk. It’s not as if you haven’t said some pretty nasty things about people. Everyone knows that the reason Miriam hasn’t married is because she has a tongue that leaves bloody wounds.”

“If my tongue is a knife, it makes its wounds on a man’s face, not on his back,” said Miriam. “And you have never heard me speak against the Lord’s anointed.”

“Oh, pay no attention to her. Everyone knows she’s besotted with Moses every since he was a baby. He can do no wrong.”

“Moses knows that I don’t always agree with his decisions,” said Miriam. “And Aaron is my brother as much as Moses is.”

“That’s not how it looks to anybody else. Is it, Elisheba.”

Elisheba put up her hands. “I’ve hardly said a thing in this whole conversation and I’m not starting now.”

Miriam turned on her sister-in-law. “Yes, that’s right, you haven’t said a thing. For instance, you might have said, ‘I won’t hear such disloyalty against the one the Lord God of heaven chose to be his prophet.’ Or you might have said, ‘My husband serves the Lord exactly as the Lord has asked of him, and desires nothing more.’ Or you might simply have said, ‘It’s not appropriate for me to hear opinions like these.’”

“I did say that!” protested Elisheba.

“Not until after you had sat quietly and listened to everything they had to say, which gave them the clear impression that you agreed with their envious backbiting.”

“We didn’t get any such impression.”

“You certainly seem malevolent toward your own sister-in-law, Miriam. It’s a wonder she still lets you in her tent.”

“But she’ll always want you to visit,” said Miriam, “because you save her the trouble of finding her own words to express the disloyalty in her heart.”

“I am loyal to my husband,” said Elisheba icily.

“If you were loyal to your husband,” said Miriam, “you wouldn’t encourage the envy and resentment and ambition that have been his weakness all his life.”

“I should think,” said Elisheba, “that you would be the last to criticize envy in others.”

Now that the quarrel had shifted to Elisheba and Miriam, the others were quick to make their simpering apologies. “I think we should let you two have this conversation privately.”

“Next time let us know when you have a listener in your tent, Elisheba.”

“I didn’t know she was there,” said Elisheba sweetly.

“Of course she didn’t,” said Miriam. “Or hypocrisy would have required a very different sort of pretense than she was giving you before.”

“I see that you truly are loyal,” said Elisheba. “For instance, you would never dream of speaking ill of your brother’s wife.”

The women, wide-eyed and full of the best gossip of the week, quickly headed off to begin spreading it, knowing they could end their tale with the truthful claim that “Of course I left right away, so I don’t know what they said when they really got into the fray.”

They couldn’t guess that as soon as the audience was gone, silence settled between Miriam and Elisheba. And when the silence was broken, it was with a very different tone. “I hope you won’t tell Moses what was said today,” said Elisheba.

“Shouldn’t he know?” asked Miriam.

“I really don’t agree with what these women said. You don’t understand how it is, Miriam. Most people avoid me because they think I’m too proud to want to speak to them, since I’m Aaron’s wife. I feel as though I’ve lost all my real friends.”

“These aren’t real friends either, Elisheba. You know that if I hadn’t spoken, they would have gone to their friends and told them, ‘I was talking to Aaron’s wife Elisheba, and I really think she’s upset at how badly treated Aaron is.’”

“But I never said that,” said Elisheba.

“You don’t have to say it. It was said in your presence.”

“And I denied it. You heard me.”

“Elisheba. You know. You know that’s not the story they intended to tell.”

“Well, now they have a better one. You and me fighting like cats.”

“If it’s any consolation,” said Miriam, “I’m the one who’ll come out looking like a demon, while you’re the sainted suffering loyal wife.”

Elisheba burst into tears. “Miriam, Aaron really is unhappy, and I don’t know why. He won’t talk to me.”

“Maybe he’s ashamed of what’s making him unhappy.”

“He has the thing he always said he wanted,” said Elisheba. “Israel is out of Egypt. God dwells among us. And yet instead of facing every day with joy, he gets up as if he were already weary and comes home as if his life were nothing but grief. He hardly speaks to me or the children.”

“I don’t know,” said Miriam. “I don’t know what passes between a husband and wife.”

“Please don’t say that,” said Elisheba. “You say that and it makes it impossible for me to talk to you because I feel like everything I say about Aaron will hurt you because you’re unmarried. I know perfectly well that you had your chances to marry and you made your choice. And I also know that God speaks to you and you’re very wise and Miriam, I need wisdom.”

The tears flowing down her face belied any notion of hypocrisy now. Miriam put a hand on her shoulder. “Elisheba, all I know is this. You can’t make a man happy by comforting him. He’ll only be happy when he feels right with the Lord. So maybe all you can do is treat him like the prophet in your own home. Don’t sympathize with him, because your sympathy will only diminish him in his own eyes.”

“Don’t sympathize with him?” asked Elisheba. “But if I don’t, who will?”

“No one should,” said Miriam. “What he needs is your high expectations, to help him become the kind of man who is filled with joy. Your sympathy only encourages him in his belief that he’s somehow being mistreated.”

“Are you sure he isn’t?”

“If he is, it’s the Lord doing it, not Moses. And that’s the real reason why he’s unhappy, Elisheba—because he knows, deep in his heart, that for some reason the Lord is not fully satisfied with him. Only when he’s right with the Lord will he be happy.”

“Then there’s nothing I can do at all.”

“I’ve told you what you can do,” said Miriam.

“But I think you’re wrong,” said Elisheba. “I think a man should have a place where someone loves him even if he’s not perfect yet. I know that’s what I need sometimes, and he gives that to me.”

Miriam chuckled dryly. “Well, it’s certainly helped you be a better person.”

Elisheba recoiled as if she had been slapped. Her back straight, she spoke to Miriam coldly. “Forgive me, Miriam. I forgot, for a moment, that I was speaking to a judge.”

“You weren’t, Elisheba. I’m sorry, I shouldn’t have—”

But Elisheba was on her feet and disappeared at once into her tent, drawing the flap closed behind her.

Miriam was left alone in the shade of the awning. She looked around at the camp of Israel, tent after tent. Some of the gold they carried had gone to buy more tents from the traders who now flocked to them; nearly every family had a tent of their own now. They were adapting to the pastoral life, to the rhythms of the camp. They were also adjusting to a life surrounded by miracles. They gathered their bread like dew every morning, a direct gift from God, and yet because it happened every day they forgot what a miracle it was. Human beings are too adaptable, Miriam concluded. We lose too quickly our ability to be surprised. We forget too quickly that everything we have is a gift, and who gave it to us.

And I need to learn how to speak the truth to people in a way that doesn’t make them see me as their enemy.

* * * 

It was well after dark when Moses returned to his tent, and even then, there were two more conversations at the tent door. When he came inside, Zeforah was just putting the youngest back to sleep.

“Did I wake her?” he whispered.

“Does it matter?” she said with a smile. “You do your work, and I do mine.”

Moses knelt before her and kissed her. She threw her arms around his neck and kissed him back wholeheartedly. “Talk to me,” she whispered in his ear.

“We’re both tired,” he said. “And we shouldn’t wake the children.”

“Walk with me outside. Just for a few minutes.”

So they walked among the tents, his arm across her shoulder, their heads bowed so their soft voices wouldn’t carry to other ears. “What did you want to talk about?”

“Nothing,” said Zeforah. “I just wanted the sound of your voice, talking to me. We used to talk all the time, about everything. About scriptures, about the children, about Egypt, about the whole world. Now . . . everything I know about what happened in Egypt has been told to me by others and I’m not even sure which parts of it are true. I miss you, Moses.”

“And I miss you. You have no idea how frustrating it is, day after day, but they give me no peace. It’s maddening to know you and the children are here in the camp and then I never see you and when I get home I’m so tired I just . . .”

“You need to sleep. It was selfish of me to . . .”

“No, Zeforah, no, really. It feels so good just to be alone with you.”

Then they both looked up, glanced around at the thousands of tents spreading as far as the eye could see in every direction, then up at the pillar of fire only a little way off, and they both dissolved in silent laughter at their own predicament. “Zeforah,” Moses finally said, “the best I can say is, in my heart I’m with you all the time. When I sit in judgment, I hear your wise voice in the back of my mind, telling me the sensible, fair thing to do. Reminding me of this scripture or that.”

“Trust me, you’re just imagining that,” said Zeforah. “Because what I’m really doing is stopping children from hitting each other and trying to keep Gershom and Eliezer working on their reading and—but here’s the funny thing—I feel like I have you there with me. As if everything I say to them, I’m storing up to show it to you later. To say, Moses, you should have heard what Gershom said, or Eliezer, or any of the others, what a man he’s becoming, what a woman she’ll be. It’s all done for your eyes. Or no, not really, it’s all done as if you were there watching, that’s the truth. Because we are together, aren’t we?”

“We became one person together, there in the hills, watching the sheep,” said Moses. “When I stood before Pharaoh, he told me once that he knew everything I knew because I had taught him, and I wanted to tell him that he had no idea who I was, because I wasn’t the same person he knew. And do you know what the difference is? You. Because you were there, inside my mind, inside my heart. You were my teacher. I prayed as you taught me to pray. I learned about God with you at my side, guiding me. I learned about life because you loved me and gave me these children. So the man Pharaoh was looking at—he couldn’t possibly see me or understand anything about me because he didn’t know you.”

She held him tightly then. “Is that true? I want it to be true of you, because it’s how I feel.”

“God knows it’s true,” said Moses. “When God wanted to make me into a prophet, he took me out of Egypt and put me in your hands.”

“In my heart.”

They clung to each other there among the tents of Israel. Then they went back to their tent, back to their children, and gratefully slept the few hours they had for sleeping before dawn.

* * * 

The line of people waiting for judgment was already long when Moses got to his judgment seat soon after sunrise. His heart sank when he saw them. Didn’t anybody learn from what the previous decisions had been? Of course not. Everybody was absorbed in his own life and had no idea what other decisions were needed. What Moses should be doing was copying out the scriptures for other people to read, so they could learn God’s teachings for themselves. Or teaching people directly. Or writing down the story of the Lord’s dealings with Israel during his own life. But instead his life was consumed by the need of the people for judgment. He kept thinking that soon things would calm down, that he’d have more time. But he could see no end to it, and he was close to despair.

Of course, he knew that at any time he could send people away and tell them to come back tomorrow. That was what Pharaoh did, hearing only a few cases that were most interesting. But Pharaoh had other institutions to depend on. The priests handled much of what the people needed—but who were the priests in Israel? That’s what he needed, a priesthood to teach the people. He’d have to ask the Lord if he could have priests, the way Jethro had ordained him. Then he’d ask the Lord for a couple of spare years in which to train them as Moses had been trained. . . .

No, he was dreaming. There was nothing he could do. The whole burden fell on him, and he couldn’t get it off his shoulders long enough to even think about training somebody else to help him.

“Moses!”

The voice sounded angry. Well, it wouldn’t be the first time some angry petitioner had tried to cut ahead of his place in line.

“Moses, you’re going to talk to me right now!”

He knew that voice. He looked up to see Jethro pushing his way through the crowd, ignoring complaints and curses from the people in line.

On impulse, Moses rose to his feet. “It’s my father-in-law,” he said with a sheepish smile to the people whose stories he had been listening to. “You know how it is. I’ll just be a minute.” And without waiting for the people to protest that he could certainly finish their case first, Moses bounded from the judgment seat to meet Jethro, take him by the shoulder, and let the old man’s momentum carry them both away from the crowd and into Moses’ tent.

“What are you doing, Moses? Don’t you love these people?”

“I’m doing my best, that’s what I’m doing.”

“No you’re not. You’re doing your worst. Wearing yourself out!”

“I can’t help it that there are so many people here.”

“Right, and you think they’re grateful for your hours of service? At the back of the line there’s nothing but complaint about how long everything takes and did you bring them out into the desert so they could die in line?”

“We try to keep things moving smoothly and they don’t have to wait, we take names and—”

“Foolishness. The problem isn’t the process here. The problem is you.”

“I can’t do justice if I don’t hear the case.”

“No, you can’t do justice at all because there’s no possibility of this ever ending and you’re going to die of exhaustion and then what will happen to my neglected daughter and her neglected children? You see! I put a lot of effort into raising Zeforah and you’re going to waste all that by dying and leaving her a widow thrown back on my resources.”

“You didn’t have to put any effort into raising Zeforah. She mostly raised herself.”

Jethro paused and thought about that. “Well, that’s true. So I’m back to my claim that you’re not serving Israel well. You need to set up other judges to hear the lesser cases. Aren’t there elders in every tribe? Let them do the judging and then you hear only the hard cases. For an hour or two a day.”

“Well of course I want to do that, Jethro. But when will I train them? When will I teach them the scriptures?”

“Oh, I see. You’re doing such a good job of that now.”

“I invited them all to watch me giving judgment so they could learn.”

Jethro rolled his eyes. “I’m sure they all sit there avidly, listening to every word.”

“Nobody has lasted more than half an hour, except Aaron, and his patience seems infinite. And Hur, but he’s not listening, he’s managing the line.”

“Good. Those are your first two choices as judge. In fact, they should stand beside you as general judges of Israel, so they only hear appeals, too.”

“You still haven’t solved my problem of how to teach them when I don’t have time to breathe!”

Jethro laughed incredulously. “This is why I say you’re the problem. First, do you think you’re the only man with a sense of fair play and decency? And isn’t that what you rely on in most of your judgments?”

“No, I base my decisions on the scriptures.”

“You base your explanations on the scriptures, but you make your decision first. That’s how you decide which stories from the scriptures to tell to buttress your case.”

“Does it matter?”

“Call men to serve as judges, get them busy so they take this load off your shoulders. Each one of them will have only a small fraction of this burden, and so they’ll have time enough during each day for you to gather the judges and teach them. And since they’ll actually be judging people, they’ll have questions for you. They’ll have experience. They’ll even suggest things that you never thought of and you’ll learn.”

“It sounds wonderful, but I don’t know these men well enough.”

“One man never knows another man completely anyway. If you want advice, doesn’t your brother Aaron know them all? That’s the impression I get. And besides, it doesn’t have to be up to you. Ask the Lord! Suggest the people you want to have as judges, and let the Lord tell you what he thinks!”

“I thought if he wanted me to have help in the judging he would have—”

“He would have wanted you to think for yourself. Moses, I think you’re a wonderful boy, but didn’t Hatshepsut teach you anything about good government?”

“She taught me to rely on highly trained people to share the burden of—”

“Exactly! That’s what she did! And what good was all their high training? Where were they when Tuthmose came to kill her?”

“What’s your point here, Jethro?”

“My point is that training is no substitute for faithfulness, and training can come while doing. You weren’t ready to be a prophet either, when the Lord called you. But you trusted in him to give you what you lacked, because Israel needed you to have it. Do you think that process was only for you? The Lord will do that over and over again. He’ll help you choose the men to do the job, and he’ll also help them do it, if they ask him.”

Moses was about to offer another argument, when he stopped himself and laughed wryly. “You know what I was doing? I was explaining why I was the only one fit to do the job.”

“Yes, I knew that was what you were doing.”

“And yet when I was thinking of praying for help, what idea popped into my mind? Priests! I needed a priesthood to help me.”

“There you have it. But don’t wait until you have people willing to devote their lives to the priesthood. Appoint judges now, and make them priests later. Tell me you agree.”

“I do agree, now that you’ve helped me see it.”

“Good. Then it was a good thing I came here.”

“Stay, then! Be the first of my judges! Train the men who will be my priests!”

“I trained you. That was hard enough. And if you need my advice, ask your wife. She knows everything I ever knew, and a lot more besides.”

“It would be nice to have time to talk with her.”

“Well then. It’s decided. Now go out there and tell the people you’re through with judgment for the day.”

“They’ll be angry!”

“So let them go find another camp with the pillar of the Lord’s presence and manna on the ground every morning!”

Moses laughed. “Everything seems so clear when you explain it, and so muddy when I try to see it myself.”

“That’s what old people are for! We speak our minds! Besides, the spirit of God tells you that what I’m saying is true—that’s why it seems so clear. Now I’m going to go take a nap while you send that lovely line of people home.”

Jethro strode out of the tent and Moses came out at a more thoughtful pace right after him. From the shocked looks on the faces of people nearby, he realized that they had heard every word of the conversation—not surprising, since Jethro’s voice could carry across a valley. The more they heard, the better they’d understand that this wasn’t his idea.

Moses stood in front of his judgment seat and addressed the crowd. “I will hear no more cases today.”

A moan of disapproval and disappointment rose from the crowd.

“From now on, the first thing you do is try to settle your problems peacefully between each other. And I mean try. If you can’t bring witnesses who can prove that you have tried to reconcile the case, it won’t get heard. Second, I’m going to appoint judges in every tribe. If you don’t like their decision, the council of elders in that tribe will decide whether you should have the right to appeal to me. And then, the Lord has given me two trusted counselors who will hear cases at least as often as I do—Aaron and Hur. If they are your judge, it has the same force as if I were giving judgment.” Moses looked at Aaron and Hur. “I hope neither one of you is going to argue with me about it?”

“I don’t have your knowledge of the scriptures,” said Hur.

“Then you’ll enjoy coming to the school I’m starting. A school for priests and judges.” He raised his voice again to the whole group. “Go home now! If your matter really is important, you’ll remember it in a few days!”

Without waiting for questions or arguments, Moses walked away from the judgment seat, saying as he went, “Aaron, Hur, come help me choose the first of the judges in each of the tribes.”

By the next day at noon, messengers were going to every tribe and elders were being called in to receive their appointment from Moses. By the day after, there were at least two judges in every tribe, and Moses was teaching for hours a day.

He also got home just at sundown and spent the evening talking and playing with his children, and after they went to bed, he and Zeforah talked and talked into the night.

“I knew what to do,” said Moses. “Why couldn’t I do it?”

“Maybe you needed permission from someone else,” said Zeforah. “Or maybe you couldn’t bear to let go of the responsibility for fear the people would stop needing you.”

“And yet I know perfectly well that the most important work ahead of me is to get Israel to a point where I’m not needed. Where everyone is hearing the word of the Lord in their own hearts, and obeying God out of pure love for him and all his works.”

“Do you think you can accomplish that?”

“Before I die, I swear I will.”

“Good. Then you’ll live forever.” She laughed and kissed him.

He kissed her back, but he didn’t laugh. The people had seen God’s power so clearly—how could she doubt that they were ready to become the Lord’s people in fact as well as name?
 

 
 
© 2000 Shadow Mountain 

Printed from Gospelink.com
