# Chapter 13: Covenants

### Chapter 13: Covenants
Orson Scott Card , Stone Tables (Salt Lake City 2000)
 
 

Chapter 13: Covenants

When the camp of Israel formed at the base of Mount Sinai, the pillar of cloud grew to envelop the entire mountain. This was the place to which God had brought his people, the goal of the journey.

On the day they arrived, Moses returned from the cloud with a simple message from the Lord:

“You have seen what he did to the Egyptians for your sake, and how he bore you on eagles’ wings, and brought you to him. Now, Israel, if you will obey his voice and keep his covenant, you shall be his own dear treasure, beloved above all other people, and you will serve the whole of God’s earth as a kingdom of priests, as a holy nation.”

Led by the judges of every tribe, the people answered: “All that the Lord has asked, we will do.”

At the Lord’s command, Moses told the people to wash themselves and their clothes, to make themselves clean and holy, ready to receive the Lord on the third day. Strict bounds were set about the mountain, so no one would stray inadvertently too close to the presence of the Lord.

At the beginning of the third day, thunder and lightning came from the cloud, and the clear sound of a trumpet, and the people trembled at the coming of the Lord. Moses led the people out of the camp, and brought them up to the boundary marked for them, as the cloud roiled down the mountain and stood before them. The trumpet sounded longer and louder. Moses cried out to the Lord within the hearing of the people, and then in answer they all heard the voice of the Lord:

“Moses, come to me at the top of the mountain.”

Alone Moses walked into the cloud, and the people waited. When he returned, a few hours later, he reminded them again to respect the boundary, for the danger to mortal bodies unpurified by God was great. Then he stretched forth his hand to Aaron. “Come with me, my brother,” he said. “The Lord wants you with me to receive his law.”

So Aaron walked with Moses into the bright thundering cloud of the presence of the Lord.

When they returned that night, they taught together the law that the Lord had given them, repeating God’s words to the people. “I am the Lord your God who brought you out,” said Moses. “You shall have no other God to set against me. You shall not carve images or bow down to any God but me, for I will hate whoever hates me, and the sons of his sons. But I will love whoever loves the Lord.”

“Once you take the name of the Lord upon you,” said Aaron, “you shall be bound by it, and your oath shall not be in vain.”

“Remember the Sabbath day,” said Moses, “to keep it holy.”

“Honor your father and mother,” said Aaron, “that you may live forever in the land that I will give you.”

“You shall not kill, or commit adultery.”

“You shall not steal, or witness to a lie.”

“You shall not covet what your neighbor has.”

As they spoke, the thunder and lightning behind them punctuated their words, affirming to the people that it was the Lord’s words they were repeating. The people became afraid, for they knew that they had already sinned against some of these commandments, and they begged Moses and Aaron: Let us hear your words, gladly, but don’t let the voice of the Lord come to us, or we’ll die.

So Moses and Aaron continued to teach them, elaborating upon the law. The old desert law of vengeance was swept away. Where once a man would answer a word with a blow, a blow with a wound, a wound with a murder, and murder with two or three or five murders in the family of the wrongdoer, now the Lord set strict bounds. Vengeance would come, not from the individual or his family, but from the law and the community as a whole, and it would not be heavier than the offense, but would be exactly proportionate. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and nothing more. And the people recognized the mercy of the Lord, setting them free from the blood feud of anarchy on the one hand, and from the arbitrary rule of tyrants on the other. The law would be fixed and the judges would carry it out with the consent and help of the community, and neither ruler nor any individual would have the right to set it aside and exact more or less than justice. It would be the foundation of peace and freedom in Israel.

They were also taught that they must share the bounty of the earth with the poor, and when lending to the poor they were not to profit from it, but to take their repayment without interest. And they were taught how to build their altars, and how to choose the animals they would offer as sacrifice.

And if they made a covenant to obey these laws, and kept that covenant, the Lord would give them the land of Canaan from the Red Sea to the Sea of the Philistines, and from the desert to the river. They would be charged with the duty to drive out the inhabitants of the land—Amorites and Hittites, Perizzites and Canaanites, Hivites and Jebusites—for they had once known the name of God and rejected him, worshiping Baal and Astarte in their high places and their groves, and the land would no longer bear their abominations. The people of Israel must make no treaty with them or permit any of them to remain in the land, for if any of them remained it would be a constant temptation and snare to Israel.

Moses wrote down the words of the Lord and caused them to be read again to the people, and again, until all had heard and knew the covenant they were about to take. And when Moses asked them, they declared with one voice, “We will do all that the Lord has said.”

Moses called young men to bring the animals for sacrifice, and upon altars they killed the beasts and burnt them to the Lord, and Moses took half the blood and put it in basins, and half the blood he sprinkled on the altars. And with the book of the law in his hand, he walked among the people and sprinkled on them the blood from the basins, saying, “Here is the blood of the covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words.”

With the blood of the covenant fresh on the people, Moses and Aaron took Aaron’s two eldest sons, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and led them into the cloud. There with their own eyes they glimpsed the God of Israel, the terrible bright beauty of his loving face, his body as clear and pure as heaven, and it seemed to them that the ground under his feet was paved with sapphires. And when the elders returned to the people and told them what they had seen, the people wept and rejoiced at the mercy of God.

“This is only the beginning,” said Moses. “The Lord has called me to go up into the mountain again, and receive from him a higher law and commandments, written on stone by the hand of God, to bring down to you, and teach to you.”

And this time he took with him only Joshua, leaving Aaron behind him to govern the people, to be their judge and teacher and priest until Moses returned.

* * * 

“Why me?” Joshua asked, as he followed Moses along the steep and challenging path up the mountain.

“I don’t know,” said Moses. “Why not you?”

Wavering between the thrill of having been chosen and terror at what might be expected of him, Joshua could have listed hundreds of reasons, but he distilled them all into one. “I’ve sinned.”

Moses answered with laughter. “If the Lord used only perfect men as his servants, he would go unserved.”

It was strange to Joshua, to hear the prophet laugh here in the midst of the cloud of the presence of the Lord. Ahead and behind they could see no more than a few yards, though the cloud also was light, and illuminated the rocks where they placed their hands and feet. “The Lord doesn’t laugh at sin,” said Joshua.

“Every sin is grief to the Lord,” said Moses. “I laughed at your thought that your sin made it impossible for the Lord to choose you as his servant. Do you recognize that your sins were sins, or do you try to make them into virtues?”

“No, I name them for what they are.”

“And do you pretend to others that you are not sinful?”

“I’ve never tried to pretend such a thing.”

“And when the law was placed before you, and I called on Israel to make the covenant, did you reject your sins and put them behind you and promise to commit no more of them?”

“I did, Moses, but I fear that I won’t have the strength to obey all the commandments!”

“And yet did you overcome that fear and follow me into the cloud? Do you even now obey the Lord and climb this stony path, rather than hang back and let fear rule you?”

“How could I say no to the Lord?”

“And how could the Lord say no to you? Your heart is pure at this moment, and as for the sins in your past, the price will be placed upon a willing sacrifice and paid for you, as long as you hold fast to your repentance.”

“Then I owe every step I take up this mountain to that sacrifice,” said Joshua.

“As do I,” answered Moses.

* * * 

Joshua? He took Joshua with him? Aaron was stunned. What could this mean?

Miriam, of course, had an answer at once, when he made the mistake of asking her that question. “You’ve already seen God,” she said. “Joshua didn’t.”

“So why didn’t the Lord include him among the seventy elders?”

“The Lord didn’t include me then, and he didn’t include me now, either,” said Miriam. “But that doesn’t undo all the gifts the Lord has given me up to now.”

“And you don’t feel even a trace of . . . surprise?”

“I’m always surprised by the Lord,” said Miriam, “and so I’m never surprised at being surprised.”

“I don’t resent it,” said Aaron. “I’m just puzzled.”

“Do you have to have it all?” asked Miriam. “He brought your two eldest sons with you to see the face of God. Isn’t it plain he intends to give you gifts that you will pass on to your children? You went with Moses to receive the law and came back and the two of you taught the words of the covenant side by side, because your ears heard the same things that Moses’ ears heard. He set you beside the prophet and made you his equal in giving the law to the people. And when the Lord called Moses to the mount again, he left you to govern the people. Explain to me how Joshua’s going with Moses somehow hurts or diminishes you.”

“It doesn’t, it doesn’t,” protested Aaron. “I don’t know why it worried me. But I heard that Joshua was going and it made me afraid.”

“I’ll tell you why,” said Miriam.

“Oh, you know why I feel what I feel?”

“You’re afraid that the Lord will notice that you’re unworthy after all.”

“The Lord is perfect. He already knows my weakness.”

“Ah,” said Miriam. “But do you?”

“And what does that mean?” Aaron demanded.

But she was already walking away from him. Elisheba took her place at Aaron’s side. “I don’t know why you even listen to her. She just resents you because at last the Lord has lifted you up to put you beside Moses where you belong, and now you govern the camp of Israel, and the Lord hasn’t given her any of the authority she so obviously craves.”

“I don’t need to hear this, Elisheba,” he said.

“Yes you do,” she said. “You are finally in your rightful place, as the leader of the Israelites.”

“Moses is still the leader, Elisheba.”

“Moses is up on the mountain. You’re the judge who rules Israel here on the ground.” She squeezed his arm. “I’m proud of you, Aaron.”

Elisheba could not know it, but her words stung Aaron deeply. He did not want her to be proud of him because he was judge. He wanted her to be proud of him because he was righteous and strong and good. Why should he be proud of being judge? He was terrified. Until now, he had had Moses beside him, and everything he said and did, he knew Moses could correct it if he was wrong. And while he resented the corrections when they came, he also felt safe knowing that when his best efforts fell short, Moses would keep his mistakes from doing harm. Who was there now to fall back on? Moses was with the Lord.

And Joshua was with Moses. That ambitious boy had somehow hurtled over Aaron and now he was alone with Moses as he went to get whatever it was the Lord intended to engrave on stone tables. Why did the Lord choose Joshua over Aaron at this moment? Having made Aaron a judge in Israel, were Moses and Joshua going to be raised higher yet, leaving Aaron behind? Had he been judged and found, if not unworthy, then less worthy?

How could Elisheba be proud of Aaron when the Lord placed him no higher than third among the children of Israel?

No, that was an unworthy thought. The Lord loved this people and had placed them in Aaron’s hand. And that was what should worry him, that he might do something wrong and lose them. To be in a position of leadership, with all the Israelites looking to him, that was what Aaron had longed for in his heart of hearts for all these years. Now he had that position, and he had no idea what to do with it. Was he expected to do no more than handle judgment from day to day, and mark time until Moses returned? Would Moses then return and look at him in disappointment and say, You were given the trust of the Lord, and this is all you did? Or worse, Moses would look at him in horror and say, Aaron, didn’t you understand anything? How could you fail so miserably? And Aaron would look around him and have no idea what he had done wrong. His humiliation would be complete.

I can’t be the leader of Israel, he realized. I have no idea what I’m doing.

And yet, within the hour, he found himself sitting in the judgment seat, speaking calmly and making decisions in the cases that had been appealed from the tribal courts. Later in the day, he taught the elders and judges, and found that he knew the answers to their questions, or knew when he should say, Let’s ask Moses that one when he returns. And in the evening, when, with knife in hand and his sons beside him, he slit the throat of a sacrificial goat and led the people in prayer, he realized that yes, he could do these things, and if they were enough to meet the needs of the people, then he must be good enough to lead them.

* * * 

Moses stopped abruptly. “Joshua,” he said.

“I’m here.”

“This is where the Lord wants you to wait.”

Wait? Joshua had thought that, like Aaron, he would participate in the entire experience. But he was going to be set aside, at the last moment! Why, then, was he brought? “How long?” asked Joshua.

“Until I come back.”

How long is that, Joshua wanted to ask. But he did not ask. He merely nodded and sat down in the midst of the fog and watched Moses as he climbed on out of sight.

* * * 

“What have I done to offend Elisheba?” asked Zeforah.

“Nothing, as far as I know,” said Miriam. “Why?”

“She avoids me. When she can’t, she speaks to me quite abruptly, as if we had quarreled and not made up yet. But we didn’t quarrel. I only just met her.”

Miriam chuckled, and it sounded as though there were malice in it. “Believe me, Zeforah, you and Elisheba have quarreled. Only you never knew it, and Elisheba knows the wrong is entirely on her side. So she’s waiting for you to forgive her.”

“But how can I forgive her, when I don’t know that she’s done me any wrong?”

“That is a quandary, isn’t it?” said Miriam. “From my experience, this is how it will go. Right now she still feels guilty when she sees you, which makes her surly. Her surliness will make you shy. Your shyness will seem to her like aloofness, pride, even arrogance. This will make her resent you, and so her guilt will turn into anger. Thus, before more than a few days have passed, it will be all your fault. So my advice to you is to wait a few days, and then apologize to her.”

Zeforah listened to all this in silence. But then, after a few moments, she burst out laughing.

“So you see the humor in it?”

“You’ve just described my life with my sisters.”

Miriam sighed and smiled wanly. “I wish I had had some sisters.”

“Will you take volunteers?”

“What, a shepherd girl like you, entangled with babies, who doesn’t even speak Egyptian?” asked Miriam.

Zeforah’s shock only lasted until Miriam roared with laughter. “Oh, my. Is that how sisters do it? Tease each other?”

“Only if they’re willing to get doused over the head with a bucket of water. Or worse.”

“Oh.” Miriam grew a little more sober. “So there are physical retaliations?”

“Beware the insects in the blankets.”

“Mud in the underwear?” asked Miriam.

“That might be popular near the Nile, but in my country we wouldn’t dare waste the water.”

“Isn’t it a shame we have to pretend to be adults?”

“Still, don’t you wish more people would?”

Miriam smiled at that. “Nice to know Moses didn’t marry a fool.”

“Apparently you weren’t willing to, either,” said Zeforah.

“Actually, the men who were interested in me weren’t fools,” said Miriam. “They just weren’t prophets.”

“Neither was Moses, when I married him.”

“There you are,” said Miriam. “I had brothers, so I had no illusions about men. You had illusions, and so, by the grace of God, your dream of him actually became true.”

“Moses suggested that you might want to learn to read Hebrew.”

“You really do know how?” asked Miriam.

“I learned out of the scriptures, with my father’s help.”

“Teach me from the same books,” said Miriam. “I’m getting old, but I’d like to read the scriptures for myself before I die.”

* * * 

Moses.

“Lord, how is it I can see your face without dying?”

My glory is upon you and sustains your life. I am the Lord your God, and Endless is my name, for I am without beginning of days or end of years. You are my son.

Your life has been shaped to be a shadow, a harbinger of the life of my Only Begotten Son. A child prophesied, a son under sentence of death, born to be at once a king and a servant, who grew to manhood and went out into the wilderness to meet his God and accept the mantle of his authority. A man who returns to his people and brings the power of God to bear against all the powers of the world, and delivers the children of God from the hands of the enemy by bringing them through the water to a safe place. A man who saved them from death by the blood of the lamb, a lawgiver, a just and merciful judge, a high priest, a prophet, at whose command water and bread are given to the people. Because of your work, there will be a people ready to recognize the Only Begotten of the Father when he comes, and obedient enough to receive the higher law that he will bring. For my Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, full of grace and truth.

“The son in the nameless book. In whose name Zeforah prays. The sacrifice for sin.”

I will show you what I have created. Not all, for you could not receive it or understand it, but I will show you the world you dwell in. See how it began.

* * * 

“You have no idea how hard it is on the people to wait, not knowing what will happen. If anything will happen.”

Aaron smiled wanly. “Harubel, you seem to forget that I am also waiting, and I also don’t know what will happen.”

“Every other time Moses went up the mountain, he came back in the same day. Now it’s been three. How do we know he didn’t fall and break a leg? Or his neck?”

“God wouldn’t let that happen.”

“Do you know that, Aaron? The people need something to distract them. Something to comfort them, to take their minds off the long waiting, the fear.”

“The presence of the Lord is comfort enough for anyone.”

“For you, perhaps. Maybe no one will tell you the truth about what they feel. That’s the loneliness of the ruler, that he never knows what anyone truly thinks.”

“Please, Harubel, I’m not Pharaoh, I’m just an Israelite like any other.”

“You saw the face of God, Aaron!”

“Harubel, you obviously have something in mind, so what is it?”

“I was trying to help you understand the mood of the people. I could come up with some kind of plan, I suppose, if you wanted.”

“Plan for what?”

“To keep them from quarreling with each other. From fleeing the thunder and lightning from the mount.”

“Their faith in God should be enough.”

“Most of them haven’t seen him.”

“They don’t need to see him to have faith!”

“They’re not as strong as you. Don’t you have any compassion, Aaron? Don’t you understand what it’s like for them? They’re like children.”

“And you and I are not?”

“Perhaps we are too, but slightly older children. We have to look out for them.”

“Harubel, the plan we have is to teach the law to the people.”

“And what do they do the rest of the day? Sit around and fret!”

“No, they have you to do that for them.”

“Ah. Humor. I’m glad to see you still have your wit.”

“Harubel, you don’t represent the people. You represent your own scheme, and whatever it is, I don’t want any part of it.”

“But you have to be part of it! Aaron, you’re the only one who can help them.”

“Help them what?”

“No, I can see you aren’t ready. Talk to me later, when you see chaos and terror among the people. When you see quarreling and stealing, oath-breaking and adultery, all because they live in constant fear and without a leader who is willing to fill them with joy and hope.”

“Go on, get out of my tent. The people have made covenants and I expect them to be kept, which means no stealing, no oath-breaking, no adultery, and I’ll thank you not to try to drum any up just to prove yourself right.”

“Time will prove me right, Aaron. Moses will come down the mount, find the people fighting or fled, and he’ll look at you and say, Couldn’t you have done something?”

“Not another word, Harubel. Out.”

* * * 

The whole sweep of the world’s past moved past his eyes. So much of it made little sense to him. The plants arising from the ground, the animals appearing, first the lesser ones, then the greater, and finally the coming of human beings, and through it all the constant awareness of the will of God, speaking, calling forth the future out of the present. Let me hold onto some part of this, let it remain in my memory, let me have some understanding, he prayed, and prayed again, and even as the prayer was granted he cried in his heart, More! Let me hold more of this in my mind!

All your mind can hold, it will have, said the Lord.

The sweep of human history, the wanderings upon the earth, Moses saw them man by man, woman by woman, child by child. He saw them as God saw them, as individuals, each infinitely precious to the Lord, yet each burdened by his or her own contrary desires. And he felt God’s agony of love, as his children, offered so much, kept turning away from the inheritance of joy in order to pursue the life of animals or the pride of rule over one another.

“O Lord, how do you keep your patience with us?”

In answer, the Lord showed him the prophets, each given as much of the truth as his mind could hold, his language could express, or his people could hear. They all knew more than they could say, and all said more than their listeners could understand or obey. Yet even among those who understood, there were always more than a few who saw the faithful as a flock to be sheared. These were not the weak and fallen children of the Lord, these were the willful rebels against the power of God.

“Why do you permit them?”

They must have their chance to show their brethren who they are.

“But what about the suffering they cause?”

The sufferers also show who they are, by how they respond to their grief and pain.

“But don’t you already know all our hearts?”

What I know must be known by those of less perfect understanding. In every soul is goodness that might be, and evil that might be, and even though I know how much of each will come to be, the child must have his day to choose and show himself and all around him which he loves more: his appetites? his power? his safety? or the leap out of the self into service in the kingdom of God?

“Yet it is only there that the soul finds its greatness.”

But they must choose it because they love the works of God, not because they seek their own greatness. So I hide the greatness from them, so their choice can be made for love alone.

“May I not tell them, then?”

You must tell them. But only the great-hearted will believe and act on what you tell. It is the downfall of evil, that it never sees far enough ahead. The enemies of God steal what pieces of power they can steal, not realizing that in the stealing, they destroy what they try to possess. When at last there is nothing left, they will wail to heaven, being in torment at their nothingness, envying the righteous who possess all things; but the law is irrevocable, that nothing can be owned forever unless it gives itself freely, and no one can rule forever except him who serves utterly.

And there in that moment, Moses saw how all time before and after pointed to the meridian of time, to the one who gave himself completely, and then arose perfect and received the ownership of all things, for all things gave themselves to him, trusting him to use his power only for their good. And together, creator and created, organizer and ordered, servant and served, ruler and ruled were united in perfect joy.

“Is this the Son?” asked Moses.

You were named for him, Moses, for the one who, brought low, will be lifted up.

And Moses saw the Son of God in all his glory, and recognized his face, and knew that he had known him before he was born, and loved him then; but now he loved him even more, for he understood the pains and temptations of mortal life, and the agony of sin and loss, and could feel the value and the cost of the gift the Son would give him. It was more than his mind could bear. He fell to the stones, weak, spent, unable to move, but filled with a sweetness that left him without tears enough to vent his joy.

For hours he lay there before he could summon strength enough to move.

“Moses.”

He looked up, and a man stood in the air just beyond the edge of the cliff. The man’s robe billowed in a wind that Moses could not feel. His smile was beautiful and seemed kind. He stretched out his hands toward Moses, and dazzling light fell from his fingertips. “Son of man,” he said, “worship me.”

“Who are you?” said Moses.

“Don’t you know me?” The sweet face grew a little sad. Moses felt regret tug at his heart.

“I know who I am,” said Moses. “A son of God, like the Only Begotten of the Father. Where is your glory, that I should worship you? For I could only see the face of God because his glory filled my body and sustained me, transfiguring me before him. But whoever you are, I can see you with my natural eyes. And this light that you scatter, it feels like darkness to me.”

As if in answer, the light that flashed from the man grew brighter and brighter, until Moses had to avert his gaze.

“I can judge between you and God,” said Moses. “You blind me with your light, but God enlightened me. I made my covenant with God that I would worship only him. Get away from here, Enemy, and stop trying to fool me. I’m here to learn from God, I have more questions I must ask him, and you’re wasting my time when I need to be calling upon the Lord.”

Still the man stood there, waving his arms, scattering light. Moses was tempted for a moment to pity him, but then remembered seeing in the vision of the Earth how this one hated the children of God and tempted them with lust for power and majesty. You are the one, Moses realized, who led Tuthmose away in his childhood, and taught him to kill for his own benefit and glory. You are the one who undoes all the good works of God, if you can find proud souls willing—eager—to believe your lies.

“Get away from here,” Moses said with loathing.

Suddenly the kind face was gone, and in its place was the face of scorn. “I am the Only Begotten of the Father,” said the man. “Think of what you owe to me, and worship me!”

Now the light in the man’s hands became fire, and he loomed larger and darker, and Moses felt the weakness of his body and he was afraid. “O God,” he cried, “give me strength against our enemy.” And in answer, he felt warmth flow through his body, and he rose to his feet. “Leave me, Enemy, Satan, for there is only One whom I will worship, the God of glory.”

For a moment he was tempted to taunt Satan about how pathetic he was, compared to God, to heap scorn on the feebleness of his imitation of glory—tricks with light, when real glory was seen, not just with the eyes, but with the whole soul, body and spirit together. The moment he thought of spewing contempt upon Satan, however, he knew that this was just another way to serve Satan, by imitating him, and to the degree that he answered hate with hate and scorn with scorn, he became more like Satan and less like the Only Begotten of the Father. So he held his tongue, and spoke no poison with it. Instead, using the priesthood he was given under the hands of Jethro not so many months ago, he spoke the command that could not be disobeyed by any being of spirit:

“In the name of the Only Begotten, I command you to depart, Enemy.”

The man wailed and wept, as if his body were being torn in pieces, and he writhed as if in agony; but as he did, he also shrank, and drew himself farther off, and farther, and finally he was utterly fled from Moses’ presence.

As soon as Satan was gone, Moses felt his body filled again with the light of the Lord, and strength flowed into him. He stood upright, and heard a voice speak to his soul: You are blessed, Moses, for I have chosen you, and you shall be stronger than the sea, for it will obey you as if you were God.

I am with you, Moses, to the end of your days. For you will deliver my people, Israel my chosen, from bondage.

“But Lord, they are already out of Egypt.”

Out of Egypt, but not yet free, for the one who fled from you just now is still their ruler, for they have not yet broken the shackles of sin and pride, and his whip falls heavy on their hearts, and his daily tally cannot be borne.

And for one moment, Moses’ vision was utterly purified. He beheld—did not merely see but saw—every particle of the Earth he stood on, and every soul that dwelt on it. He saw it all as God saw it, comprehending it completely in the moment, knowing every being, great and small, and how they all fit together into one great whole, obedient to God, and of all these beings, only the humans, only the children of God, unable to comprehend how they all belonged together, and who they really were, and who God was; and so only the children of God rebelled against him, and lived in darkness though light was all around them and through them. The light shone in the darkness, but those blind of heart did not see it, did not know that it existed, and so staggered and stumbled and were injured and knew not why.

Even this was not enough, for suddenly Moses’ vision was enlarged, and he comprehended with the same clarity not just Earth and all who dwelt on it, but all the other worlds that God had made, and all who dwelt on them, each calling their own world Earth, and all together forming an even greater whole, which existed only to bring joy to each being comprised in this great creation, as much joy as each was capable of receiving, according to the degree of service that each could deliver to the whole. And on all these worlds, the only ones who sorrowed were the children of God who had not yet given their hearts to him.

With his whole heart, Moses yearned to cry out to them, to show them what he could, in this bright moment, see.

But he knew that their eyes were shut to such a vision, and that if he shouted to them each would hear only the faintest whisper of his voice, and no two would hear the same; if he showed them what lay before their very eyes, they would see only the dimmest of shadows, not comprehending how much light was made invisible by their vanity, and no two of them would agree on what it was they saw.

“How did you make all this, and why?” Moses asked.

By the word of my power I made them; by the Son I created them, worlds without number. More than you can see, for many worlds have already finished their history and completed their work, and uncountable worlds are yet to be created, and even those you see now would be uncountable to men. But I count them all, for they are mine and I know them. As one world passes away, another comes to be; there is no end to my works, as there was no beginning. For this is my work and my glory, Moses, to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

To you it is given to write only an account of the world you stand on, for only the story of your world will help your brothers and sisters to know who they are and what they might become. Only the prophets who have dwelt upon your earth have spoken words that your sisters and brothers need to hear. And even many of the words you will write shall be withheld from those who would not be helped by hearing them.

“O Lord, may I not tell my wife and children? My brother Aaron and my sister Miriam? May I not tell Joshua, who is only a little way off?”

In the hour when you speak to them, you will know how much it would be good for them to hear, and you will say only as much as would do them good. When they are ready for more, more will be given to them. But you may be sure that whatever you write will someday be had again among the children of men, for in the day when they have need of it I will raise up another like you, to write again what you have written.

* * * 

A spirit of darkness had descended on the camp of Israel, Aaron could feel it. He knew that most people were still keeping their covenants, waiting patiently for Moses to return; and they trusted in the Lord, for didn’t they see the cloud of his glory on the mountain? Didn’t they gather his manna from the ground every morning?

Yet it almost didn’t seem to matter that most people meant well, and did well, for they were not the ones who did the talking, they were the ones who passed each day peaceably, without contention. What Aaron heard, what he saw, was the constant parade of complainers, quarrelers, faultfinders, telling him what other people were doing wrong, or demanding that he tell them what could not be known, or do for them what could not be done.

Even at home there was no respite, for Elisheba had her own catalogue of tales to tell, of people who regretted ever leaving Egypt. “You just need to take charge, Aaron. Get control of things. Let them see that things really are going to be better.”

“How can I show them what should be obvious to anyone who’s been awake at all for the past months?”

“This is your chance to make a difference, Aaron. Are you going to let it slip by and just mark time while Moses is on the mount? Isn’t there something you can do to make them happy? Isn’t that what God expects you to do?”

Leave me alone! “I don’t know what God expects, except that he gave us laws and I’m supposed to teach the people how to live by them.”

“Fine, you’re teaching, but it’s not enough, is it, because people just aren’t happy!”

“You keep talking about ‘people,’ Elisheba, but who are these people? Are you one of them? Are you not happy?”

“How can I be happy until you’re happy? And how can you be happy until you finally take your rightful place as the great benefactor of Israel? All the years you served Israel day and night. Even now, Moses is gone again. Show them who it is who really loves them!”

“God loves them, Elisheba.”

“God they can’t see. You they can.”

“I can’t talk about this anymore, Elisheba. You don’t understand me, and I don’t understand you.”

“You’re just afraid to offend Moses.”

“I’m not afraid to offend anyone but God.”

“But that’s just my point! How could it offend God, for you to—”

“What’s your plan, Elisheba?”

“Not my plan, Aaron. Simply what the people need, something visible, something they can see, to make them feel the greatness of the power of God. To make them feel like they have something comfortable and familiar—”

“All of this talk of yours, and it comes down to this,” said Aaron. “You’ve become Harubel’s message-bearer in my own home.”

“Who is Harubel?” It was clear she honestly didn’t know the man.

But it didn’t change the fact that she was acting out his plan. Or someone’s plan. “Tell me then, Elisheba, what particular visible thing would make the people feel comfortable?”

“I don’t know, Aaron. Certainly none of the gods of Egypt—those were symbols of our slavery. But perhaps something from the glorious days when the Hyksos pharaohs ruled, and Joseph was remembered as the great vizier, and the Israelites were held in honor throughout the lands watered by the Nile!”

“Why are you giving speeches to me?”

“Because it’s the speech you should give. I dream of it, Aaron, of you standing before the people raising a standard in the name of God. When we next go into battle, this is what would be raised up! When we offer sacrifice, the people would see it as the symbol of the Lord and gather to it!”

“The Hyksos bullcalf.”

“The calf of sacrifice.”

“Do you think for one moment that anybody would take it to be a symbol of the God of Israel?” said Aaron.

“They would if you told them so,” said Elisheba. “Symbols mean what we choose to make them mean. The Hyksos called it a god but only because they didn’t understand the truth the way we do.”

“Do you know what rites are performed where this bullcalf is worshiped?” Aaron asked.

“Well, they certainly won’t happen here—you’ll see to that.”

“Stop listening to whoever it is that tells you this nonsense,” said Aaron. “It’s unbearable to me that I have to hear such things in my own home.”

“Oh, I’m wrong to want you to give the people what will keep them happy while they wait for Moses to finish whatever he’s doing up there?”

“You took the covenant, too,” said Aaron. “We are forbidden to make graven images.”

“I know that,” she said.

“So why are you asking me to make one?”

“Because . . . because. . . .”

She stood before him, confounded.

He gathered her into his arms and held her. “Elisheba,” he whispered, “don’t you see what they’re doing to you? Using you to try to get me to do evil in the sight of God.”

“They don’t want evil, they’re just trying to think of ways to heal the dissension and trouble among the people.”

“They are the trouble, Elisheba. They’re the ones quarreling and complaining, and then they come to you pretending to be benefactors willing to heal the quarreling and complaining, if you only give them what they want.”

“Well what do you think they want, then?”

“They want to dance before the bullcalf, Elisheba. These people, the plagues taught them to fear the power of God, but they didn’t lose their yearning to do the obscene things that pass for worship among those who danced before the calf.”

“No!” said Elisheba. “You don’t know these women, they would never. . . .”

“You don’t know these women,” said Aaron. “I can promise you, they already have, many times, and all they’re trying to do is use you to get me to permit their abominations in the camp of Israel, right here where we can see the cloud of the presence of the Lord. They know if they did it themselves, most of the people would rise up in fury and stone them to death, which is what they would deserve as blasphemers and oathbreakers. But if I give them a calf, with some nonsense about it being a symbol of the God of Abraham—”

“You’re leaping to conclusions about people you don’t even know.”

“I know them,” said Aaron. “I knew them in Egypt. I wish they had stayed there and hadn’t come with us.”

“You think you know them but these are my friends.”

“They are not your friends. Speak to me no more about this.”

“But—”

“Not another word.”

* * * 

The goldsmith heated the wooden frame over a low fire. Within the frame, the hard-baked clay grew warm, and out of the vent at the bottom, melting wax slowly dripped, then faster and faster, collecting in the pan.

“All of this is useless, you know, unless you can get your hands on the gold,” said the smith.

Harubel laughed. “Oh, we’ll get it. In fact, Aaron will melt it down and pour it into the mold with his own hands.”

“That’ll be the day.”

“You have no idea how unsophisticated these people are. It’s like they’re all children, clinging to these rules they’ve been taught, not even knowing what the real game is. They don’t know what passion is, or pleasure, or even worship. All of this effort, and for what? The most boring god, the most boring worship, just standing there watching somebody go swip with a knife and then sprinkle blood around and say prayers. Why not just lie down and everybody have a nap.”

“Aren’t you a little worried about what God might do? Look what happened to Pharaoh when—”

“We aren’t rebelling! We aren’t interfering! Isn’t there room for more than one way to worship? We’re doing it all in the name of their God, aren’t we? Is Aaron’s way the only way? Isn’t there room for a little variety? Is everybody supposed to come out of this exactly like everybody else? What did we get our freedom for, if not to be a little free?”

“You don’t have to persuade me.”

“I’m just saying, God is the one who made us the way we are, isn’t he? I mean, isn’t that the whole point? The God of Israel is like Ptah, he made everything, so didn’t he make me, complete with all these needs and desires? And if he put these desires in me, then how can it be wrong to satisfy them? In fact, I’m worshiping him more fully than these pious people are, because I’m using my whole self in my worship.”

“Have you tried that argument on Aaron?”

“He hasn’t had a desire in fifteen years. Have you seen his wife? This is an old man’s religion they’ve got here.”

“You’re going to persuade Aaron to gather the gold, melt it down, and pour it in?”

“Watch me.”

* * * 

The angel sat across from Joshua and opened the book again.

“The more I read,” said Joshua, “the easier it gets.”

“This is the book of the days of Noah,” said the angel.

“Has Moses read it?”

“A fragment. With most of the plainest truth lost from it. Even the name was lost. And yet it still opened a door in his heart, because his wife read it and taught him from it.”

Joshua had only read a few words when he stopped. “Why am I never hungry or thirsty? I’ve been here for days, but I never even think of eating.”

“You thought of it now.”

“I just read this verse: The fruit is given to man to eat, but he lets it ripen and fall to the ground, while he gnaws on old bones and grows thin.”

“The glory of God is on this mountain,” said the angel, “so you have no need of food or drink.”

* * * 

Aaron heard the tumult before the messenger reached him. “Quickly!” the boy shouted. “At the boundary of the Lord’s land!”

Aaron leapt from the judgment seat, Hur behind him, and rushed as quickly as he could to the foot of the mountain, where the line had been drawn that the people could not cross. Hundreds had gathered there. Many were onlookers, but most were a group that was shouting and cursing at the young men of the patrol, who looked sick at heart at the prospect of striking out with weapons against their own people.

“Let us by!”

“The Lord has forgotten us!”

“Moses is dead!”

“He’s not coming back!”

“Moses is dead!”

It became a chant. Moses is dead. God has forgotten us. Moses is dead. God has forgotten us.

Aaron strode at once into the space between the soldiers and the crowd. He held up his arms for silence, and because the staff that had become a snake was in his hand, the people recoiled a little, and relative quiet settled over the crowd.

“Moses is alive,” Aaron said.

“You haven’t seen him either!”

“The Lord has much to teach us. Be grateful at how long he’s been up the mountain! It means the gift he’ll return to us is that much greater!”

“How do you know he didn’t fall and die!”

“Because the Lord that gives you manna every morning is also the Lord who led him up the mountain. Do you think the prophet’s foot could slip when there are angels to bear him up?”

“But nothing changes! Day after day!”

“Go home!” Aaron said. “Back to your tents. Don’t defy the Lord by crossing this boundary line. It would be death to you if you tried! Go to your families!”

They obeyed him, straggling away. But then, to his chagrin, one group of them began chanting again as they walked among the tents: “Moses is dead! God has forgotten us!”

“Do you want me to take some of these men and go silence that chant?” asked Hur.

“And then what?” said Aaron. “Send soldiers wherever people say things we don’t like? Is that what these young men entered into this service to do? Is that why we came out of Egypt?”

“We didn’t come out of Egypt to have troublemakers tear the nation of Israel apart, either,” said Hur.

“They’ll quiet down soon enough,” said Aaron. “Most people will know that the whole idea that Moses might be dead is ridiculous. Or that the Lord has forgotten us. They have only to look at the cloud over the mountain on a day that’s completely clear. The Lord is with us.”

“Well, technically, the Lord is with Moses,” said Hur, “and we’re on our own down here.”

Aaron glared at him. “You, too?”

Hur smiled uncomfortably. “I think I was joking.”

“I think I’m relieved to hear it.” Aaron held up his hand, listened. “Hear that?”

“What?” asked Hur.

“The chant has already stopped.”

Hur grinned. “Well, what can I say? You were right.”

But later that day it began again, somewhere among the tents of Manasseh. And in the darkness, it began in Gad and went on for an hour before people in neighboring tents pulled the stakes on the tents of the chanters. It became a fistfight and Aaron had to come and arbitrate, and the result was a new rule against loud noises at night. But the chanters bruited it about that Aaron was now trying to make them be quiet because he knew Moses was dead but was afraid that if the camp of Israel knew it, they’d divide up and each family would go to Canaan or back to Egypt or wherever they wanted. “And then who would have Aaron as ruler and judge?” It was a vicious rumor, but it was repeated often enough that some people started to believe it, a little, and wonder aloud about whose interest was foremost in Aaron’s heart.

At least at home Aaron finally had some peace. “You were right about them,” Elisheba said. “They’re no friends of mine.”

“What happened?”

“I overheard them telling somebody else that there was another army of Egyptians coming to attack us and take us back into slavery, and you knew about it but you weren’t going to tell anybody because you kept hoping the Lord would make you a prophet like Moses only the Lord doesn’t love you like Moses so you’ll try to stop the Egyptians yourself and—oh, it goes on and on, I can’t believe anybody was listening to it!”

“But they were?”

“When I challenged them on it, then everybody said that it was just speculating, and there was no harm in wondering about things, was there? Aaron, they really are vicious, trying to stir up trouble.”

“If you can see that, maybe others will see it, too.”

“But think how long it took me. I feel like such a fool.”

“Honest people are easiest to fool, Elisheba. It never occurred to you that they might be flattering you, because you don’t lie.”

“So much of what they said to me sounded true, and I still don’t—I can’t even sort out what I think now.”

“Then hold fast to the Lord, and wait. These are his people. He’ll open the door for us and make it clear what we must do.”

* * * 

As Moses watched, the rough face of the stone crumbled and slid down, leaving a smooth surface. Then small bits of dust formed on the face of the stone. When he brushed them away, he could see that letters had been incised in the stone, deeper than any tool could have engraved them. He read, brushed away more dust, and read again.

What emerged was the order of the priesthood of the Son of God, and sacred rituals that would bind husband to wife and parents to children through every generation of the world. He read the pattern for ceremonies that taught the dead how to enter heaven, and knew that the Books of the Dead in Egypt were but a weak echo of what Melchizedek had known, and Noah, and Enoch, and the great prophets and patriarchs of the earliest age of man. Following this pattern, Moses would be able to ordain all the men of Israel who chose to live worthy as high priests after the order of Melchizedek, the great king of Salem, to whom Abraham had paid his tithes. A nation of high priests, all of them linked to the Lord and to their families by the holiest of bonds. And in the deep places in his soul, where he held memories that he could never fully bring to consciousness again, he felt how the order established by the writing on the stone fit in with the order of all the earths and all the heavens, so that instead of human beings being cut off from knowledge of the creations of God, they would know their place and gladly serve within it, and receive the joy that the Lord had in store for them.

He knelt and prayed, even as the writing went on, thanking God for his mercy and praying for the wisdom to know how to bring Israel to the point where all could receive these blessings.

* * * 

It was a fullblown riot now, the chanters tearing down tents wherever they roamed. “Moses is dead! God has forgotten us!”

The captains of the guard waited for Aaron to tell them what to do. Hur, Caleb, and other elders of the tribes kept urging him to take action, that this could not go on, everyone was becoming frightened.

Harubel appeared at his side. “Aaron, what can I do to help you?”

“As far as I know, you’re the one behind all this,” Aaron snapped.

“What I want is peace and quiet,” said Harubel. “We won’t make a god, we won’t dance, but we’ll make an emblem, a visible sign that the people can gather around. Something to see—isn’t that what they’re calling for? Something to see.”

“This is what you wanted all along,” said Aaron.

“Yes, of course,” said Harubel. “I want Israel to be content. But this—it’s descending into chaos, and when Moses comes back and finds the whole camp in an uproar, what’s he going to say to you?”

“I’m not afraid of my brother, he’ll understand that—”

“He’ll understand that Israel has no leader when he isn’t here.”

“Spare me the sniping,” said Aaron. “I have plenty of people doing that already.”

“Let’s put it in the Lord’s hands,” said Harubel. “I know a smith, he’ll make a clay form with a hollow place in it. Gather the gold we got from Egypt, melt it down, and pour it in—and ask the Lord to make it into whatever shape he wants the people to see. That way we aren’t making a graven image, God is. It’ll be a miracle! The people will see that the Lord is with them!”

The chant was growing louder and louder, and so were the shouts and screams of the people who were fighting.

A miracle would be helpful at this moment.

“Whatever comes out of the clay,” said Aaron, “there’ll be no dancing. None of the rituals from the worship of the calf.”

“Of course not,” said Harubel. “The people wouldn’t stand for it anyway.”

“Not any of the hand-clapping music of Egypt, either.”

“Oh, suddenly that’s evil?”

“Nothing that sounds like the worship of other gods. Or that looks like it.”

“I agree completely,” said Harubel. “I wouldn’t have it any other way. It’s the Lord who’ll do this.”

But when the smith and his assistants carried the wooden frame and the clay within it to the judgment seat, Aaron grew suspicious. “You already have a shape inside that, don’t you?”

The smith looked at him in puzzlement. “How could I? The gold pours in and burns away the clay and makes its own shape. I have no control over it.”

“Smiths shape things all the time.” If only he knew anything about how smiths did their work, but those were closely guarded secrets, and Aaron could only guess whether he was being told the truth or not.

“Yes, we shape things,” said the smith, “but not when the form is already enclosed like this. How could I? Am I supposed to reach in with teeny-tiny tools and carve something down in the hole?”

Aaron looked at him and knew that he was a liar but didn’t know what the lie was. He also knew that the chanting was growing louder, and so were the cries of those trying to silence the chanters.

What should I do, Lord? Can I believe these men? Will you make the gold come forth in some shape that will help to still this riot?

He heard no answer.

Aaron turned to the leaders of the patrol. “Go tell the chanters to come and see that God still remembers Israel.”

Moments later, the patrol headed off to find the chanters. In the meantime, Aaron had the elders of the tribes bring the carts filled with gold booty from Egypt and bring them to the large clay melting pot that was being set up before the judgment seat.

When the chanters fell silent, it was almost more frightening than the noise had been. The fire under the melting pot grew intense, and Aaron let the smith choose the ornaments of the most pure gold and put them in the pot to be melted down.

“What are you doing?” demanded Miriam.

“Trying to stop the rioting,” said Aaron.

“Harubel is a calf-worshiper,” she said. “So is that smith he’s working with.”

“The smith, also?”

“He’s not even an Israelite, Aaron. He’s a Hittite.”

“Then what is he doing here?”

“Maybe he came along on the journey so he could get his hands on some of that gold. And now you’re giving it to him.”

“The Lord will make it turn out all right.”

“The Lord has nothing to do with this, and you know it!”

“As the Lord did with the plagues, he’ll do now.”

“Not the way you think!” cried Miriam. “Aaron, the Lord won’t do anything with this. Whatever it is, it’ll be a graven image. Why would the Lord ever help you create the very thing he forbade us to have?”

“But it won’t be graven, it’ll be—”

The smith’s assistants ran their rods through the slots at the top of the melting pot, so that four long handles emerged from it. Then they picked it up by the handles and carried it to the form.

Zeforah and Elisheba ran to Aaron. “Husband!” cried Elisheba. “Don’t do this! It’s a trick!”

“Elisheba, I can’t stop now,” said Aaron.

Zeforah spoke up. “Aaron, I have said nothing about the governing of this camp, but you must listen to Elisheba, this will bring you nothing but shame.”

“What will bring me shame is standing before this crowd and letting them see that my wife and Moses’ wife and my sister Miriam are the real rulers of this camp. I’ve made the decision, and it will stand.”

“Aaron, please!” cried Elisheba. “God will destroy us!”

“You’re the one who was telling me we needed this,” said Aaron.

“But not like this. Look at them—those aren’t the children of Israel, those are devils!”

The faces of the chanters were all intently focused on the gold as it poured out of the melting pot and into the form.

“It’s in God’s hands now,” said Aaron. “Whatever forms in the mold, that’s up to God.”

“God has no part in this,” said Miriam.

“I was charged with governing Israel,” said Aaron. “By God I was assigned. The crisis is upon us! I have to act.”

“Act to stop them then,” said Zeforah. “Don’t surrender to them!”

“I’m surrendering to no one.”

“Moses would not do this,” said Zeforah.

Aaron whirled on her. “Should you govern us then? You’re his wife, so you know what he would do. I can’t believe I’ve lasted this long without your advice.”

“That’s not fair,” said Elisheba. “Zeforah has never tried to give advice before.”

“But you have,” said Aaron.

“I was wrong,” said Elisheba. “I’m glad you didn’t listen to me—then.”

“What I needed from you, then and now, is your support, not your criticism.”

“I am trying to support you in the righteous resolve you had before,” said Elisheba. “What happened to change that?”

“Look around you,” said Aaron, indicating the crowd of one-time chanters, now intently watching as the smith and his assistants carried the form on their shoulders. Inside it, Aaron imagined the gold changing shapes, growing into something. Whatever the Lord wanted it to be. O Lord, please make the gold take the shape you want it to have!

“Never mind,” said Miriam to the women. “He’s not going to listen. Get back to your tents and keep your children away from this.”

“I am keeping Israel safe!” cried Aaron as the women left.

“Of course you are,” said Harubel. “What do they know? Now we get a chance to see a miracle come from Aaron without Moses there.”

“The miracle, if it comes, will come from God.”

“What do you mean if?” said Harubel, laughing. “Have some faith!”

It was then that Aaron realized he had been deceived, that he had succumbed to flattery as surely as Elisheba had the week before. Harubel knew what was inside the form. It had been planned from the beginning.

“Don’t break the form,” said Aaron.

“You can’t be serious,” said Harubel.

“I forbid you to break the form.”

“Forbid? You forbid? Do you have any idea what would happen then? Look at these thousands of people, waiting, watching for the sign from God. If you refuse to break the form, what do you think they’ll do?”

“They can do what they want. I forbid you to break the form.”

Harubel responded by stepping in front of Aaron. “Aaron the prophet says, It’s time to see what God has given us!”

He turned around and leered into Aaron’s face. “As you were to Moses, now I am to you. Spokesman!”

When Harubel turned back around, Aaron could not bring himself to rush forward, for the people were now pressing close, frantic in their excitement. He could never silence them, could never push his way through that crowd to stop them, and even if he could make himself heard or seen, he knew they would not obey him now. They all knew what the gold would be. Some of them were already tearing off their clothes, to dance naked for the god the mold had shaped for them.

“This is not from God!” cried Aaron. But his voice was lost in the tumult from the crowd.

The wood frame was gone, and the clay stood alone. The smith’s hammer tapped at the baked clay. Pieces chipped off. More and more of them. The gold glinted underneath, lustrous with firelight, perfect, new. Four legs. The triangular head. The bull calf.

They clapped hands, in the rhythmic music of Egyptian worship. The naked men and women began to dance, and more, before the calf. More and more threw their clothing aside or laid it on the fire so it would burn more hotly. The calf seemed to sweat as much as the dancers from the heat.

“O God,” cried Aaron, “strike them down now, and me with them. We are all worthy of death.”

If God heard his cry, he was the only one, for no one else even noticed Aaron in the frenzy of the music and the dance.

“Here is your god!” cried Harubel. His voice was heard. “Here is your god!” And no one thought for a moment that he meant the Lord God of Israel.

* * * 

“Mother,” said Gershom. “What’s all that clapping?”

“I’ve never heard such a sound before,” said Zeforah.

“Its the way the Egyptians make music when they worship their gods,” said Miriam.

“But who would be worshiping an Egyptian god?” asked Gershom.

“People who want to die for their blasphemy against heaven,” said Miriam.

* * * 

The writing was finished, four columns of it. A fine line appeared all the way around the writing. Two tables of stone, each with two columns of writing, slid down the face of the rock. Moses caught them, gathered them into his arms, and rose to stand straight, ready to bear the stone tables down the mountain. Only then did he see that the tables were written on the reverse side, too—writing that he had not yet read.

He was about to start reading the back of one table when the voice of the Lord came to him.

Go, get down the mountain, for the people have corrupted themselves. They have turned aside quickly from the covenant they made with me. They worship a golden calf, and sacrifice to it. Get down, and see how I will destroy them.

“No, Lord, please!” cried Moses. “Did you bring them out of Egypt to destroy them? Did you make your promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, only to end them here? Destroy those whose fault it is, but not the innocent. There are surely many who are innocent!”

Go, then, and separate the guilty from the innocent. By your judgment I will be bound. Whomever you condemn on earth, I will condemn in heaven.

* * * 

Joshua stood on the path, listening to the tumult coming up from the camp. He was torn between his duty to wait for Moses and the urgency of the need to get down the mountain and join with his soldiers.

Then he heard stones clatter, and Moses came into view, carrying two large tables of stone.

“Moses,” said Joshua. “There’s a noise of war in the camp!”

“I don’t hear anyone shouting in triumph, or screaming in terror,” said Moses. “What I hear is the sound of singing.”

Only then did the voices resolve in Joshua’s ears; only then did he understand what he had been hearing.

“After all we’ve seen,” said Joshua, “how could they?”

Moses didn’t answer as he passed Joshua and began the long walk down the mountain.

“What is the writing engraved on the stone?” asked Joshua.

“A temple, and a nation perfect before the Lord, with no poor among them, each man a priest and prophet to his family, and Holiness to the Lord written in the door of each house and the windows of every soul. A nation where angels minister to every household, as the angel ministered to you.”

So he knew. And the Lord meant to give the same gift to all. But now? “What will the Lord do now?”

“What good will it be to enter the promised land, if we carry Egypt with us?” said Moses. “It will take longer than I thought. For myself, I pray only that I live to see the promised land. When the people are ready to enter it, then my work is done.”

“If I had been down there,” said Joshua, “my soldiers might have—”

“No,” said Moses. “The wicked had to have the chance to declare themselves. The lines are drawn. Now help me get down the mountain.”
 

 
 
© 2000 Shadow Mountain 

Printed from Gospelink.com
