J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

A Study of the Savior's Ministry Offers a Wealth of Faith, a Wealth of Virtue

As we get older, as I get older and become more reflective, I seem to know less and less about the Savior. I seem more and more to grow in wonderment and awe and in deep, heartfelt gratitude for what I understand he did for you and for me, for all of his brothers and sisters, for we all are such.

You know, we all had somewhat the same kind of existence that he had. We had an existence before we came to earth. We have an existence here on earth, and while our time has not yet come, yet when it does come we shall join him and those who have gone before, on the other side.

Two Great Missions

I do not wish to undertake to discuss Adam and the Fall. We shall take that as a fact, and then, knowing the plan as we now know it, we shall know or perceive the two great missions which, as immediately concerning us, we know the Master had. The first mission was a redemptive mission, acting as our Redeemer, making the Atonement for the Fall of Adam, so accomplishing it that the great plan framed in the Grand Council of Heaven might be fulfilled, that we would keep this estate and then in due time go on after our death, finally being resurrected.

Now, the Savior, as I think of him, was both a Creator and a Redeemer, so far as we are concerned. The work of redemption has not been given to us in detail any more than the Fall has been given unto us in detail. I seriously question whether we could understand either the Fall or the Atonement if our Heavenly Father saw fit to try to explain it to us in detail, as he has not. We know the great facts.

Now so far as that redemption, the redemptive work of the Savior, is concerned, he alone was responsible in that. He did the whole work of redemption himself. We seemingly, so far as we know, had no part at all therein.

But the work of redemption went somewhat beyond just what we know as the Atonement. I often have marveled at the work which the Savior had to do when he came here, and it seems to me that I can sketch it out this way:

First and foremost was his duty to make the atoning sacrifice. None except himself could do this, that is so far as we know.

But he had other things to do, most of which might have been done by someone else duly authorized and empowered thereto by our Heavenly Father. I call your attention to one or two of them.

You will recall that Adam was offering sacrifice to the Lord, and the angel came and asked why he did it, and he said he did not know except the Lord had commanded it. Then the angel told him that the sacrifice which Adam was making was symbolical of the great sacrifice that was to be made by the Only Begotten in due time. From then until the Savior came, the religious service practiced among the people of our Heavenly Father was in good part ritualistic, and the foundation of it was animal sacrifice, although the fruits of the field were also used.

The coming of the Savior did away with sacrifice. He has so stated. His coming was really the end of the ritualistic worship which the people of God had followed up until that time.

Sacrifice of a Broken Heart

Now, I want to read you just a few verses, and I am taking them from Third Nephi 9:18-22. The Lord, visiting here during the time he lay in the tomb, during the time of the great destruction that took place here on this continent at the time of his crucifixion, spoke to the people and said:

I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings.

And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost, even as the Lamanites, because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion, were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not.

Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin.

Therefore, whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of God. Behold, for such I have laid down my life, and have taken it up again; therefore repent, and come unto me ye ends of the earth, and be saved.

Thus the Lord when he was here on earth, had to begin to teach the people how to live and how to serve him and how to worship him and the Heavenly Father without animal sacrifice. That was one great task that he had to do.

I might return and say that, as you will probably recall, he gave the Gospel to Adam, and I have often thought that these "higher critics" who try to deduce the worship of the Israelites from the pagan nations who preceded them as if God had not himself given his plan of sacrifice to the Israelites—I have often thought that if they would but consider, if they but knew that Adam had the Gospel given to him, that he knew all about it, and that these pagan nations were merely remembering a part of what was given to Adam, it would put a wholly different light on their contentions and conclusions.

Now, the Savior, in addition to this task, had to lead the people to an understanding of the sacrifice which he was to make, and that he was the Messiah. These "higher critics" say that this idea of a Messiah was a gradual growth with him, that he did not understand it at first, but that gradually he acquired it; that the Apostles in the years immediately following, amplified the concept, which was in fact in good part mere myth. But as I read the record, that is not the fact at all. As I read the record it was necessary that the Savior should break this news of his Messiahship, shall I say, gently, gradually to the people. He began very early declaring his own Messiahship. He did it when he was twelve years old in the temple. He did it again to the woman of Samaria. He did it to Peter and the Apostles at Caesarea Philippi.

Testimonies of the Messiah

The Father himself gave the testimony at the Lord's baptism. The Father gave the testimony again at the Transfiguration. Jesus knew who he was. He knew his power. He never failed in anything he ever tried to do. There is no record of any failure on his part. He did whatever he set his mind to do.

So, to me, this whole record proves without doubt that the gradual growth of this Messianic concept as disclosed by his teachings was in order to prepare the people for their acceptance of it. You will recall that perhaps the first time it was said by his Apostles was at Caesarea Philippi, and that after Peter had declared him, he told them that they should say nothing about it, that it should be kept secret as among themselves. But like all secrets, it soon got out.

Now, the record testifies that from that time on he began to preach of his death and his resurrection. So he had that task of preparing the people. That was another service he did.

Then still another service that he did was to build a new organization that could carry on his work. The Priesthood of Aaron which had theretofore carried on the work in Israel for over fifteen hundred years, no longer had the authority to perform their earlier functions, and he had to create other agencies to carry on his work; and so he built up his Church.

And time and again, if you will read the record, you will note that he cautioned the people not to talk about him, not to talk about his Messiahship. He was putting off the day (as I read the record) of the crucifixion and resurrection until the people, his disciples, were prepared to follow on after his death. As you know, it was not until then and not until after the Holy Ghost came that they began to go forward fully under the plan which he had taught.

Thus he had to do these two latter things, the subordination of the Aaronic Priesthood in its power and authority, the establishment of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the building up of his Church.

But he had to go farther than that, he had to teach the principles of the Gospel, his Gospel, which would bring men back into the presence of our Heavenly Father.

All of these things he had to do. They could not be done overnight, they had to be taught gradually. Men had to be brought to see them, and there were very few, relatively, who recognized the Savior in all of these activities and became converted to them.

Actual Personality of the Savior

You know, I am quite a believer in studying the life of the Savior as an actual personality. That is not often done. Our students of the Bible and of the New Testament, seem to refrain from trying to build a biography of the Master out of those four great Gospels which constitute the greatest life of Jesus that ever has been written or ever will be written regarding his earthly ministry until it shall be written by himself or someone appointed by him, that plus what is given in Third Nephi and in the earlier chapters.

So, if I might, I would suggest this to you: Get some good student's Bible that contains a chronological outline of his life, a so-called harmony. It does not make much difference what Bible you take, because I am not impressed with the proposition that the exact order of the events of the Savior's life, of his work among the Saints of that day is of great importance; it is the fact that the things which are narrated did happen. Then try to go along with the Savior, live with him, let him be an actual man, half divine, of course, but nevertheless moving as a man moved in those days.

For instance, I would like, personally, to think of following him after the first Passover, after he had cleansed the temple and after he had had his great talk with Nicodemus, following him when he went on north and came to Samaria and there met the woman of Samaria, the woman who had been many times married, the woman whose life he told; I would wish to realize how she spread the news; how he told her if she had known who he was, she would have asked him for living water; then how she commented about what that meant, and said to him, when he made a little further explanation, that she knew that all these things would be made plain when the Messiah comes. Then I would wish to remember that he said to her, "I that speak unto thee am he," so, at the very beginning of his ministry announcing his divinity.

Try to get the picture of that incident. Go along the road northward from Jerusalem to Samaria, travel with him, travel with his Apostles, be at the well, Jacob's Well, learn something about the well.

So I would want to know something about that great occasion at Caesarea Philippi, when he and his disciples were there and his questioning of Peter, "Whom do men say that I am," and so on. I would want to know about that. I would want to know something about Caesarea Philippi. Why it was built. Who built it. What kind of a place it was. I would like to live with the Savior as he went through that experience, not merely read it as if it were merely an announcement of some great principle, but read it as if it were a part of a living biography. I would want to know about that.

I would want to know, too, about the Transfiguration—as much as I could. There is not too much to be known that we can understand, but I would like to know something about the mountain on which it took place. I would like to know something about the conversation between the disciples who were there and the Savior afterwards. I would like to remember that there again the Father bore witness to the Son. Read about it. Live with it. Live with him. It would be amazing how much more the New Testament will mean to you if you read it in that way.

And so on through the rest of his life. Live with him.

Then when you come to those final days, the days of the Atoning Sacrifice, follow him as a man, as if you were going with him; follow him to the Upper Chamber; then go with him to the Mount of Olives where he gave that great sermon and uttered that great prayer, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent."

Then follow him into the Garden. I do not believe that you can understand, I know that I cannot understand the kind of agony that he went through in that Garden when he shed drops of blood. I do not know—sometimes I have wondered if anybody who is not a God could understand that. I repudiate, personally, the idea that his agony was caused by any bodily suffering, any fear of death. There was something deep and beyond that, and what it was I do not know.

Follow him to the cross. We can dimly perceive the loneliness which came to him. Apparently only John was present, of the disciples, and the women from Galilee, and the mother. You recall what he said to John and to his mother: "Woman, behold thy son!" ... "Behold thy mother!" Live there with him through that.

Then when you come to his utter loneliness, when he repeated the words of the Psalmist, as he looked down and cried out in his weariness of soul, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me"—be there at the cross with him.

Then take him to the tomb. Go along with Nicodemus and Joseph and bury him. And go back with them after the burial, into Jerusalem. Be with the Apostles that night when all that they had lived with and lived for was seemingly buried in the tomb. He had taught them about his death and his resurrection, but they did not understand. They did not believe it when they saw him a resurrected being.

Mary at the Tomb

Then go with Mary to the tomb that early morning; then later when she with the other women came and looked in, only to find the tomb was empty, but an angel was sitting on the right side, and he said to them, "... I know that ye seek Jesus ... He is not here: for he is risen ... go quickly, and tell his disciples." Try to go with those sisters and with Mary to that tomb.

Live with the Savior and it will give you such a view of him, such an intimacy with him as I think you can get in no other way. And all of those other things that I have mentioned, aside from his redemption, had to do with your exaltation, with my exaltation; they were to teach us how to live. Learn what he did, what he thought, what he taught. Do as he did. Live as he lived, so far as we can. He was the perfect man.

There is a wealth of virtue, a wealth of knowledge, a wealth of testimony, a wealth of comfort, of encouragement, of upbuilding of faith, in getting a real, intimate knowledge of the Savior from the point of view of his mortality.

I bear you my testimony that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that, as I have said, he was born, he lived, he was crucified, he lay in the tomb, he was resurrected, and his resurrection, the Atonement which he made for the Fall of Adam, has brought the resurrection to every person born to this earth as surely and truly as he was resurrected. He atoned for Adam's disobedience.

I bear my testimony that the Priesthood was restored after it was taken away from the earth, restored through Joseph and Oliver. I bear my testimony that the principles of the Gospel, some of which had been lost, were re-emphasized, restored. I bear my testimony that Joseph was a Prophet, and that the other brethren who were with him were divinely appointed by our Heavenly Father to do their work.

I bear my testimony that all the keys and the powers that were conferred upon the Prophet Joseph were conferred upon and have been enjoyed by his successors down through and including President David O. McKay.

I bear my testimony that this is the true Gospel, that we have the true plan of life and salvation. I bear my testimony that there is no other name under heaven given among men whereby we may be saved except Jesus of Nazareth, whom, as Peter said to the Sanhedrin, "ye crucified."

May the Lord be with us always and strengthen our faith and help us to study the life of the Savior so that we may get the most out of it.

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"The same was in the beginning with God.

"All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.

"In him was life; and the life was the light of men."

John 1:1-4
