J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Great Plan of Salvation and Exaltation

AT THE Grand Council, "The Council of the Eternal God," a plan was framed under which the spirits assembled might take on mortality to "prove" themselves "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.) Spirits keeping their first estate were to be permitted to take on mortal bodies and gain the experiences of mortality, those 'who kept not their first estate should not have glory in the same kingdom with those who kept their first estate'; and those who kept their second estate should "have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abraham 3:26.)

Gospel in World from Adam till the End

Since to "prove" themselves 'to see if they would do all things whatsoever the Lord their God should command them,' it was necessary that the Lord should make his commandments known to them, "the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was. Amen." (Moses 5:58-59.) "And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters." (Ibid., 5:12.)

Perversion of the People by Satan

But with the Fall came sin. Satan came among the people declaring he was a son of God, and they should not obey the teachings of Adam and Eve. Many of the people believed and followed Satan, "and men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." The Lord through the Holy Ghost called upon men to repent, promising that those who obeyed should be saved and those who "believed not and repented not, should be damned." (Ibid., 5:12 ff.)

But Satan intruded himself into the very household of Adam himself, and Cain, Adam's son, murdered his brother Abel in cold blood. Unrighteousness spread. The work of the Lord languished among the people. So the Lord established the Adamic dispensation, which is a period during which there was on the earth the "power and authority to dispense the word of God, and to administer in all the ordinances thereof." (A Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel, Franklin D. Richards and James A. Little, compilers and publishers (Salt Lake City, second stereotyped edition, 1884), p. 143.)

The Two Plans

The plan of the "Council of the Eternal God" required that every spirit falling within the plan should have opportunity to "prove" himself. Satan had proposed to save all these spirits, denying them their agency; not one soul was to be lost. The Only Begotten had proposed to give each spirit an opportunity for salvation, opportunity to "prove" himself in the exercise of his free agency. God chose this plan.

Thus each and all of the spirits, entitled to the blessings of the plan, must be given the opportunity to take on a mortal body, if he desired to do so, and have the experiences of mortality. He could do good or evil.

The Lord's Solicitude

So all along the way of mankind's march towards the end of mortality on the earth, the Lord has, at intervals, intensified his efforts to save God's children under the plan by sending some of the great ones, who were chosen at the beginning, as Abraham was chosen (Abraham 3:23), to reestablish his work and service. Each such occasion has carried with it a reemphasis of the Priesthood, its duties and powers, for the Lord has always sought to bring salvation to his children, no matter how wayward they might be. He has always fixed upon periods for setting up his work anew, either when there was some special purpose to be worked out, as with the Mosaic dispensation and the Messianic, or when the peoples of the earth reeked in unrighteousness, as in the dispensation of Noah when the people had become "carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Moses 5:13; 6:49.)

The Gospel Dispensations

Thus other dispensations followed the first dispensation, that of Adam, the Lord in each trying to bring his children to his way of life that he might "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Ibid., 1:39.)

The Prophet Joseph has told us of the dispensations from Adam to Enoch, from Enoch to Noah, from Noah to Abraham, Abraham to Moses, Moses to Elias, Elias to John the Baptist, and from then to Jesus Christ, and from him to the Apostles, Peter, James, and John. (Compendium, p. 143; see Paul's statement as to his personal dispensation, 1 Cor. 9:17; Eph. 3:2; Col. 1:25.)

The End from the Beginning

God in his infinite knowledge saw the end of all things even from the beginning. Isaiah declared the words of the Lord:

Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me,

Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. (Isa. 46:9-10; see also Isa. 41:26.)

Thus God knew men in the beginning not only enmasse, but each individual and what each would do, when tested by the trials and temptations of mortality.

Limitations upon Achievements of Early Dispensations

So God knew from the beginning that the dispensations of Adam and Enoch and Noah and Abraham and Moses and Elias, and even of the Messiah himself, could not bring man to that culmination of earth-life for which the grand plan provided—the birth, the death, the resurrection, the exaltation of men in the presence of God in the eternities.

The pre-Messianic dispensations could not do so, because at their times the Messiah had not yet received his body, lived, died, and been resurrected—man had not been redeemed from the Fall, and this must be done to reunite the spirit and body, overcoming the mortal death. The Messianic dispensation could not do so because in Christ's time—the Meridian of Time—there were still multitudes of those hosts that Abraham was shown, who had not yet had opportunity to receive mortal bodies and "prove" themselves and show whether they should "have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." This opportunity must be given them under the plan.

Purposes of Various Dispensations

Recalling the purpose of mortality as disclosed in the great plan, the "proving" of men "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abraham 3:25), one can gather, at least in part, an understanding of the Lord's course over the ages.

The Dispensation of Adam

To Adam the Gospel was given that he might "prove" himself and try to lead his children in paths of righteousness. But they began to stray; the Lord warned: "My spirit shall not always strive with man" (Gen. 6:3); man became so wicked it "grieved him [the Lord] at his heart." (Ibid., 6.) The people died in their wickedness.

The Dispensation of Enoch

Then came the dispensation of Enoch who vindicated the grand plan by showing men could keep God's commandments if they had a sincere desire thereto. Enoch led his people into a state of translation. (Heb. 11:5.)

The Dispensation of Noah

But the earth's people who were not of Enoch so increased in wickedness, became such a stench in the Lord's nostrils, that he resolved to destroy mankind and to begin all over again, and bring a new race through Noah and his posterity. Then came the Flood. The antediluvians likewise died in their wickedness, rejecting the truth.

The Dispensation of Abraham

But Noah's posterity did no better than the immediate descendants of Adam. Wickedness and corruption, and a pervading spirit of apostasy again cursed the peoples of the earth. Finding a righteous strain in Abraham—whose father apostatizing from the true faith, was a 'worshiper of the gods of the heathens' (Abraham 1:5), the Lord founded an elect family with Abraham at its head, so opening the dispensation of Abraham. The Lord made a solemn covenant with Abraham and declared:

I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. (Gen. 22:17-18.)

The Lord repeated this blessing upon the head of Jacob. (Ibid., 28:13-14.) And Abraham's seed kept for generations the knowledge and worship of the only true God. Yet the other peoples of the earth were in spiritual darkness; they lived and died heathens.

The Dispensation of Moses

In due time, as the result of a long residence in Egypt, begun to save themselves in a famine and finally ending in grievous bondage, Abraham's seed, now called Israel, for God had so christened Jacob at Peniel (ibid., 32:28), became so inclined to idolatry that later during the exodus when Moses left them so he might commune with God at Sinai, they had Aaron make them an Egyptian golden calf to worship. So to preserve his true worship and to save his chosen seed, the Lord raised up the great statesman, leader, lawgiver, prophet, Moses, who led the Children of Israel out of the bondage of Egypt. The Lord reestablished his Priesthood, attempting to give them the Melchizedek Priesthood, but they refused to accept it (D & C 84:25), and were left with the Aaronic Priesthood only. Thus the Mosaic dispensation was set up to reestablish the worship of the true God, and to gather all Israel into one place, separated from the heathenish influences of the idolators of the world. But all the while these idolators themselves continued in their blind wickedness, and continued, as was the rule during all the long centuries since Adam, to die in their sins.

The Dispensation of Elias

But the neighboring tribes in Palestine, themselves idolators, soon began to corrupt even Israel. The Lord raised up mighty prophets to try to lead back to the worship of the true God, the apostates from his true worship. Elijah vindicated before them, the power of the true God in his contest with the priests of Ball. (1 Kings 18.) Yet the Lord having granted to Elijah this proving miracle, Elijah was forced to flee for his life to Mount Horeb, to escape the wrath and revenge of King Ahab's wife, Jezebel. Elisha followed Elijah, and other great prophets followed him, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the others down to Malachi, living through the division of Israel into two kingdoms, the two captivities, the return to Jerusalem, through the period of the Maccabees, even down to the days of John the Baptist. All these sought to preserve Israel in the true worship. But there was a great falling away to idolatry among Israel. Abraham's seed in part perished in sin, while the world still wallowed and died in wickedness.

The Dispensation of John the Baptist and the Christ

John the Baptist, coming in the spirit of Elias as a forerunner, began turning Judah back to the worship of the true God and the practice of the true ordinances. The ten tribes of Israel had been lost for generations. John could reach but a few of Judah. The rest of Judah followed in a corruption of the true worship, with venal priests and a priesthood wandering from the order and principles given to them in the wilderness by the Lord through Moses.

But John's dispensation seems among all up to that time to have been truly successful—he prepared the way for One who was to come after, "the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose" (Luke 3:16; Matt. 3:11-12; Mark 1:7)—the Christ, who in turn fully consummated his dispensation. He was born, he lived, he performed his ministry, he was crucified, buried, lay in the tomb, was resurrected on the third day—the First Fruits of the Resurrection—and ascended into heaven. His dispensation came to a perfect fruition.

The Dispensation of the Apostles

Then followed the dispensation of the Apostles.

But, as had been foreseen from the beginning and proclaimed by the ancient prophets, on this hemisphere and in Palestine, the dispensation of Christ's Apostles did not bring the earth-culmination of the grand plan. The Savior had said this plainly enough in his great prophetic discourse to the Apostles on Mount Olivet on the third day of the week of the Atoning Sacrifice. But the Apostles did not understand and, at least at first, seem to have anticipated that this earth-culmination of the plan, with the second coming of the Christ, was in the immediate future.

The Apostasy

But such was not the plan. Already during the lives of the Apostles the apostasy from the true faith had begun. The writings of James, Peter, John, Paul, and Jude abundantly show this. The world progressively twisted and turned away from and finally abandoned the pure principles and ordinances of the Gospel—they 'transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, and broke the everlasting covenant' (Isa. 24:5); they became wicked and corrupt, again "carnal, sensual, and devilish"; the Priesthood was taken from them. The apostasy was finally complete.

Sectarian Estimate of the Post-Apostolic Centuries

A learned sectarian divine—writing about the condition of the world at the close of the first Christian century (which he marks as the time of the death of the Apostle John) indicts the condition of the people of the eastern hemisphere, in these brilliantly eloquent words:

The age of inspiration is over,—that peerless century which began with the birth of Christ, and closed with the death of John—and the course of the ages descends once more to the ordinary level of common time.

It was with the Church now as with the disciples at Bethany, when the last gleam of the Savior's ascending train had passed from their sight, and they turned their faces, reluctant and sad, to the dark world again. The termination of the age of inspiration was in truth the very complement and consummation of the ascension of the Lord. The sun can then only be said to have fairly set, when his departing glory has died away from the horizon, and the chill stars shine out sharp and clear on the dun and naked sky.

That time has now fully come. The last gleam of inspired wisdom and truth vanished from the earth with the beloved apostle's gentle farewell, and we pass at once across the mysterious line which separates the sacred from the secular annals of the world,—the history of the apostolic age from the history of the Christian Church. (Islay Burns, The First Three Christian Centuries (T. Nelson and Sons, London, 1884), p. 49; see also p. 63.)

Once more the people of the earth (other than Israel) were finally left, as they had been left in each dispensation before, down to the dispensation of John, without the Priesthood of God, without his Church, without the true faith and its saving principles and ordinances.

Hosts Dying without Opportunity to "Prove" Themselves

All those myriads upon myriads born to mortality all over the earth during the dark ages of all the dispensations had not the opportunity to "prove" themselves and show "they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.) They could not, without further opportunity, "have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever."

Furthermore, not all principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Christ, so far as the scriptures show, had been in the Church during each of these various dispensations (D & C 128:18), though certain of them were present in every "dispensation of the priesthood." (Ibid., 128:9.) Yet an opportunity for a full knowledge of the complete Gospel by every spirit coming to mortality on this earth, was necessary under the grand plan.

Salvation for Those Dying without the Gospel

So to these countless hosts of the dead, so dying in spiritual poverty, must come the full message and opportunities of the Gospel of Christ. He himself began this work while his mortal body lay in the tomb, by going to, and preaching "unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah," and "for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Peter 3:19-20; 4:6.)

Forecasting his visit to the imprisoned spirits and his preaching to them, Jesus, attending his second Passover during his active ministry and speaking to the multitude assembled at the pool of Bethesda (where he healed a man "which had an infirmity thirty and eight years"), said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live.

For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself;

And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,

And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. (John 5:5, 25-29.)

Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

That these myriads dying in darkness and it seems, still existing in darkness and ignorance, might have an opportunity to hear, and, believing, live the Gospel, it was necessary that a new dispensation should be set up, another period when there should be on the earth the "power and authority to dispense the word of God, and to administer in all the ordinances thereof."

Paul envisaged this, though perhaps not too clearly nor entirely (see Gal. 4:4; and as to Peter also, see Acts 2:17), when, having first spoken of our redemption through Christ and his making known his will, he said to the Ephesians:

That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him. (Eph. 1:10.)

In the very early days of the Church our people were advised as to "what the fulness of times means":

Now the thing to be known is, what the fulness of times means, or the extent and authority thereof. It means this, that the dispensation of the fulness of times is made up of all the dispensations that ever have been given since the world began, until this time. (Millennial Star, vol. 16, p. 220.)

And Peter speaking with John to the people in the temple, after performing his first miracle, declared:

Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;

And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:19-21.)

And here it may be recalled that after Christ ascended into heaven leaving his Apostles dazed and bewildered, looking "stedfastly toward heaven as he went up ... two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Ibid., 1:10-11.)

The Age of Spiritual Darkness

So during the long centuries that followed the apostasy from the Gospel of the Primitive Church and the loss of the Holy Priesthood of God, men wandered in spiritual darkness. Priestcraft was rife. Men again died in spiritual poverty. They had much of the letter of the law, but the vivifying spirit which gives life to the law, the Holy Ghost which bears record of the Father and of the Son (D&C 20:27), were not among men; "... the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." (2 Cor. 3:6.) There were in the earth, during all these spiritually turbulent centuries, millions of good men. They lived as best they knew. But not having the Gospel in its fulness nor the Priesthood with its powers and authorities, they could not "do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.)

Thus was the condition of men at the beginning of the last century. The people must have the light. The Fulness of Times was drawing nigh as predicted by the prophets and by Jesus himself. Another dispensation must be introduced to bring salvation to the living and dead, and under the prophecies this would be the last dispensation, with its tremendous responsibilities to the countless living and the innumerable dead. This was to be the time declared by Peter, "the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21.)

The Opening of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

Pricked with an inspired longing to serve God properly and bewildered by the conflicting claims of sectarian ministers, the young boy Joseph, not yet fifteen years old, read the sovereign formula:

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. (James 1:5.)

In the faith which James prescribes—"faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed" (ibid., 1:6), Joseph went into the woods and prayed. The Father and the Son came to him, in a glorious vision, following an almost life and death personal, physical struggle between Joseph and the powers of evil. The Father introduced the Son with essentially that same solemn presentation he used at the baptism of the Son by John (Matt. 3:13-17; Mark 1:9-11; Luke 3:21-23), at the time of the Transfiguration with Peter, James and John (Matt. 17:1-15; Mark 9:2-13; Luke 9:28-36), and at the time Christ visited the Nephites after his resurrection (3 Nephi 11:1-7)—"This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!"

The boy as soon 'as he got possession of himself' asked the question on which he wished wisdom—which of the contending sects should he join.

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. (P. of G. P., Joseph Smith, 2:19-20.)

The Father and Son thus appeared together on earth for the first recorded time since the day of the visitation to the ancient Nephites. The door had opened on the last dispensation, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

Nine years from the time of the First Vision, the Holy Priesthood of God was restored, first the Aaronic and then the Melchizedek.

Ten years after the First Vision (the Book of Mormon having meanwhile been translated and printed) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized.

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times was now ushered in.

The Restitution of All Things

The young boy Prophet, taught by the experience of the First Vision, went again and again to the Lord for wisdom and guidance, and beginning in 1829, revelation after revelation poured in upon him, giving minute direction, admonition, commendation, reproof when necessary. The Lord was squaring away his Church for the great burdens it must carry.

There are certain ordinances and blessings indispensable to the salvation of man in the celestial kingdom.

Baptism

Jesus came to the Jordan to be baptized of John; but John forbade him, saying: "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" And Jesus answered: "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (Matt. 3:13-15; Mark 1:9-11; Luke 3:21-23; and see for full discussion, 2 Nephi 31:4 ff.)

Later Jesus declared to Nicodemus:

Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. (John 3:5.)

Christ, giving his final charge to his Apostles, directed:

Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. (Mark 16:15-16.)

All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.

Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen. (Matt. 28:18-20.)

Thus baptism is essential for entry into the kingdom of God. (D & C 76:50 ff.) It must obviously be performed by those having authority. None are exempt, even the Christ himself being baptized. The authority to baptize was conferred upon Joseph and Oliver on the banks of the Susquehanna River, by John the Baptist; the precise formula to be used in this ordinance (one of the three formulae which the Lord has given to us in this day, the other two being the blessing on the bread and on the wine) had been given shortly before. (Ibid., 20:73 ff.)

Baptism for the Dead

Then came a clarification on baptism that had been wanting since Paul had put his rhetorical question to the Corinthians, in his great sermon on the resurrection: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor. 15:29.)

The Lord now again revealed the principle of vicarious work for the dead—a principle lost since the early Christian days. He made clear that the ordinance of baptism should be performed vicariously for the dead (D & C 127: 4 ff.; 128), in order that they might enter the celestial kingdom. (Ibid., 76:50 ff.)

For, as the Prophet declared:

...we without them [the dead] cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect. Neither can they nor we be made perfect without those who have died in the gospel also; for it is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole, complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times. (Ibid., 128:18.)

The Holy Ghost

The conferring and reception of the Holy Ghost, which bears record of the Father and the Son must be again provided for. The Holy Ghost was promised to the Apostles by the Savior in the Passover chamber (John 14), but he explained that "if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you." (Ibid., 16:7.) Just before his ascension, Jesus again promised them the Holy Ghost, which was to come to them, "not many days hence." (Acts 1:5.) On the day of Pentecost, the Holy Ghost came with a sound like the "rushing mighty wind," and "appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them," and miraculous manifestations followed. (Ibid., 2:1 ff.)

As to how necessary the power of the Holy Ghost is, may be gathered from the following scriptures which speak of his functions. Discoursing on the Comforter to his Apostles in the Passover chamber Jesus said:

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. ...

But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me. (John 14:26, 15:26.)

In this dispensation the Prophet Joseph, under divine inspiration, declared, after calling brief attention to the crucifixion and resurrection of the Savior:

That as many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end, should be saved—

Not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things, should have eternal life,

As well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of the Son. (D & C 20:25-27.)

The power to confer the Holy Ghost and its gifts was again given to men (ibid., 20:43; 39:23; 49:14); it was a part of the restitution of all things prophesied by Peter. (Acts 3:21.) This essential part of the plan of salvation is again provided for.

The Sealing Power

On the occasion of Peter's testimony of the Christ in the region of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus promised him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that "whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matt. 16:19.) A little later in Capernaum, speaking to his disciples, he affirmed:

Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Ibid., 18:18.)

On this hemisphere, the Lord conferred the same power upon Nephi, the son of Helaman:

Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Helaman 10:7.)

The Prophet Joseph declared as to the sealing power:

Nevertheless, in all ages of the world, whenever the Lord has given a dispensation of the priesthood to any man by actual revelation, or any set of men, this power has always been given. (D & C 128:9.)

The Lord expressly conferred the power on the Patriarch Hyrum Smith:

That whoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whoever he curses shall be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Ibid., 124:93.)

Upon the Prophet himself the Lord conferred this power in these words:

Whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven.

And again, verily I say, whomsoever you bless I will bless, and whomsoever you curse I will curse, saith the Lord; for I, the Lord, am thy God. (Ibid., 132:46-47.)

Thus the sealing power has been restored, a part of the restitution of all things which were to come in this, the last dispensation.

Eternity of Family Relationship

In connection with this sealing power, the eternity of the marriage covenant and of the family relationship should be noted.

During the last day Jesus spent in the temple before his crucifixion, the Sadducees, who denied the resurrection, came to him questioning which of seven brothers each of whom a woman had married in succession, following the death of the one preceding, should have this woman as a wife in the resurrection. This colloquy is usually cited to the point covered by the reply of Jesus that they erred, "for in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven." (Matt. 22:23-33; Mark 12:18-27; Luke 20:27-38.)

But the incident may also be understood as showing that the Sadducees recognized by their question that they who believed in the resurrection believed also in the continuation of the relation of husband and wife after death, and that the reply of Jesus went merely to the point that this post-resurrection relationship of man and wife must be perfected before the resurrection.

And the perpetuation of this family relationship of man and wife in eternity connotes the relationship there of parent and child also, as between them and their children.

First quoting the final recorded words of Malachi, "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse" (Mal. 4:5-6), the Prophet Joseph said:

I might have rendered a plainer translation to this, but it is sufficiently plain to suit my purpose as it stands. It is sufficient to know, in this case, that the earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children, upon some subject or other—and behold what is that subject? It is the baptism for the dead. For we without them cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect. (D & C 128:18.)

And with reference to the work for the dead, referring to the recording of baptisms, the Prophet made the following record:

Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning your dead: When any of you are baptized for your dead, let there be a recorder, and let him be eye-witness of your baptisms; let him hear with his ears, that he may testify of a truth, saith the Lord;

That in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven; whatsoever you bind on earth, may be bound in heaven; whatsoever you loose on earth, may be loosed in heaven. (Ibid., 127:6-7.)

Thus the sealing power conferred upon the Prophet Joseph and passed from him down through his successors as Presidents of the Church (and the Lord said, "there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred" [ibid., 132:7]), enables husband to be sealed to wife, parent to child and child to parent, in a union of a family relationship that shall last through time and all eternity, in a never ending existence of joy and bliss divine.

This sealing power with its vast and multiple uses, is thus brought to earth as part of the restitution of all things prophesied by Peter.

Restoration of the Keys of Former Dispensations

In the great vision to the Prophet and Oliver in the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet records, after picturing the glorious vision of the Christ:

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (Ibid., 110:11-16.)

Finally, we may add the great testimony of the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon at Hiram, after which the Lord revealed to them the three great glories to which men might go in the hereafter:

And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about.

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (Ibid., 76:19-24.)

Thus principle after principle, ordinance after ordinance (not only those named, but others) dealing with the children of God and their destiny in the hereafter have been restored in this restitution of all things in this the last dispensation, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

As we ponder these great truths, we are burdened with the thought of how vast is the service and how great is the responsibility of this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times that carries in it the salvation and exaltation of billions of spirits who during the ages since Adam, have come to the earth and taken mortal bodies, and have died without the opportunity to "prove" themselves, that they might "have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever"; and how vast also the service and great the responsibility of bringing the Gospel to the billions now on the earth, andstill coming in multitudes, that they may "prove" themselves likewise.

For to us in our day has come the same commandment and commission that was given to Christ's own Apostles on the day of his ascension. The Lord has said to us:

Go ye into all the world, preach the gospel to every creature, acting in the authority which I have given you, baptizing in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned.

And he that believeth shall be blest with signs following, even as it is written.

And unto you it shall be given to know the signs of the times, and the signs of the coming of the Son of Man;

And of as many as the Father shall bear record, to you shall be given power to seal them up unto eternal life. Amen. (Ibid., 68:8-12.)

God give us the strength, the wisdom, the power and his inspiration and revelation, which we need to obey this command of the Almighty to us.

"And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn."

Luke 2:7
