J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Nativity

BROTHERS and sisters, all, brothers and sisters of our Elder Brother, Jesus, the Christ: Into what a world of meaning and relationship reaching back into the eternities, and reaching forward into the eternities to come, does that statement of fact, which has been revealed to us, take us. I realize, more fully than you, how hopelessly inadequate I am to try to develop the eternal truths of life behind this relationship. My words are wholly inadequate. I shall not even attempt it. I come back to the simple fact that I can somehow understand, merely the birth to Mary the Virgin. The Divine Conception I do not understand. But I know it existed and I take it on faith and the knowledge which has come to me from it.

At the Christmas Season of the year, the air, the churches will be filled with expressions of adoration, of reverence, and of worship. It is for us to see that in the days and the months and the years to come these do not become, as I fear sometimes they do in the world, mere hollow memories, hollow reverence, hollow worship, as we go about our daily tasks. We must live with these eternal facts and with the eternal relationship to which I have already referred. From that lowly cottage on the outskirts of Jerusalem under the circumstances which the Holy Writ tells us about, came him who was to be and was the Savior of the world.

Judgment by the Father in Mercy

As I get older and come nearer to the day when I shall go to meet him, I become more and more impressed with his boundless, eternal love, and mercy, and charity. Those great qualities, to me, almost absorb all else that I know and can think about him. I have come to feel that there are two great principles which shall govern our meeting with him and the Father, hereafter. In his mercy, in his tenderness, in his love, in his experience which came to him as mortal being, out of all of this there will come his judgment. We shall have all of the reward that love and mercy and tenderness and divine relationship can give for our services here on earth. We shall receive the punishments, and those only, which infinite justice require as they are tempered by the love and by the mercy and by the charity and by the experience not only of the Christ, but of the Father who, if we understand correctly, passed through those experiences which Christ, himself, lived through.

I become more and more impressed with the great truths expressed by Peter, facing the synagogue, on a charge of having healed a cripple. He was to be penalized for restoring health and when asked, as you all know, by what name he did this, he stated, "By the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified...," and added, "for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

We must never forget that. We must cling to the knowledge we have of the Master. We must hold him in reverence and in worship, knowing that we can come to the Father only through his Son.

Reflect Upon His Love

May God increase this testimony to us day by day, the testimony that I bear witness to you; help us to live, day by day, as he would have us live; help us to reflect, truly, upon him and his work, his love, his mercy, his charity—that consistent with our humility we may day by day grow more nearly like him. I bear my witness that Jesus of Nazareth is Jesus the Christ, born in the lowly cottage in the humblest of circumstances, to go forward and be the Savior of mankind; that he lived, he taught, he suffered, he endured crucifixion, was martyred, was buried in the tomb, and the morning of the third day rose, a resurrected Being, having lived out the full measure of the mission for which he came to this earth. I bear my testimony that the great truths and the Priesthood which he left on the earth disappeared, and that these had to be restored. I bear my testimony that this restoration was made through the Prophet Joseph.

I pray again that our lives may be so lived that when we get to the other side we may join our loved ones who have gone before, loved ones faithful in the Lord, and that we may meet there, as the plan provides, with our Master, our Savior, our Elder Brother and with our Heavenly Father.

"...And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed...."

Luke 2:1
