J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

Palestine at the Time of the Savior's Birth

AS ONE approaches the life and teachings—the service and work of the Master—one moves towards the fountain from which mortals drink the truths of eternity that never change nor alter however much men's concepts, men's understandings, may change.

The All-Wise may find it necessary in one period of the existence of mortality on this earth, in order to reach us humans, to cause us to view, as it would seem he might, eternal truths now through one facet, so to speak, of the eyes of our understanding, now through another. But while the human so viewing may at one time gather into his mind one impression regarding a truth, its composition it may be, its substance, its dimension, its value, its meaning, and while man may at another time view, so to speak, the truth through another facet of his understanding, yet the ultimate truth remains always the same, never changing, never growing, never shrinking. The difference to the human results, so to speak, only from the different facet through which he looks at the moment.

Of the doubters among us some seem natural doubters requiring little doubting stimulation from others, and others are doubters who are so stimulated by someone else. Both sorts find difficulties in the Gospel that Jesus taught, running from real and fundamental doubts that become almost denials. Others have shadowy doubts which they would like to put out of their minds but have not the strength so to do. These latter doubters particularly, seek (if they search the Holy Scriptures at all, or if they seize upon things which they hear) to find, frequently, small and unimportant matters in order to justify the doubts which they have.

Among the principles which some of these doubters seize upon in their doubting excursions in the teachings of the Savior, is that principle set out in the Gospels about the peace which the Savior may afford to those who believe in him. They recall that those who heralded the birth of the Savior announced:

And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night.

And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.

And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. (Luke 2:8-14.)

No Peace in the Land

Over the centuries the doctrine has been promulgated in the churches that the Savior so born brought peace into the world, a peace which we will call "secular," as affecting peoples and bodies politic. This ignores the fact that while in the whole Roman Empire there was more peace in it than had been found, perhaps, for other long periods of time before, and while there is some record to justify, in recognition of this, the fact that the temple of Janus appears to have been closed at this time (the rule being that the temple of Janus in Rome should be closed in time of peace), Yet the facts are that there was no peace in Palestine itself, but that the Savior was born in a period when there were disturbances, civilly and religiously, far more intense than was usual in this trouble-torn little piece of territory in the Near East.

Students note that here and there, there were instances where the mob sought to kill the Savior, but these are regarded generally as more or less isolated incidents in the life of the Messiah and are not correlated with the general condition in Palestine at that time. Such persons are usually unaware of the general conditions in Palestine at that time. They are not familiar with the fact that in Galilee there was a tremendous non-Israelitish population that was more or less constantly fomenting trouble, often bloody. They are unfamiliar with the fact that the Samaritans, a mongrel group, occupied an area that lay between the northern area of Palestine and the southern area. They are not familiar with the fact that there were more than a "baker's dozen" of Jewish sects, orders, and societies, some of them characterized as possessing religious distinctions, others professional distinctions, a third group political distinctions, and then the great secret society, the Assassins or Sicarii.

Jewish Sects and Orders

As among the Jews only, there were other classes: the Sanhedrin, Proselytes, Publicans, and Hellenists, all forming a conglomerate mass of Jewish sects and orders that made against a unified front that under other circumstances might have been formed inimical to and facing their religious and philosophical ideas. These have been classified as characteristic of both the Old and the New Testament. These various groups were neither merged with nor destroyed by the followers of Christ.

Thus we must seek to find some recognizable and sensible meaning to the "peace" of which the angels spoke in their annunciation to the shepherds.

Politically and civilly the whole history of Palestine as of this time proves that the peace that the angelic hosts spoke of was not the civil and political peace as usually understood among men and as operative in the political life of peoples and nations. Palestine at this time was passing through perhaps one of the bloodiest times that ever occurred in its history, when it came to the civil and political life. They were divided into sects, into political parties, and civil tumult and strife were the rule and not the exception.

A careful reading of the New Testament and ancillary reading of the secular history of Palestine negatives the idea that the peace of which the hosts spoke was the secular peace as among nations and peoples. Christ evidently understood this, for he said:

Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.

The words immediately following indicate that he had no intention of applying this to the secular peace as usually understood. His full statement was:

Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.

For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother,and the daughter in law against her mother in law.

And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.

And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.

He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. (Matt. 10:34-39.)

It seems quite clear that the Savior is here describing the tremendous spiritual struggle that must ensue primarily in the religious thinking of many but also extending in many cases to the social and political struggle which must be an incident to the change from the ritualistic worship of Moses to the highly abstract and spiritual concepts that were involved in the great dictum that hereafter worship was to be with a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

Revolution of Ritualistic Worship

It is difficult for us of today to realize the tremendous revolution involved in altering the ritualism of the Law of Moses into the humble and lowly concept of worship, not with the sacrificial blood of animals, but with this broken heart and contrite spirit of the worshiper.

It is an interesting reflection that up to the time of Christ, apparently, the peoples of the world, not alone Israel, but seemingly all pagan nations, worshiped with the ritual which in reality, but usually unconsciously, looked forward to the sacrifice of the Son by substituting animal sacrifice as under the Mosaic Law and reaching even to the sacrifice of human beings under the great pagan religions of the earth.

The sacrifice was always vicarious. Animals were, with some, sacrificed, as under the Mosaic Law, for the sins of the individual and for the sins of the people, and among other and pagan religions, human sacrifice was made for the same purpose, but it was always a vicarious sacrifice, apparently with little actual sacrifice except for the value of the animal sacrificed, by the individuals themselves, to cancel the debit, so to speak, against their lives and living in the eyes of the Almighty One. The sinner seemingly, in general, took on no obligation and considered himself under no obligation to abandon his sins, but took on only the obligation to offer sacrifice therefor.

But under the new covenant that came in with Christ, the sinner must offer the sacrifice out of his own life, not by offering the blood of some other creature; he must give up his sins, he must repent, he himself must make the sacrifice, and that sacrifice was calculated to reach out into the life of the sinner in the future so that he would become a better and changed man.

This was a great evolutionary and revolutionary step in the development of righteousness among men. It moved from a vicarious offering for the sin of the past, with no obligation to abandon the sin in the future, to the personal obligation of the individual for his wrongdoing, including not only something for the past, but also the abandonment of the obligation of purchasing forgiveness in the future by a repetition of the same vicarious offering but with no accompanying resolution himself to abandon the sin in the future.

Forgiveness of Sins Based on Repentance

It is not to be wondered at that in establishing this great revolutionary principle there was to be the bitterest war in the minds and the consciences of the people, in moving from a life where forgiveness of wrongdoing by the individual might be purchased by the sinner through the vicarious offering of the lifeblood of some other creature, moving from that sacrifice to where the sinner had to acknowledge his sin and then abandon it and thereby make unnecessary any future vicarious sacrifice for the sin committed.

Clearly from the standpoint of the light that has come to us through modern revelation that began with the Divine Sacrifice of the Son for the sins of all men, to the present situation and condition of men where every sinner must answer for the sins which he has committed and not only answer for those of the past for which he makes answer, but have a true repentance by an abstinence in the future of a repetition of the sins of the past, under the modern law, every sinner so repenting, every sinner so sorrowing for the past by an abandonment of the practices of the past, moves into a new world where, with proper covenants, he thrusts away out of his life the wrongs of the past and moves into this new world, following the teachings of the great Master who declared, "I am the way, the life, the light, and the truth" of the world.

"...Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people."

Luke 2:10
