J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

Some Christmas Messages

MAY THE joy, the peace, the blessings of the Season be unto you!

They have joy who have righteousness; peace, who know no hatred; blessings, who covet not their neighbor's.

Out of the Passover chamber, as he prepares to sacrifice himself for the sins of the world, comes Christ's celestial voice, declaring his bequest to all men of all times:

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

May this full blessing descend upon you and yours, now and in the days to come.

Out from the shut-in walls of the city, went the wise men, wished on their way by the deceit and cunning of the crafty Herod,—out they went into the way that led to the Christ Child in the manger in Bethlehem, out into the freedom of body and soul had by those who serve the Lord and keep his commandments.

Years later the Christ was to say to the multitudes that gathered around him on the Mount:

Enter ye in at the strait gate....

Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.

May the Lord help all of us to enter that strait gate and tread that narrow way.

Still the Christian sees, with the inner light of the spirit, the shepherds watching by night their flocks on the hillside, with the angel of the Lord, clothed in glory, proclaiming to them the good tidings. Still, his spirit listening, the Christian hears the angel's message and the divine blessing first carolled by the heavenly hosts:

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

Still the Christian glimpses the infant Christ lying in a manger, wrapped in swaddling clothes, and the mother, Mary, and the patient, trusting Joseph.

May the Lord grant to us the power so to live as never to lose this vision.

Again it is Christmas—remembrancer of Jesus, son of Mary, Son of God.

Jesus the Christ: In the beginning with God; himself God; author of our salvation and exaltation; creator of the world and all that in it is; the light and life of the world; our Savior dying on the cross for us; our intercessor with the Father, who time and again said: "This is my beloved Son; hear him"; bestower of infinite love and mercy; soul of compassion and forgiveness; healer of sick bodies and broken hearts; friend of the friendless; giver of divine peace, his peace.

God grant to each of us this knowledge, this testimony.

Greetings this Christmastide!

Nearly two millenniums ago, appeared in the heavens the Star of Bethlehem, God's blazing herald to his earthly children the world round, proclaiming that to earth had come the Only Begotten to carry out his great mission of the redemption of mankind. In the west, darkness fled the heavens for a day, a night, and another day. God's promise to his children through his prophets from the beginning was being fulfilled, heavenly choirs attended, singing praises and proclaiming peace.

The light of the world was come to it, shedding its life-giving rays into the souls of men, to their salvation. Death would be conquered, the grave become a couch to rest the weary body, waiting for the trump of the resurrection morn.

Peace had come to the troubled hearts of the poor, humility to the haughty pride of the rich.

Completed finally on the cross would be the plan of God's work and glory, to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

God grant this boon to all of us.

In the center of God's great plan of earth's creation, of human mortality and experience, of final redemption, in every part and place of man's divinely decreed destiny, stands Jesus the Christ in the eternal majesty of Godhood.

His coming was heralded by heavenly choirs, and witnessed by a guiding star of great magnitude in the firmament, yet was he cradled in a manger; the innkeeper found in the inn no room for the birth of Divinity.

He grew to manhood as a lowly carpenter.

He lived and died to atone for the Fall, so redeeming us from eternal burial in the tomb, and so bringing within the grasp of every one of God's children born to earth, immortality and eternal life—the work and glory of God.

He is the way, the life, and the light of the world.

His is the only "name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved," for "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."

May the Holy Ghost increasingly bear record of this to each and all of us, to our salvation and exaltation.

Again nears the day of remembrance of when, forth from the infinite glory and power of the throne of God to be born to mortality in the manger-cradle in Bethlehem, came him thenceforth to be called son of Mary, Son of man, Son of God, Jesus the Christ, the Only Begotten of the Father. God incarnate, he came not to royal courts, not to the palace of the rich, not to the home of earthly honor nor of vaunted learning of the wise and powerful, but to the humility of a lowly cottage of a village carpenter, to the home of one of us common folk.

He descended below all things that he might rise to take even captivity captive,—

O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

Manhood found him out with the poor, the downtrodden, the oppressed, the sick, the afflicted of the earth in body and spirit, teaching his truth to their peace, their comfort, their eternal salvation and exaltation, their everlasting happiness.

The fishermen and the common folk heard, loved, and followed; the high and powerful turned their backs, scorning, deriding, reviling; they walked not after him.

He chose the foolish things to confound the wise; the weak to confound the mighty. He blessed the poor in spirit, promised comfort to them that mourn. He blessed them that hungered and thirsted for righteousness and them that are merciful. He declared the peacemakers should be called the children of God; the pure in heart should see God. He blessed the persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs would be the kingdom of God. He blessed the meek to inherit the earth.

He speaks to all of us who suffer for his sake, bidding us to come to him:

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

So, to now and hereafter while time flows on, the Author of our being and of our salvation speaks. His words are the assurance of the lowly and humble; the hope of the mighty and great.

God help us this Christmas time to know the divine virtue of the spiritual ointment which, to ease our wounded souls, his Son gave us as his mortality was speeding to its end. It was in the Upper Chamber the night before he poured out his life blood on the cross, so overcoming the world, an Atoning Sacrifice for the Fall of Adam and for your sins and for mine, that he bestowed this priceless heritage upon his disciples grouped around him, upon all men then and since living, and upon those hereafter to be born:

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

God grant it may so be.

Almost two thousand years ago, the angel of the Lord, enveloped in his glory, brought to the lowly, "sore afraid" shepherds, night-watching their flocks on the hills near Bethlehem, Judea, "good tidings of great joy" for the peoples of the earth, and declared that on that day was born " a Savior, which is Christ the Lord." And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." Isaiah's "Prince of Peace" had come.

In the temple precincts, during the last week of his mortality, a lawyer questioned him,—"Which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus answered, quoting the law from the days of Moses. The first commandment was to love the Lord our God with one's whole soul; and the second was like unto it, to love one's neighbor as one's self, for on these two hang all the law and the prophets.

Israel, using the free agency God gave them, forgot the commandment of Moses, and heeded not the words of Jesus. For centuries they have been dispersed among the peoples of the earth, driven and persecuted. Peace has fled from them. Till now, equally unheeding, have been the men and peoples of the earth, Christian and pagan alike, vainly seeking the peace proclaimed by the heavenly host, which has found no home among them.

Who can plumb the depths or climb the heights of the soul-filling joy of his peace that will come with its blessings and glory when we live the law, when every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to God, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

The peace, yet vainly sought by men, peoples, and nations, patiently awaits our offering, on the altar of sacrifice, our selfishness, greed, ambition, our thirst for unrighteous power and dominion (still nourished in the minds of men), that peace eagerly, hopefully looks for the day of our living the great commandments,—our soulfilling love of God, our love of neighbor as ourselves.

There will be no permanent peace, till the sacrifice is made and the commandments lived.

God give us the faith and the power to plant Christ's promised peace in our hearts, that we may assure our own salvation and exaltation, and so stand guiltless before the Lord for the wickedness and warfare of the nations.

Once more the earth has circled her orbit back to the recurring day when the glory of the Lord shone round the shepherds on the hills and an angel brought to them good tidings of great joy to all people. For on that day Christ the Lord was born. Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying:

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

On the last night of his mortality, Jesus, praying in the Garden to the Father, reminded the Father of their lives together in heaven before Jesus came to make the Atonement. He pleaded for help in his coming sacrifice:

O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.

From that eternity through to the hour he now faced he had done the will, rendered the service to the Father; created worlds without number and peopled them; had guided the Father's children in their free agency; had sought to save them and lead them to exaltation; had prepared to give his own life for their redemption and exaltation; and now a final request at this critical, sacred hour:

Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.

As mortal death cast its shadow ahead and enshrouded him, there passed before him all he had done for our Father's children, then the final offering, even the sacrifice of mortal life itself for their sakes. He gazed upon Jerusalem, the summation of his hopes, his struggles, his admonitions, his pleadings, of all his services. There came to him, in poignant grief, the knowledge that Jerusalem would continue to scourge and persecute the prophets and the wise men sent to them, to crucify and kill them, that upon Jerusalem would "come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar." Then he cried out from the depths of his soul:

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!

Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.

But God watches over all. Never did he let the righteous all go to destruction. More than once his divine love and mercy intervened to save an obedient remnant:

First, Noah and his family, saved by the hand of God from the engulfing flood waters that drowned the world so that the earth might be repeopled.

Next, Moses, prophet-leader, law-giver for all peoples since born, led Israel miraculously treading the depths of the Red Sea dry-shod, then wandering for forty years in the Wilderness of Sinai, till, tested and purified, they entered the Promised Land, free and worshiping the true God.

Then the righteous of Israel, led back to the Holy Land from captivity, that worship of the true God might still be found on his footstool.

Then, modern Israel, fleeing the oppressions and persecutions of the emissaries of unrighteousness, out from Nauvoo over the frozen waters and sloughs of the mighty Mississippi, into the wilds of the trackless plains of America, the abode of wild beasts and savage Indians, into and through the mountain fastnesses of the Rockies, out into the bleak and barren embraces of the Great American Desert. They came for conscience sake and for freedom. They trekked a thousand miles. The Lord was their companion.

They toiled; they knew privation and want, success and discouragement; they built factories and tamed the earth; they built villages, towns and cities, churches, temples, and schools; they worshiped.

Another righteous remnant had been saved. The Lord had again vindicated his plans and purposes.

May God bless the righteous and the sinners unto repentance. May he bless you always.

Simeon declared the Christ:

Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word:

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,

Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people;

A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. (Luke 2:28-32.)

Once more our minds and hearts and spirits crowd themselves together in reverent love and adoration for the birth and life and work of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Again we try to comprehend his divinity, his mortal birth, his life, his mission, the final sacrifice, the resurrection, that brought to each and all of us the precious blessings of our destinies. Again we seek to understand his going back to his eternal home, taking his place in the Godhead.

God declared his work and his glory are to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man,"—a resurrected being, each in the image of God himself, with eternal progress before him, Jesus declared our destiny to the multitude on the Mount:

Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

Blessed are we that in the earliest days of his ministry, Jesus taught Nicodemus:

For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Later he rebuked the disciples, angered because a Samaritan village refused him lodging, and asking him to call destructive fire, as did Elias of old, saying to them:

Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.

For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

How blessed we are for his words to the Samaritan woman, herself a sinner, declaring that the water he had to give to drink was living water springing up to eternal life, and whosoever drank of it would never thirst again.

How blessed are we for the eternal words companion to these, uttered to those who followed him across the sea, after he had fed with five loaves and two fishes, five thousand men and their women and children:

I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.

The bread and water that Christ, our Lord gives, are the spiritual food that can bring salvation and exaltation to every human soul.

How blessed are we for our own credo: "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel,"—all mankind may be saved, those that have lived from the beginning, through our work for the dead, those now living and those to be born in the future through our spread of the Gospel, till God's plan is completely fulfilled.

How blessed are we to have this never dimming, always glowing hope, and the eternal knowledge that belongs to us, to comfort us and to urge us on through life, that we may add to God's declared work and glory by gaining for ourselves, and for all believers and doers, the priceless destiny of immortality and eternal life.

May God grant us the power so to live is my prayer for you.

Ever returning till time shall be no more and we live in eternity, shall yearly come back to us the anniversary of that glorious night when there came to earth our Savior to bring to us redemption and the resurrection.

As the wise men saw the glorious star in the heavens that led to the Infant Christ, so may his worshipers, as they look into the vaulted star-field, see there in spirit that same guiding star which leads to the eternal home of the Royal Son.

As heard the shepherds of old, so may his worshipers, in the humble spirit of silence, hear the heavenly multitude praising God and declaring Christ's message to all the Father's children:

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

As the shepherds keeping their flocks in the fields hearkened to the angel and hastened to Bethlehem, city of David, where wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger (the sign the angel promised) they saw the Infant Christ, the Lord, so in sacred contemplation, his worshipers may see the Infant Royal Babe, lying in a manger, King of all born to earth, yet eternally Royal, member of the Godhead, next to God himself.

As the shepherds came from their visit to the Christ, returning to their flocks, "glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them," so his worshipers, so envisioned, come therefrom to their tasks of daily life, glorifying and praising God for their testimonies and knowledge that Jesus, so born, is the Son of God, his Father and our Father, Christ, the Only Begotten, proclaimed from the beginning.

His worshipers know that Christ is the way, the truth, the life, and the light.

That no one comes to the Father except through Christ.

That in his great prayer, Christ declared that life eternal was to know the Father the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he had sent.

That Peter declared to the questioning Sanhedrin, that Christ was the only name under heaven given among men whereby they must be saved.

That in the Passover chamber, he said to the Apostles and to us all:

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

To the humble housewife Martha, he declared:

I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:

And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.

To all which I bear my humble testimony, praying that God will bring to all his children, a sustaining, saving, burning testimony of the Christ and his peace and mission to God's children on this earth.

Again we near the day we celebrate as the anniversary of the birth of our Lord and Savior—Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Atoning Sacrifice that none but an Infinite Being, the Son of God himself, could offer to redeem man from the Fall, and enable him to bring to pass the great declaration of the Father that "my work and my glory [is] to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

Born in a stable, cradled in a manger, yet his coming was heralded by a heavenly host, proclaiming to the shepherds, tending their flocks on the hillsides, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men" in fulfillment of the foretelling of the angel to them that "unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."

"Peace on earth,"—not world peace, but the peace he promised in the Upper Chamber to all when he said:

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

The peace that passeth human understanding.

The peace of a "pure heart and a contrite spirit."

The peace of the new sacrifice that replaced the sacrifice of the Law of Moses, where man sought forgiveness for his sins by offering the flesh and blood of animals. Under the new covenant man gained forgiveness by placing on the altar of sacrifice his own unrighteousness, offering to our Heavenly Father the pure heart and contrite spirit.

Each Christian is armed with a sword by which he is to divide the old law from the new covenant, the ritual of sacrifice for the simple righteousness of life; by which he cleaves from his soul all that is base and ignoble in him, and these being destroyed and cast out of his life, then comes the blessed peace from him who promised peace, his peace—not the peace of the world of ease, luxury, idleness, absence of turmoil and strife, but the peace born of the righteous life: the peace that lifts the soul; the peace that, day by day, brings us ever nearer to the home of Eternal Peace, the dwelling place of our Father.

God grant to all of us this peace, which the Lord gives to all who live "godly in Christ Jesus." [^1]

Again we have reached the time in the circling of the years when we have come to the anniversary on which we recognize the birth of him who gave us the Divine Plan through which we may gain salvation and exaltation in the Kingdom of God.

As the years flow by, this earthly anniversary brings to us who love and honor him and recognize him for what he is, a new sense of obligation to him for the Atoning Sacrifice which, in the Meridian of Time, he made to redeem us from the Fall.

To those of us who are increasing in the years of our sojourn and experience here, there comes a deeper and fuller realization of that great Atoning Sacrifice.

Few there are who recognize and appreciate what it is.

Few ever receive the lightning-like flash of light that brings us to even an approximate understanding of the origin of man, the meaning of the Fall, the need for the Atonement, and the birth and mission of Jesus Christ.

Too few of us can appreciate the statement of God himself, when he said:

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

But to all of us there may come a knowledge of the redemption that brings the resurrection to every man born on earth, and the opportunity to grow in righteousness until it brings even the most sinful man unto repentance and within the purview of the Divine Plan of Salvation.

Fortunately, the plan is self-operative and does not need to be understood to be effective.

Fortunate they are who glimpse the great value of the redemption and the resurrection.

Fortunate they are who do not need to understand too much nor too clearly, indeed not at all, what the resurrection means and the great blessing it brings to every man and woman born on earth.

May the Lord be good to us and give us knowledge and inspiration and testimony that will enable the great bulk of us to live sufficiently near to that plan that we shall not only be heirs to the self-operative part of that plan, the universal resurrection, but that there may come to us in some measure at least and in sufficient measure so that we shall know of the meaning of the balance of that plan, so that we will be willing to serve him and keep his commandments.

All his purpose, all his aim is bound up in the exaltation of man, a purpose towards which he has worked in all the eternities that have gone before and will work in all those which are to follow after.

God grant that every person born on his footstool shall recognize his earthly responsibilities and shall strive to do his part to fulfill this great, Divine, eternal purpose.

"...Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.

"And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast...."

Luke 2:41-42

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Drafted by J. Reuben Clark, Jr., just prior to his death, to be his 1961 Christmas Message.
