J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Personality of God

MY REMARKS will deal with one phase only of this great subject, the Personality of God, and that phase will be in a sense the least important one because it deals with a negative—what God is not instead of what God is. But no adequate understanding of the whole subject can be had from the viewpoint of the Latter-day Saint, except this phase be first disposed of.

Of the fundamental differences between the beliefs of the Latter-day Saints and other Christian sects, none is more important, none reaches deeper along the roots of their faiths than their respective conceptions of God and his relationship to man.

The character and attributes of God, the nature and descent of the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, the universality of the salvation of man, including work looking to the exaltation of those who died without the law, or without yielding obedience to it, the eternity of the relationship between the righteous husband and the righteous wife, when sealed by the power of the Priesthood, and the doctrine of continuous revelation, are matters upon which the Latter-day Saints have no compromise to offer to any sect or denomination in the world. If the Latter-day Saints are wrong in these fundamental concepts, their religious faith is a tragic delusion and a fateful snare; if they are right in these, then all men must accept and live them or abide the penalty, a failure of the blessings which God has planned for those who are obedient to his laws.

It is the humble, devout faith, it is a knowledge by and of the spirit, of hundreds of thousands of Latter-day Saints, living and dead, that the Gospel of Christ as taught and practiced by them, is the very truth of which Christ spoke when he said, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.)

The great Christian sects of the world declare a belief in a God "without body, parts, or passions," "one only, eternal, incomprehensible, spiritual essence," who is omniscient (that is, all-knowing), omnipotent (that is, all-powerful), and omnipresent (that is "He is in all parts of the universe and with every individual"); "God is everywhere" (everywhere present at the same time, and in and a part of God's creations).

Since the Beginning of Time

But this is not the God of the Latter-day Saints; nor are these the attributes of him they worship. The belief and contention of the Latter-day Saints is that neither the Holy Scriptures of old nor those composed of modern revelation reveal any such God as has been described. The Latter-day Saints declare that such a being is not the God of Adam, Noah, and Enoch, nor of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; that it is not the God that made Israel his covenant people, nor that led Israel dryshod through the Red Sea; that it is not he who guided the wanderings in the wilderness, nor that traced upon stone, amidst the thunders of Sinai, the great moral law of the world.

The Latter-day Saints further declare that the scriptures fully attest that Israel and her mighty ones conceived God as a deified being of their own order, with a body, parts, and passions, omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent in the sense that operating by and through his influence, power, and authority he brings all men into his presence, but that God himself is not otherwise "in all parts of the universe and with every individual" nor is he "everywhere" at the same time. The Latter-day Saints affirm that this was the one-God concept to which Israel was brought back when they were delivered from bondage, and to which they held while living in the midst of and mingling with the idolatrous paganism of surrounding peoples in Palestine; that this was the concept which either came to them because they were the chosen people of God under the covenant or the concept on account of which the covenant was made to them, and they became the chosen people of God. Any other concept of God than this belies all his recorded dealings with his people, and with the peoples of the world since the beginning of time.

The Latter-day Saints believe in the same God that declared Israel to be his chosen people.

It seems clear on reflection that the fundamental error in the sectarian concept of a God "without body, parts, or passions" composed of an "incomprehensible, spiritual essence," is to be found in the alleged attribute of "omnipresence" which is defined to be "the quality of being everywhere present at the same time ... in theology universal presence of the divine essence."

The Keystone of the Arch

Being thus the keystone of the arch, it is worth-while to consider the scripture passages which are usually cited to sustain this sectarian doctrine.

I will take first (merely because it appears earliest in the Bible text) the passage from Solomon's prayer at the dedication of the temple he had built. He said:

But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded? (1 Kings 8:27.)

Behind this prayer of Solomon lay these facts: David, having peace from his enemies, said to Nathan, the prophet of God, "Lo, I dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord remaineth under curtains." Nathan, the man, said to David, "Do all that is in thine heart; for God is with thee." But on the same night, the word of God came to Nathan saying:

Go and tell David my servant, Thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not build me an house to dwell in:

For I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up Israel unto this day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to another....

... I will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons; and I will establish his kingdom.

He shall build me an house ... (1 Chron. 17:1-5, 11-12.)

When David in solemn assembly gave counsel to Israel and Solomon prior to his death, he recounted this command in these words:

And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father....

And thou, Solomon my son ...

Take heed now; for the Lord hath chosen thee to build an house for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it. (1 Chron. 28:61 Chron. 28:6, 9-10.)

Obedient to Instructions

Obedient to these instructions, Solomon built a house to the Lord, and now, dedicating it, he seems to have recalled that the word that came to his father, David, was that God had not need for a house to dwell in, and that he had been content to dwell in tents; and Solomon, apprehensive that the house built might not be acceptable to God, skeptical perhaps that he could be lured from heaven to earth, exclaims:

But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house which I have built! (2 Chron. 6:182 Chron. 6:18.)

Solomon had not in mind that God could not dwell in his house because he was an omnipresent, formless, spiritual essence.

Indeed, if God were everywhere, he would be already in the temple, and Solomon would be doing a vain thing to importune his presence there. That Solomon prayed for his presence, is proof that Solomon did not believe he was already there. The plain import of these simple words is that Solomon believed God dwelt elsewhere than in this temple, or on this earth and there came to him the conviction that he could not bring him to earth and confine him to the house he had built, nor indeed to any dwelling upon this earth, because he could not be confined even in heaven or in the heaven of heavens. God moves as and where and when he wills.

Another passage cited to show God's omnipresence in the sectarian sense, is taken from Job's answer to Eliphaz's third discourse:

Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him:

On the left hand, where he doth work, but I cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him. (Job 23:8-9.)

Poetic Outpouring

This beautiful lament seems so obviously the poetic outpouring of an almost despairing soul, seeking from his God a love and consolation which seemed constantly to elude him, that it is almost sacrilege to attempt to wrench it into an announcement of a scientific fact. Moreover as the announcement of such a fact, its effect is to affirm not that God is everywhere and in everything, and therefore then present with Job, but that he is nowhere to be found.

A third passage uniformly cited as sustaining the omnipresence of God, is from the 139th Psalm, where David exclaims:

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence.

If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;

Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. (Psa. 139:7-10.)

If this is to be taken as the outcry of the conscience-stricken, self-condemned defiler of Bathsheba and the murderer of Uriah, it does but show how the consciousness of guilt remains with the sinner to whom God has vouch-safed the spirit of repentance. If it be a figurative allusion to the sins and punishments of Israel, it teaches the same lesson. That David was not here consciously declaring the omnipresence of a formless, spiritual essence, and that he did not so conceive his God, is clear from his contemplation of the infinite goodness of God and his exclamation, "in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me."

But these passages admirably illustrate the omni-presence in which the Latter-day Saints believe—an omnipresence that operates by and through God's influence, power, and authority, an omnipresence of men before God, not of God in men.

All in His Presence

A man standing on the mountain peak has within his presence all that lies within his horizon—every cliff, canyon, mountain stream, brook, and river; every hill and valley; every hamlet, town, and city. He sees the lightning play here, the rain fall there; he sees the clouds and the whirlwind; the sunshine and the shadow; the tiny beetle at his feet, the bird that soars overhead, the beasts of the field; men come and go in the distances; the life of his world is before him. All are in his presence. But how manifestly error to say that since all are in his presence, that he is in and a part of each and every of them.

So God, enthroned upon the pinnacle of his omniscience and omnipotence has the universe, with all his creations, in his presence, and this is his omnipresence; but that does not put him in his creations, does not make them a part of himself. With the instruments of God's influence, power, and authority, with the instrumentalities by and through which he performs his works, and governs and controls the multiplicity of his creations, we are not now concerned.

Still another passage cited to sustain the concept of an omnipresent, formless, spiritual essence is the Proverb: "The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good." (Prov. 15:3.)

This is quite obviously a figurative expression however considered. But if to be taken literally it indicates a God with parts, not a formless spiritual essence. From any view it shows rather that God is omniscient—all-knowing—than that he is omnipresent.

Some commentators quote two passages from Isaiah as showing the omnipresence of a God of a formless, spiritual essence. The first reads:—

For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. (Isa. 57:15.)

Definite Abiding Place

But Isaiah here fixes a definite abiding place for God where dwell also the spirits of the humble. If by this passage God is declared to be omnipresent in the sectarian concept, so also must it be considered that the spirit of the humble is likewise so omnipresent, for God and this spirit dwell together, but this would prove too much.

The other passage reads:

Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?

But the verse immediately following, begins:

"For all those things hath mine hand made. ..." (Isa. 66:1-2.)

Surely there is here again no suggestion other than that of definite location for God, highly figurative as the first part of the declaration is; while the final sentence expressly declares he possesses bodily parts,—"For all those things hath mine hand made."

The Prophet Jeremiah is also invoked to support the sectarian omnipresence of a God of a formless, spiritual essence:

Am I a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off?

Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord. (Jer. 23:23-24.)

Jeremiah, abiding with "the poorest sort of the people of the land" which Nebuchadnezzar had left at Jerusalem when he carried away to Babylon the first great contingent (2 Kings 24:14), is here engaged in reproving captive Israel, even including the prophets for their iniquities. God seemingly wished to correct the error into which Israel appears occasionally to have fallen—that he was the God of a particular place, the Promised Land. Hence he declared, "Am I not a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not ... afar off?" He, the all-knowing, the all-powerful, could reach the false prophet in Babylon as well as in Jerusalem. They could not hide their iniquities from his omniscience, they could not escape his omnipotence, which filled heaven and earth.

One Final Passage

One final passage cited by the commentators, may be noted. Paul speaking to the Athenians on the text, "To the unknown God," declared:

God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands. (Acts 17:24.)

Murphy's note to this sentence reads, "God is not contained in temples; so as to need them for his dwelling, or any other uses, as the heathens imagined. Yet by his omnipresence, he is both there and every where." (Douay Version, Murphy Red Letter Edition (John Murphy Company, Baltimore & New York), ad loc.)

Truly God could not in the time of Paul, and cannot now, any more than he could in the days of Jeremiah, be led captive and confined in any particular place. Omnipotent, he moves as he wills; omniscient, he sojourns where wisdom requires. Paul speaking to the Athenians was challenging the fundamentals of their paganism, that God dwelt and must be worshiped in temples, and that the service he required was worship only with men's hands. Paul, the trained Pharisee, the metaphysician, the mystic, would, had he wished to announce the sectarian omnipresence of a God of a formless, spiritual essence, have used other and far different language than this. A prophet who believed in such a God would hardly write to the Ephesians concerning the "God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory," and say:

And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,

Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. (Eph. 1:19-21.)

Nor could a prophet believing in the sectarian God have written to the Colossians that Christ "is the image of the invisible God" (Col. 1:15), nor to the Philippians that Christ is "in the form of God." (Phil. 2:6.)

Appreciating Difficulties

But commentators, appreciating the difficulties into which this sectarian concept of omnipresence drives them, admit that "He is not everywhere in the same sense, but he is in some places in a way that he is not in others," and in support of this they cite the words of Christ spoken in the Passover chamber just before he left for the Garden of Gethsemane:

Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I. (John 14:28.)

They cite also the words spoken to Mary Magdalene who, discerning the Christ and not the gardener, evidently rushed toward him when "Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." (Ibid., 20:17.)

Surely it must be that if God were everywhere, how unnecessary for Christ, the Only Begotten, the Firstborn, of the Godhead, to ascend to his Father and his God.

The Gospels, too, clearly show Christ's intimate communion with the Father during his whole mission on earth, to justify a contention that he must go from where he was to the Father if the Father, being everywhere present, were then actually with him. The forced admission of the learned commentators itself shows the error of their concept. Had God been actually present with Christ, no matter where Christ was (as God must be if everywhere present) then how unnecessary, how deceptive Christ's message to Mary and the Apostles that he must go elsewhere to join his Father and God. Here was one moment for the Christ to make plain the truth. If God was then with him, about him, and part of him, this was the time for the declaration. Another moment was when having gone for a last walk with the Apostles, he reached Bethany and raising his hand in a blessing, he ascended into heaven. Why the deceptive going to God, if God was there with him?

Nor does the sectarian concept of omnipresence stop, nor can it stop with God. The words of Christ regarding himself require the commentators to attribute sectarian omnipresence to him also, to him of body, parts, and passions, and to attribute to Christ such omnipresence, such a formless, spiritless essence, while he, Christ, still lived and moved among men and ministered unto them.

"In the Midst of Them"

Christ, teaching the troubled, vacillating, faint-hearted Nicodemus declared, "And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven." (John 3:13.)

Interpreted as the commentators interpret analogous passages referring to God, this must mean that though Christ was there present in the flesh with Nicodemus, he was also and at the same time then present in heaven.

When the Apostles came to Christ at Capernaum disputing who should be greatest in the kingdom of heaven, Christ, after declaring to them that "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven," further declared: "For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matt. 18:18, 20.)

Interpreted as the sectarian concept of omnipresence requires, this passage would mean that if two worshiping groups met in Christ's name at different places at the same time, then Christ, the being of flesh and blood and bone must be actually with both groups at the same time. If it shall be said that not his physical body but his influence or "spirit" would be present, that his presence would be with them as was the presence of the man on the mountain peak with his world, then there is destroyed the omnipresence for which the sectarian contends, and there is declared and revealed the God of ancient Israel and of the Latter-day Saints who is become omnipresent in the true sense.

Again, just before his ascension into heaven, and while giving to the Apostles their final commission for their ministry, Christ said, "lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matt. 28:20.)

Here also if Christ were to be with each and every of his Apostles always as he says, then he, the being of flesh and bone, he, the physical individual (both before and after the resurrection), must be in two or more places at the same time, a conception quite beyond the powers of the human mind.

Attributes of the Father

With the actual omnipresence here predicted of the Christ, the Latter-day Saints have no dispute. They believe and maintain that Christ, being in the image of the Father, has the attributes of the Father. They have no difficulty with the concept that the influence, the wisdom, the power, the authority of God and of Christ can be exercised at any point at any time.

Reflection raises the question as to what difference there is between the sectarian concept of the omnipresence of God, that he is everywhere, which necessarily puts him in and makes him a part of everything, and the old pagan philosophy which gave to every hill, and grove, and brook its own particular deity. Is there a difference in essence between these beliefs, or is sectarian omnipresence a mere spiritualization of the earlier pagan concept?

The foregoing passages present the full case for the concept of the omnipresence of God. Treated as evidence, each and every one of them, and all of them together, fail when tested by the ordinary rules applicable to matters of evidence (either in law or in logic), to establish the fact for which they are cited. Evidence of the probative value of this would be rejected as a ground for action in any of the material affairs of life.

God has given to all his creations upon the earth, to the very earth itself, a due and proper individual form. Every plant, every animal has its own shape that lasts through life; and to the successor of each comes that same shape. The minerals of the earth have each their due and proper form when left to obey the law and order of their creation. Lastly, man has his form to him given, and his offspring after him. The laws of God, as shadowed in his works, know only order and form; these they inexorably demand. When God gave to his children his greatest gift, without which they were lost to him, he gave the gift in due and proper form and figure,—a man, the Christ who was in the image of the Father—our Father, Christ's Father.

Who shall say that God has made a law and given an order for his creations which violate the principles of his own existence?

No. God is not a formless, spiritual essence, not a being without body, parts, or passions. All his works cry out in protest at the thought. God is an exalted, omniscient, omnipotent, deified being of the same divine order as the children of his creation and of his own First-born and Only Begotten.

"And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. ...

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them."

Genesis 1:26-27
