J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Personality of God from a Biblical Standpoint

THE VERY beginning of the record of God's dealings with man announces his creation in the image of God.

And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness...

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. (Gen. 1:26-27.)

Thus was man created and put upon the earth. The Latter-day Saints accept this statement in its plainest and simplest import, they do not believe the language is figurative; their conception of God does not permit them to believe it is either deceptive or equivocal. They believe that Elohim standing at the pinnacle of the work of creation of this world and its peopling life, declared in simple language and straightforward statement the great eternal truth that man is the offspring of God, in form and figure the same as God, of the same order of being with God, with an eternal intelligence implanted within him, which shall forever grow in grace, wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, even finally unto perfection.

In Very Deed and Fact

We are not unacquainted with the doctrine that "This image of God in man, is not in the body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual substance, endued with understanding and free will"; nor with the statements of other commentators that the likeness here is a "spiritual, intellectual and moral likeness." (See Douay Version, Murphy Red Letter Edition, and The New Indexed Bible (John A. Dickson Publishing Co., Chicago, 1901), ad loc.)

But with these doctrines as applied to this text, we are not in accord.

That man is spiritual and temporal, that, as Paul declares, "There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body" (1 Cor. 15:44), is one of the fundamental beliefs of the Latter-day Saints; but they affirm that the creation here recorded is the creation of man's natural or temporal body, which is in very deed and fact in the image and likeness of God, its Creator, for as he said later when giving to Noah the law governing murder, "in the image of God made he man." (Gen. 9:6.)

That such is the true meaning of creation in an image or likeness, as those words are used in the Bible text, appears to be put beyond controversy by the record of the birth of Seth. The scriptural record reads:

...In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

Male and female created he them...

And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth. (Gen. 5:1-3.)

It is the belief of the Latter-day Saints that there is the same image and likeness between God the Creator and man, that there is between Adam the father and his posterity; they firmly believe that these words, image and likeness, are used with identical meaning and signification in both texts.

It is worthy of reflection that God thus declared his act and his purpose in the beginning of the record of his dealings with his children, and leaves man with this one account thereof, as if by this means to prevent, by avoiding multiplicity of statement, even the possibility of misinterpretation and misunderstanding.

God Appears to Man as Personage

But that God has a body, of which man is an image and likeness, is shown by an abundance of other direct evidence. Time and again God has shown himself to men as a man, from the time of Adam even until the present.

To Abram on the plain of Moreh the Lord appeared and first announced and made with him the great covenant, later repeatedly confirmed, that his seed should possess the land. (Gen. 12:7.)

Later, "when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect... And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him..." (Gen. 17:1-3.) It was on this occasion that God changed his servant's name from Abram (a higher father) to Abraham (a father of many nations). (Ibid., v. 5.)

A little later, Abraham sat at his tent door on the plains of Mamre, in the heat of the day, and the Lord, with other personages, again appeared unto him, and Sarah prepared a meal and they ate. Later the personages "turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the Lord." Then occurred that wonderful discussion between God and Abraham as to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, where, upon Abraham's persistent intercession, God finally promised, "I will not destroy it for tens' sake. And the Lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place." (Ibid., 18:1-8, 22, 32-33.)

Nothing appears in this text to justify the interpretation (made in Murphy's note, Douay Version) that the three personages were angels and that two went away immediately "whilst the third, who represented the Lord, remained with Abraham," for the record says the Lord talked with Abraham; the record shows that Abraham believed he was talking with the Lord after the other personages had left. It is not conceivable that the Lord and his angels would have practiced deception not only upon Abraham but upon mankind since born.

After Abraham died, Isaac, to escape a famine, journeyed to the land of Gerar, apparently on his way to Egypt.

And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of. (Ibid., 26:2.)

A little later when Isaac, now the well-digger, had, at the behest of Abimelech, gone to the valley of Gerar and dwelt there, "the Lord appeared unto him ... and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake." (Ibid., 26:16, 24.)

To Jacob there came visitations also.

And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram, and blessed him....

And God said unto him, I am God Almighty....

And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him. (Ibid., 35:9-13.)

Commentators are of the opinion that the description in Ezekiel refers to God where that prophet said,

... and, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate. (Ezek. 40:3.)

A Man's Voice

So of the vision recorded in the eighth chapter of Daniel, where that prophet declares—

... behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man. And I heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision....

Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and set me upright. (Dan. 8:15-18.)

So also the subsequent vision of the glory of God by Daniel:

... I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel; Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz:

His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in color to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude....

Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me....

Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the ground.

And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands. (Ibid., 10:4-10.)

John's Vision

While the vision of John on the Isle of Patmos, as recorded in the first chapter of Revelation, is by some commentators regarded as a theophany (Scofield), yet the Latter-day Saints believe that the Being so appearing to John was the Son and not the Father (Rev. 1:10-19, D & C 19:1); yet John did in vision see God the Father and his Son, the Lamb, for he bears witness:—

... I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands;

And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. (Rev. 7:9-10.)

Thus to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Ezekiel, Daniel, and John, there came the glorious vision of God the person. In two of them the record expressly affirms he came as a man and each of these holy men talked with God.

Like unto their testimony, is the record that "Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God." (Gen. 6:9.)

And so of the great Enoch, "translated that he should not see death" (Heb. 11:5), Enoch, the only prophet of God who, as the Latter-day Saints believe was ever able to lead his people completely to righteousness (Moses 7:69), of whom the record says, "And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him." (Gen. 5:24.)

Surely it cannot be that God has vouchsafed such a record so simple and plain in the natural meaning of its text to his children, as declaring something which is not. God would not sport with us over the prize of eternal life, which comes through a knowledge of him. Who shall face his God at the judgment day, having in the flesh denied his personage.

References to Physical Attributes

The scriptures are filled with reference to the parts of God's body. While Israel was camped at the foot of Sinai,

... he said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off.

And Moses alone shall come near the Lord: but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him....

Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:

And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink. (Ex. 24:1-2, 9-11.)

Written with God's Finger

Later at the Mount, when God gave unto Israel the law, it is recorded:

And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God. (Ibid., 31:18.)

The Lord had already said unto Moses:

... Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them. (Ibid., 24:12.)

Moses later repeated the account to Israel:

And the Lord delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the finger of God; and on them was written according to all the words, which the Lord spake with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly. (Deut. 9:10; for obvious figurative uses of the phrase "finger of God," see Ex. 8:19; Luke 11:20.)

The New Testament again and again asserts that Christ sits in heaven on the right hand of God. Mark records that "after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God." (Mark 16:19.) Paul so affirmed to the Romans (Rom. 8:34), to the Ephesians (Eph. 1:20), to the Colossians (Col. 3:1), and to the Hebrews (Heb. 10:12). Peter likewise declared it in the first of his Epistles (1 Pet. 3:22) and again at Pentecost (Acts 2:33).

But of all the testimony to this point, none reaches so far and explains so clearly as that of Stephen, the first martyr, who, having arraigned Israel for its unbelief, and the council maddened, having "gnashed on him with their teeth," cried out, when he "looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God. And said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:55-56). Surely Stephen, his body racked with the agony of a barbarous death, did not falsify a record concerning his Maker whom he was about to meet.

God Talks with His Children

From the first day when "God said, Let there be light" (Gen. 1:3), until Malachi closed his record with God's promise to send Elijah, "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord" (Mal. 4:5-6), from generation to generation during this full time of recorded history, at each of the glorious theophanies, God is declared to have talked with men, his children. He commanded Adam not to eat of the tree of knowledge; after the Fall, Adam and Eve heard "the voice of the Lord God" who "called unto Adam" and "said unto the woman," and "said unto the serpent." (Gen. 3.) "Noah walked with God.... and God said unto Noah...." (Ibid., 6:9-13). The Lord talked with Abraham (ibid., 12:1;13:14;22:1 et seq.), and the Lord spoke unto Isaac (ibid., 26:2) and unto Jacob (ibid., 31:3;35:1).

So in the great covenants which God has given to his children, from the time when after blessing them he gave to Adam and Eve the great elemental command, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it" (ibid., 1:28), down through the covenants with Adam, after the Fall (ibid., 3:14-19), with Noah, after the Flood (ibid., 8:20-22; 9:1-27), with Abraham (ibid., 12:1-3; 13:14-18; 15:1-18; 17:6-8; 22:15-18), with Isaac (ibid., 26:1-5), and with Jacob (ibid., 28:13-15), covenants which God remembered (Ex. 2:24), down through the covenant he made with the whole people of Israel through the great law of Sinai (Ex. 20), and the covenant for the gathering again to Palestine (Deut. 30:3), until God said to Nathan in the Davidic covenant, "Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the Lord" (2 Sam. 7:4-17; 1 Chron. 17:7-15)—in each and every of these the divine record is that God verily spake the words by which he and his children were to be bound, and be judged and be blessed throughout the ages.

To Moses, at the very beginning of his mission "God called ... out of the midst of the bush" (Ex. 3:4), proclaiming who he was and that Moses was to deliver Israel. But Moses, demurring, said unto God, "Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you." (Ibid., 3:13-14.) And from that time until Moses finished his work, God talked with, commanded, pleaded with, and instructed Moses, until, as the record goes, "the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend." (Ibid., 33:11.) In chapter after chapter, on page after page, the holy record bears witness that God spake with Moses "whom the Lord knew face to face." (Deut. 34:10.)

As to all of these the language is that God said, or spoke, and the text either expressly states, or leaves room for no reasonable doubt that the speaking was by voice as man to man. When some means of communication other than this is used, the scriptures clearly so state, as when the record declares that he "came unto Abram in a vision" (Gen. 15:1), or when he communicated through angels (ibid., 22:11 et seq.).

God Has Passions

The scriptures are likewise filled with testimony that God possesses and exercises the same great elemental feelings that are possessed by man. He himself declared at Sinai, "for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments" (Ex. 20:5-6); and when the second tables of stone were given to Moses, the Lord passed before him and proclaimed, "for the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God." (Ibid., 34:14.)

Nahum declared "God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth ... and is furious; the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies. The Lord is slow to anger ... and will not at all acquit the wicked." (Nah. 1:2-3.)

Moses sang of God, "To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence." (Deut. 32:35.) Paul exclaimed, "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord" (Rom. 12:19); and David cried out, "O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thyself." (Psa. 94:1; see also Psa. 99:8; Isa. 34:8; 35:4; Jer. 50:15; 2 Thess. 1:8; Heb. 10:30; Jude 7.)

And when Moses and Israel sang their song unto God, they declared, "The Lord is a man of war" (Ex. 15:3); not, suggest the commentators, as the Vulgate has it, the "Lord is as a man of war." (Bishop A. J. Maclean in Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible, sub voce "God.")

"Who," said Nahum, "can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire." (Nah. 1:6.) Paul declared to the Romans, "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness" (Rom. 1:18), and he exhorted the Colossians to abandon evil things "For which things' sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience" (Col. 3:6); God speaking to Moses of the Children of Israel worshiping the golden calf, said, "Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them" (Ex. 32:10), and to Eliphaz, the Temanite, he said, "My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends." (Job 42:7.)

But God is not wholly a being of wrath and vengeance, not wholly a God of war. He declared to Moses, as he gave the second tables: "The Lord, The Lord God merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin." (Ex. 34:6-7.)

Paul writing to the Romans in reproof of their sins, said, "And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?" (Rom. 2:3-4.)

A God of Love

He is a God of love, for Christ himself declared to Nicodemus that "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son"; later Jesus said that "he it is that loveth me"; that "the Father himself loveth you"; and in the intercessory prayer he declared to the Father, thou "hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.... for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world." (John 3:16; 14:21; 16:27; 17:23-24.)

Paul repeatedly affirmed the love of God (Rom. 5:8; Eph. 2:4-5), and John declared "God is love" (1 John 4:8-16); and so through almost endless expressions with which the Old and the New Testaments are filled, bearing record of God's infinite love.

Thus the Holy Writ is filled with the testimony of God's holy men from Adam to the Apostles of the Master, that God is a Personage, having a body, having parts, and possessed of the great elemental passions; that man is in the image and likeness of God. The Latter-day Saints affirm that taken all together these evidences leave no reasonable doubt that God is a Being of the same order as man; and that in his recorded appearances to man he was not "veiled in angelic form," but that he appeared to them in his own proper person, in form of a man. (See The Scofield Reference Bible, C. I. Scofield, ed., (Oxford University Press, New York, 1917), p. 115.)

But all the evidence thus far adduced falls short of that given by the work, the life, the being of Christ, "the only begotten of the Father." (John 1:14.)

Paul's Testimony

That Christ was in the image and likeness of God, Paul time and time again declared. To the Corinthians he said Christ "is the image of God." (2 Cor. 4:4.) To the Colossians he exclaimed in exaltation of Christ, he "is the image of the invisible God." (Col. 1:15.) To the Hebrews he affirmed that Christ is "the express image of his person" (Heb. 1:3; in A.S.V., "the very image of his substance," and in the Douay Version, "figure of his substance"); to the Philippians he bore testimony that Christ was "in the form of God" (Phil. 2:6), and commentators have declared that the word "form" here used means "the form by which a person or thing strikes the vision, the external appearance." (Scofield, ad loc.)

Christ himself speaking in Solomon's Porch at the Feast of the Dedication, declared, "I and my Father are one." (John 10:30; and see ibid., 14:11.) Prior to this time while attending the Feast of the Tabernacles, he had said, "Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also... I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him... I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me... I speak that which I have seen with my Father." (Ibid., 8:19, 26, 28, 38.)

In the last hour in the Passover chamber when, in reply to the question of Thomas, "How can we know the way?" Christ had said, "If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father," but Philip, doubting as much as did Thomas later and almost demanding a sign, begged, "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us," and "Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?" (Ibid., 14:5-9.)

The Same Figure and Form

Christ here spoke of himself while still in mortality, as he lived and moved among men, while he still ate and drank with them, while he still blessed and rebuked them, suffered with them, healed them of their infirmities, physical and spiritual; he was here Christ, the man, with form and figure, that could cleanse the temple of those who had made of the house of God "a den of thieves"; and it was the same Christ, the same man, the same figure and form, with the same hands and feet, and body, who still spoke as he had always spoken, face to face, man to man, and who said to his Apostles after his resurrection: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have" (Luke 24:39); and later to Thomas, "Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing." (John 20:27.) Christ, "the image of the invisible God," and resurrected to immortality, still looked and acted as a man, still mingled with men as a man, still taught them with the voice of a man, still ate and drank with them as a man. (Luke 24:42-43.)

Who in the face of all this can doubt that God is in the form of man, of the same order of being as man, for Christ "the only begotten of the Father" who "is the image of the invisible God," so stood both as mortal man and as man resurrected to immortality.

To know this, is to know God, and to know God is life eternal. Christ in the most beautiful of all prayers, petitioned, just before he entered the Garden, "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:1-3.)

Which may God grant to all of us.

"And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him:

That he lives!

"For we saw him, even on the right hand of God..."

Doctrine and Covenants 76:22-23
