J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

Modern Revelation on the Personality of God

WE HAVE discussed the belief of the Latter-day Saints that God is not a formless, omnipresent, spiritual essence, and that on the contrary the declarations of the prophets of God and the records of his dealings with his children, as recorded in the Bible, clearly establish that God is a Being of the same order as men, with body, parts, and passions. Now we are to discuss the personality of God from the standpoint of modern revelation. This will lead us to the ancient records revealed in these last days, the revelations given to the prophets of this dispensation, the inspired utterance of these same prophets, and the theophanies granted to him who, by and through the grace, power, and authority of God, opened this, the greatest and last dispensation.

Pearl of Great Price Testimony

The account of the creation recorded in the Pearl of Great Price puts beyond doubt that man is in the actual image and form of God. To Moses, who declared to Satan, "For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten," God said, "I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God... And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so... And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them." Adam, prophesying after the birth of Seth, said, "In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; in the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created and became living souls in the land upon the footstool of God." (Moses 1:13; 2:1, 26-27; 6:8-9.)

Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon bears an equal testimony. King Limhi speaking to his people declared "that man was created after the image of God." (Mosiah 7:27.) Ammon, instructing King Lamoni, said, "I am a man; and man in the beginning was created after the image of God ..." (Alma 18:34); later Aaron preaching to the father of King Lamoni, affirmed, "God created man after his own image" (Alma 22:12); and in the revelation given to Joseph Smith in April, 1830, on church organization, it is declared that God "created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them." (D & C 20:18.)

Repeated references are made to the parts of God's body. Alma, the son of Alma, declared, after his conversion, "... then shall they confess, who live without God in the world, that the judgment of an everlasting punishment is just upon them; and they shall quake, and tremble, and shrink beneath the glance of his all-searching eye" (Mosiah 27:31); and Jacob instructing the people of Nephi, after the death of Nephi, declared he must speak unto them "under the glance of the piercing eye of the Almighty God." (Jacob 2:10.)

Lehi, blessing Joseph, his lastborn in the wilderness, and repeating a prophecy of Joseph who was sold into Egypt and who foresaw the deliverance under Moses, declared that the Lord had said, "But I will write unto him my law, by the finger of mine own hand." (2 Nephi 3:17.)

Amulek, recounting his ancestry unto the people who were in the land of Ammonihah, declared he was a descendant of Aminadi; the "same Aminadi who interpreted the writing which was upon the wall of the temple, which was written by the finger of God." (Alma 10:2.)

A Voice out of Heaven

When, after his resurrection, the Savior appeared to the people of Nephi, in the land Bountiful, his approach was heralded by "a voice as if it came out of heaven"; and they understood it not, either at the first or second call, but on the third, "they did understand the voice which they heard; and it said unto them: Behold my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." (3 Nephi 11:3, 6-7.)

So in the writings of Moses regarding the Fall, Adam and Eve "heard the voice of the Lord God, as they were walking in the garden, in the cool of the day; and Adam and his wife went to hide themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden. And I, the Lord God, called unto Adam, and said unto him: Where goest thou? And he said: I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid..." (Moses 4:14-16.)

The glorious theophanies of Moses recorded in the same writings place the matter beyond any possible doubt.

Moses, says the record, "saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence. And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless? And, behold, thou art my son...thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten." (Ibid., 1:2-6.)

When this vision closed, Moses exclaimed in an ecstasy of joy: "But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." (Ibid., 1:11.)

Another Visitation

To Moses there came another visitation from God, after Satan had tempted him. Calling upon the name of God, he, Moses, "beheld his glory again, for it was upon him; and he heard a voice, saying: Blessed art thou, Moses, for I, the Almighty, have chosen thee... Moses called upon God, saying: Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them? And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face." (Moses 1:25, 30-31.)

But God has revealed further knowledge as to his personality. It will be remembered that Paul repeatedly declared that Christ was in the image and form of God. (2 Cor. 4:4; Col. 1:15; Heb. 1:3; Phil. 2:6.) We have just seen that God declared he made man in the image of himself and the Only Begotten. (Moses 2:26-27.) I recall to your minds also that Paul declared, "There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body," though Paul seems not to have understood the exact relationship between the two. (1 Cor. 15:44-46.) But the writings of Moses made known through Joseph Smith make the matter clear. Moses records that God, after reciting that, "Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them," and after declaring that "I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them," further declared: "For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth... And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth..." (Moses 2:27; 3:1, 5.) Thus man was created "spiritually" in the image of God and of the Only Begotten.

Became a Living Soul

The record then continues:

And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul... nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created... (Moses 3:7.)

As to this "natural" body or body of flesh and bones, Adam declared, in a prophecy already quoted:

In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

In the image of his own body, male and female, created he them... in the day when they were created and became living souls in the land upon the footstool of God. (Moses 6:8-9.)

Thus man was created "naturally" in the image of God.

That the natural body of man is in the image of the spiritual body of man, that the two bodies of man, natural and spiritual, are very counterparts, is put beyond question by the record of the glorious manifestation of Christ to the brother of Jared, millenniums before Christ took upon himself a body,—for Christ himself has declared, "I was in the beginning with the Father." (D & C 93:21; and see Moses 2:26.)

The brother of Jared, having built the vessels by which he and his people were to "cross this great deep" was importuning the Lord to touch the stones which he "did molten out of a rock," so that, being touched, they would light the vessels on the voyage. So great was the faith of this mighty man that "the Lord stretched forth his hand and touched the stones one by one with his finger. And the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood..." (Ether 2:25; 3:1, 6.)

But the vision did not end here, for after declaring to the brother of Jared, "never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast. Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image," the Lord proclaimed, "Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh." (Ether 3:15-16.)

By His Own Testimony

Thus by his own testimony Christ had a spirit, a spiritual body, and was to have, and did have, a body of flesh and bone. It is the belief of the Latter-day Saints that since, as Paul says, Christ "is the image of the invisible God" (Col. 1:15), that God also has a spirit, a spiritual body, and a body of flesh and bone. Nor may we pass on without observing that since man is "in the similitude of his Only Begotten" (Moses 1:13), man also has a spirit, a spiritual body, and a body of flesh and bone.

And this the scriptures declare, for the Lord showing Abraham the creation in vision, said, "I came down in the beginning in the midst of all the intelligences thou hast seen ... and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits... and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." (Abraham 3:21, 23.)

The Latter-day Saints believe that these intelligences were co-eternal with God. As the Lord said to the Prophet in a revelation given at Kirtland in 1833, "I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn.... Ye were also in the beginning with the Father.... Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.... Behold, here is the agency of man.... For man is spirit." (D & C 93:21, 23, 29, 31, 33.)

That man has a spiritual body is evidenced by the account already given in the writings of Moses that man was created spiritually in heaven before he was given a natural body. That man has a natural body, we are, ourselves, the final evidence. Thus man is indeed "in the similitude of his Only Begotten" (Moses 1:13), who "is the image of the invisible God" (Col. 1:15), with a spirit or intelligence, a spiritual body, and a temporal body, which latter are the counterparts, one of the other. Evidence could not be stronger that man and God are of the same order of being.

Like a Man in Form

It was these facts which lay behind the declaration of the Prophet Joseph when he announced at King Follett's funeral the principle that made havoc of the erroneous doctrines of Christendom:

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,—I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked, and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith, (2nd ed., Deseret News Press, 1940), p. 345.)

Here is the language of very assurance, of actual knowledge. By what right did the Prophet so speak?

Dispensations of the Gospel

From the earliest beginning of recorded time until now, man has traveled spiritually in identic, recurring cycles. Through this full stretch of history God has, time after time, striven with the co-eternal spirits which he tabernacled with spiritual and material bodies, seeking to lead them not only to salvation but to exaltation, and the great body of these same spirits, so embodied, have as each renewed effort was made, exercised their free agency and wandered into forbidden paths.

In this effort of God to bring these spirits to exaltation, the first dispensation came to Adam, Michael, the prince, the archangel. (D & C 107:54; 128:21; 88:111-116; Rev. 12:7.) He possessed the power and authority of God through the Melchizedek Priesthood, or the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God (D & C 107:2-3, 41), he having received this Priesthood "in the Creation, before the world was formed." (The Prophet on Priesthood, July 1839, History of the Church, Vol. 3, pp. 385-386.)

Adam walked and talked with God who taught and led him; Adam had the Gospel to save men, for Moses declared, "And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost." But while Enoch was able so to lead his people that he "and all his people walked with God," yet Cain brought murder and corruption and the spirit of disobedience into the human heart, and the peoples of the earth waxed in wickedness and corruption until "God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth." (Moses 5:58; 7:69; 8:30.)

Then came the Flood.

The next dispensation came to Noah after the Flood, who was commanded to multiply and replenish the earth (Gen. 9:1); he also possessed the Melchizedek Priesthood, received at the hands of Methuselah (D & C 107:52); he also had the Gospel, received before the Flood, in a truth and purity which had sanctified Enoch and his people; he also "was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God." (Gen. 6:9.) Yet the people dwindled in unbelief and wickedness and the peoples of the world were lost to God. The second cycle of God's power and authority, of a Gospel plan, of belief, of unbelief, of disbelief, and of wickedness to destruction had run its course.

The Almighty was forced to call Abraham from a heathen worship and an idolatrous family to usher in the next dispensation, by and under the authority of the Priesthood and to restore the Gospel. (Abraham 1; D & C 84:14.) And God came to Abraham and talked with and blessed him. (Gen. 12:7; 17:1-5; 18:1-8; 18:22, 32-33; 26:2.) So was ushered in the Abrahamic dispensation. But after Isaac and Jacob, to whom God also appeared, and whom he instructed and blessed, there came the bondage in Egypt and then even the chosen people forgot their God and departed from his ways. Thus again there was a falling away from the true path; for a third time the cycle was complete.

Face to Face

Then God came to Moses, first in the burning bush, afterwards in the glory of the appearance of Sinai (Ex. 3:4; ch. 19, 20; 24:1-11; 31:18), and Moses opened his dispensation endowed with the Melchizedek Priesthood (D & C 84:6), having talked with God "face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend." (Ex. 33:11.) Moses "sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God; but they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence.... Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; and the lesser priesthood continued...." (D & C 84:23-26.) The fourth cycle had run its course.

Then came the Meridian of Time, the Atonement of the Only Begotten; the establishment of the Apostolic Church; the falling away and final apostasy; the loss of the Priesthood. Man was again wandering in the spiritual wilderness. Once more the cycle had been completed.

And now was the time come, predicted at Patmos, when God decreed that again his Priesthood should be restored to earth, his Church again established, in this the last dispensation, that man should again have opportunity to exercise his free agency until salvation or condemnation. "And I saw another angel," said John, in words familiar to the ear of every Latter-day Saint and dear to his heart, "fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14:6-7.)

In Mighty Prayer

Troubled in spirit, devoutly and honestly humble, and moved by a faith which might have removed mountains, a lad, for "the word of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision" (1 Sam. 3:1), having read that, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him" (James 1:5), went to his God in mighty prayer, just as Adam and Noah and Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and Moses had done before him, and God, answering that prayer dealt with this lad just as he had dealt with them of old. Uncertain as to which of all the ways followed by the various Christian sects was the right way, the lad appealed to God. Let him tell his own story:

At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture.

So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

Two Personages

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!

My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join.

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. (P. of G.P., Joseph Smith, 2:13-20.)

Let me ask who doubts or disbelieves this simply told, matter-of-fact story of this the most glorious vision of all recorded time—for here for the first time, has the Father and the Son appeared together as glorified Personages—if God appeared to Adam, to Enoch, to Noah, to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob, to Moses, and to the prophets of Israel then following, if God appeared to the lad Samuel in the temple, why not to the lad Joseph in the woods? Who shall deny God's power to appear when his divine purpose sanctions or requires? And while the personalities of those mighty ones of ancient days are so obscured by the mists of time that the faithneeding critics of today even deny their existence, we know that Joseph lived, that he gave the testimony we have read, and that he sealed that testimony with his life, for no one can doubt but that to live in peace he had only to retract. Men do not willingly die for a lie.

As in All Dispensations

Following this vision, God moved his work forward as in all the preceding dispensations. The Priesthood was restored; the Gospel, "the everlasting gospel" of John, was revealed in its ancient purity; the Church was organized in the exact similitude of that established by the Son and his Apostles. Man had again his free agency, coupled once again with full opportunity, and woe to him, declare the scriptures, who chooses the way of darkness. The last cycle for man has begun.

Once again the Father and the Son appeared together in this dispensation, this time to Joseph and Sidney Rigdon, appeared to them just as he appeared to Moses and Aaron, to Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel (Ex. 24:9-11), just as certainly, just as actually; and of this further vision the two declare:

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (D & C 76:22-24.)

Thus does modern revelation and vision and teaching (I have scanned but a few of them) declare that God is a personal Being, of the same order as man, with body, parts, and passions. Well might the Prophet declare at Ramus, "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit." (Church History, Vol. 5, p. 325.)

This is the faith and belief of the Latter-day Saints; it is the doctrine upon which they are prepared to rise to eternal glory or fall to eternal condemnation. On this faith they hazard eternal life, nothing doubting.

Circumscribed by Law

To those who deny to God a body and who make of him a spiritual essence—a mere force, god-force if you will, I beg to suggest this thought—but without entering the field of metaphysical philosophy: The postulated godforce must, from its manifestation, be not only intelligent, but also all-intelligent and hence all-powerful. The Latter-day Saints believe that "the glory of God is intelligence." (D & C 93:36.) The great forces of which man knows—heat, light, electricity, are each and all bound and circumscribed by law; they move and operate in an appointed and prescribed way; they are not masters, but slaves, slaves of intelligence, even that of the finite mind. Man knows no intelligent force. Intelligence is manifest to man only through material entities as if intelligence itself were entitative, as indeed the infinity of human intelligence is proof, and as the Latter-day Saints believe. All human experience, all human knowledge protest the concept of a god-force; they sanction an intelligence functioning through a material entity.

To those who look for and await a scientific demonstration of God, that shall lead to a knowledge devoid of any "if," I offer this thought: A knowledge of the scientifically knowable comes only by and through a demonstration to the senses of man: science repudiates any allegation of knowledge which is not demonstrable to the senses. To that which science cannot hear, see, feel, taste, or smell, or the effect of which it cannot experimentally demonstrate to the senses, it denies existence. But as these senses are exercised by finite man, they have the imperfection of finitude. No two men hear, see, feel, taste, or smell in precisely the same way. Thus, sense-knowledge must always be imperfect, not because the knowable is imperfect, but because the means of knowing are imperfect.

Nothing Doubting

And because of this and because finite mind cannot know when it has the infinite truth, man cannot know when he has reached the ultimate truth; there is and must always be—it is of the very essence of the true scientific spirit—an "if" in sense-knowledge. So when man seeks to find God by sense-knowledge, when he looks for scientific demonstration of God's existence and attributes, he shall never escape that "if" which his very method of knowing postulates. You who seek and expect thus to escape the "if" in your God, will perish in despair. The grief of the doomed shall be your portion. And in this we see how unstable the belief of those who depend for their testimony of God upon signs, for signs are but sense-knowledge which tempt unbelief.

If you shall escape the "if," if you would know God, you must go to God in faith and prayer, nothing doubting, and to you shall come the knowledge of the Spirit, which, beyond compare, exceeds the knowledge of the senses. And remember faith is the gift of God. (Eph. 2:8.)

Paul declared to the Corinthians:

For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God....

But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. (1 Cor. 2:11-12, 14.)

Again I come to the elemental thought of the wonderful prayer of intercession, the preamble to the final act of the atoning mission of the Only Begotten:

Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee:

As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. (John 17:1-3.)

"The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." Matthew 8:20
