J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

Testimonies of the Divinity of the Savior

JESUS, returning from his forty days in the wilderness, came into the midst of the multitude gathered together at Bethabara to hear John and receive of his baptism, whereupon John proclaimed: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." The next day Jesus came again, and John bore further witness, this time regarding the manifestation of the Holy Ghost at the baptism of Jesus, saying: "And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God." (John 1:29, 34.)

So solemnly testified John to the Jewish world and to all men born on earth in whatever time; and in this testimony is bound up the basic truths of Christian faith and knowledge—the identity of Jesus as the Messiah, the Fall of Adam, and the Atonement for Adam's Fall by Jesus the Christ, the Only Begotten of the Father.

But John was not alone in this exact testimony of Christ as the Lamb of God, the Redeemer.—And I shall tell my story today mostly in the recorded language of God the Father, of Jesus the Christ, and of God's servants and prophets.

Years after the baptism, John the Revelator was to speak, under divine inspiration, of the "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world"; and Peter declared we are redeemed "with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world." While Job cried out to his heckling friends in an ecstasy of joy and triumph: "I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God," Paul, addressing the Corinthians in that great sermon on the resurrection, declared: "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (Rev. 13:8; 1 Pet. 1:19-20; Job 19:25-26; 1 Cor. 15:21-22.)

These testimonies all hold but one language,—that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world, and that testimony must come to every child of God, for it is written that 'every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ.' (Isa. 45:23; Rom. 14:11; Phil. 2:10-11; Mosiah 27:31; D & C 88:104.)

Birth Foretold by Prophets

The birth of the Atoning Sacrifice, the Lamb of God, had also been foretold by the ancient prophets of Israel. Isaiah declared: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel," "which being interpreted," says Matthew, "is, God with us." The Psalmist sang of him as begotten of the Father, and spoke also of his goodness and mercy and righteousness, of his care for the poor and the needy whose souls he would save; the Psalmist boasted of the Messiah's strength and power, of his justice and judgment, and declared that through him the throne of David should endure forever; he repeated a supplication of the Lord to the Father and proclaimed the Lord a priest of Melchizedek who should judge among the heathen; he told in graphic detail of the agony on the cross even to Christ's almost despairing outcry, when all had forsaken him: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Isa. 7:14; Matt. 1:23; Psa. 2, 72, 89, 102, 110, 22.)

Chronicled and Witnessed

When the hour was near for Jesus to come to earth and take a mortal body, an angel told Mary she should bear a son; and to Joseph the husband of Mary he revealed that the son should save his people from their sins. The unborn John bore witness to the presence of Deity when Mary visited Elisabeth. On this hemisphere Jesus himself foretold his birth as of the next day. In Palestine, an angel announced the birth to the shepherds tending their flocks on the hills, while a multitude of heavenly voices caroled, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." His star appeared in the heavens. (Luke 1:26-56; 2:8-20; Matt. 1:18-25; 2:1-12; 3 Nephi 1:4-14; 21-22.)

Then was fulfilled the great prophecy of Isaiah:

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. (Isa. 9:6-7.)

So was the birth of the Lamb of God foretold long before and chronicled and witnessed at the time.

Heralded by John

Who this person is who came to earth thus heralded by the heavens, is told to us by John in the mighty preface to his Gospel:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made....

He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not....

And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth. (John 1:1-3, 10, 14.)

And in the prayer of the Great High Priest, Jesus himself besought the Father: "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." (Ibid., 17:5.)

Thus Jesus is the Christ, the Only Begotten of the Father, the Creator of the world and all it contains, the Redeemer of its people, the children of God, all of them, the Word that is God.

Nor do we who rejoice in these witnesses and their testimonies and who are blessed with a pure testimony of the truth of the Gospel of Christ, give up one hairs-breadth of that full divine stature given to Jesus, the Carpenter of Nazareth, by the scriptures; we accept it without cavil or reservation.

We cherish in our hearts the witness which God himself has borne of his Son.

We recall that when Jesus came up out of the water, after John had baptized him "to fulfil all righteousness," the Holy Ghost descended upon him, and God the Father's voice came from the heavens, declaring: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 3:17; Mark 1:11; Luke 3:22.) We acknowledge that the same voice and the same message came to Peter, James, and John as Jesus communed with Moses and Elias at the time of the Transfiguration. (Matt. 17:5, Mark 9:7; Luke 9:35.) We declare that the same voice and same message came, in our dispensation, to the boy Prophet Joseph praying in the woods.

Testimonies of Jesus

With equal fervor we keep ever present in our minds the testimonies of Jesus himself about himself.

We remember that when in the temple at twelve, he said to his mother and Joseph, who had sought for him three days: "How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49.)

We do not forget that when he first cleansed the temple of the money changers and those selling therein oxen and sheep and doves he drove them out, saying: "Take these things hence: make not my Father's house an house of merchandise." (John 2:16.)

We rejoice in the contemplation of the words of Christ's great sermon to Nicodemus, a "ruler of the Jews" who came to him timidly by nightfall: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved"; and likewise we have joy and see salvation in his great declaration to the woman of Samaria: "I that speak unto thee am" the Christ. (Ibid., 3:16-17; 4:26.)

We do not forget that while at the Feast of Tabernacles, he solemnly testified to those about him in the temple: "Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am not of this world.... I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.... When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things" (ibid., 8:23, 26, 28); nor do we forget that later in Jerusalem as he taught the parable of the Good Shepherd, he again testified: "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father." (Ibid., 10:17-18.)

Likewise it is in our memories that at the time of his arrest, as he bade Peter, who would have used force, to put up his sword, Jesus said: "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels"; we remember that in the last discourse in the Chamber of the Last Supper, he declared, answering Philip's question, the oneness of the Father and himself; and that to the disciples disputing among themselves who should be greatest, he declared: "For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost." (Matt. 18:11; 26:53; John 14:8 ff.)

So do we ever hold clear in our memories the words between Jesus and Peter in the coasts of Caesarea Philippi: "But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." Also do we ever remember that rarely beautiful scene between Martha and Jesus, returned to Bethany to raise Lazarus from the dead: "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this? She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world." (Matt. 16:15 ff.; John 11:25 ff.)

We Cherish These Testimonies

We cherish up all these mighty things in our hearts, these witnesses and these testimonies. They are the light that guides our feet through these dark days that afflict us; they are our cheer and our comfort in our sleepless nights filled with anxieties over our loved ones on the battle fronts; they give us the hope and the faith to go daily to our tasks, never despairing amidst all this woe, misery, and death; they spell our happiness and salvation in the life to come.

Every Christian remembers that as Christ and his disciples left the temple for the last time and went and sat on the Mount of Olives in the evening of the third day of the week, his disciples, recalling his lament over Jerusalem, and his teachings that he should come again, asked him privately, "Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?"

Jesus, answering, broke forth in a mighty prophecy that visioned in a few bold phrases, the signs of his coming at a later day. He spoke of plagues and earth-quakes, of wars among the nations and of disturbances in the heavens, of persecutions of the saints, of false prophets, of betrayers, of false Christs, of deceivers, those of whom John later declared "confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh," and that such a one "is a deceiver and an antichrist." (Matt. 24; Mark 13; Luke 21; 1 John 2:18 ff.; 4:3; 2 John 7.)

Speaking of this same time an ancient prophet of this hemisphere said the day would come when men "lifted up in the pride of their eyes" would "put down the power and miracles of God, and preach up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning,"—iniquities of which Satan was the foundation. (2 Nephi 26:20 ff.)

Duty of Those Who Accept Christ

In these days when antichrists are abroad, just as Jesus foretold nearly two thousand years ago, denying Jesus, his Sonship and Messiahship, belittling things of the Spirit and magnifying all the pleasures of the flesh, it is fitting that we who accept the Gospel of Christ should declare our testimonies of the truth, for as he said: "... ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) We should fail in our duty, be recreant to our trust, did we do less than this.

We do not deny the Christ, we accept and proclaim him as the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, the First Fruits of the Resurrection.

We do not deny the miraculous conception; we accept the virgin birth with all that this fact connotes and implies.

We do not deny his divinity; we accept it. He is the Only Begotten of the Father. He is the Word; he was with God "in the beginning," having the glory of the Father.

We do not deny he was the "Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world," "slain from the foundation of the world," foreordained to his mission before the world was. We declare in all soberness, first, that the Fall of Adam brought the separation of man from the presence of God, a spiritual death; and next that it brought both mortality and mortal death. We declare that man may in himself overcome the spiritual death by so living and observing the commandments of God that he may ultimately again stand and live in the presence of God. This is given to man to do, through the exercise of his free agency, also a gift of God. Our Heavenly Father has from the first given man sufficient truth to enable him to do this. But to overcome the effects of mortality and mortal death, it was necessary that an Atonement should be made for the failure of Adam, exercising his free agency, to observe the commandment that God gave. So Christ came to earth. But "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." Thus the Only Begotten of the Father came to earth, to make Atonement for Adam. For again, as Paul declared, "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (John 1:29; Rev. 13:8; D & C 29:41-50; 2 Nephi 2:22-25; 9:5 ff.; Alma 12:16, 32; 40:26; Helaman 14:18; Moses 5:11; 1 Cor. 15:22.)

We do not deny his resurrection; we proclaim it, in its most literal sense. We declare that Christ took up the very body he laid down. And that through his death and resurrection, he opened the graves of all God's children, who in due time will all be resurrected,—the good and the bad, who thereafter will stand before the final judgment seat to receive whatever reward is due them for the lives they have led.

We do not deny the miraculous in Christ's life; we accept it as the most natural manifestation of the power and authority of the Son of God, whether the miracles be of healings or those sometimes called "nature miracles," which to us testify directly of his creative power.

We do not deny, we accept each and every of the doctrines and teachings of Christ, as they were pronounced by him. We declare they contain a full and complete plan of life and salvation and that exaltation in God's presence will come to all those who shape their lives thereby.

In that eventful third day of Christ's final week, in the temple certain Greeks came to Philip, saying, "Sir, we would see Jesus." But Jesus, finishing his discourse, went and hid himself. (John 12:21-26.)

Not To Be Seen from Casual Desire

Many today seek, just as did the Greeks, to see Jesus, as if the view of him would come for the mere asking. But he is not to be seen from the casual, curious, or doubting desire.

To the millions of the humble and honest in heart who are discouraged, weary, grief-stricken, despairing, and who would see Jesus, and who, seeing him, would know him, we repeat the words spoken by Jesus to this generation: "... every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D & C 93:1.)

"His will" is easy to know. The Gospel of Christ is simple. It is the "way of holiness" that is so plain that "wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein." (Isa. 35:8.)

To you who seek truth, we say leave off, sweep out of your path, the false reasonings, the rationalizing, the spirit-destroying questioning of men, who without faith themselves would kill the faith of others; leave off trying to make your finite mind reach into and comprehend the knowledge and wisdom of the infinite; read the Good Book yourselves in humility and faith; pray while you read; live the doctrines Jesus taught,—and God will not leave your soul barren, for it is written, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.)

"Come Unto Me"

Then shall you see Jesus; you will walk and talk with him in spirit; and into your lives will come a joy that will fill your being to the brim: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) And Jesus himself bade us come to him. For he has said to all men of all times: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matt. 11:28.) For "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

I leave with you my witness that Jesus is the Christ, the very Messiah that was to come, the Redeemer of the world, the First Fruits of the Resurrection, the Savior of us all.

May God add to and perfect the testimonies of all of us.

"And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.

"And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men."

Matthew 4:18-19
