J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Perfect Missionary

IN THINKING a bit about missions and missionary work, I find myself running back in my mind to the great service and the activity of the Perfect Missionary, of the Missionary who was taught by his Father and our Father. Over and over again in the course of his ministry, he said he did only that which he had seen his Father do, and taught the things which his Father had taught.

As I ran back over some of his early experiences, I was struck with the incident that records the first words recorded in the scriptures of what he said. You will recall that on the occasion of his visiting Jerusalem to attend the Passover when he was twelve, he remained behind and his father and mother went on. Missing him, they came back and searched for him for three days. At the end of that time they found him in the temple precincts, talking, discussing with the learned ones of the Jewry, things concerning which the official record says little, but of which the Apocrypha tells us more.

Recognition of Christ's Divine Authority

You will recall that after their long searching, they finally found him, Joseph and Mary, so discoursing with these learned ones, and Mary, reproving him, said, "Thy father [meaning Joseph] and I have sought thee sorrowing." I have always thought that that indicated the kind of intimacy there was in the Nazareth home of the carpenter, where Joseph was called "father." To that reproof from the mother, Jesus answered, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:48-49.) I think that was a recognition of his divine authority, of his personality, an authority which is held by every missionary who goes out, one divinely commissioned, a mission to do, and authority to do it. You may call it a testimony if you will. It seems to me that that was the first thing that the Savior made clear,—his divinity and his authority.

The Lesson of Obedience

The second words, as recorded, had two elements in them, relating to missionaries. That was when he came to John to be baptized. John protested, saying, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" Jesus replied: "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (Matt. 3:14-15.)

The great lesson that I get there, more particularly as affecting the missionaries, is that of obedience, obedience to the law and the commandments. Then this was the due and the proper order of conversion and membership. You know the great revelation that came there,—the testimony of the Father himself, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," and the descent upon Jesus of the Holy Ghost. (Ibid., 3:16-17.) The baptism is the first ordinance of the Gospel.

The Bestowal of the Holy Ghost

Then my mind turned on to the first recorded sermon of Jesus, which was preached to the timorous Nicodemus, who came to him at nighttime, too fearful to come under the broad light of day—the great sermon, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) He spoke of the necessity for the Holy Ghost and its bestowal. It descended upon Jesus as he came up out of the water on the river bank.

Gospel Fundamentals

The great fundamentals of the Gospel were the ones Jesus thus taught. They came in due and regular order and to me it seems that those great essentials, and I am sure no one could disagree, are the great things which should be in the minds of all those who seek to teach, to instruct, to persuade, to convert members to the truth, that they may join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

May I wish for all of you and pray for you the very fullest measure of all the blessings that it is needful for you to have in the spread of the Gospel,—a burning testimony, patience, forbearance, charity, love, and all the rest of the great Christian virtues, that you may find through your words entrance to the minds and hearts of every soul who is seeking the truth, that you may bring to that soul the greatest blessing that he can receive, putting him on the way to immortality and eternal life.

"Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in threat:

"Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." Matthew 7:13-14
