J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

Divine Authority and the Latter-day Saints

IF THE present widespread and growing tendency among the Protestant laity, and clergy, too, to deny to Christ his Messiahship, his divine origin, and his resurrection, shall continue, it is not difficult to foresee a time when the Christian world will be divided into two great camps—those who will regard Christ merely as a great teacher and philosopher, the framer of a great ethical code, but without a divine parentage or resurrection, and those who, being the true followers of the lowly Jesus will hold to the Christ of the Gospels, the Epistles, and the Apocalypse, the Christ who has dominated and controlled the growth and development of the civilized world for nearly two thousand years, the Christ who with a love divine gave his life that man might be saved from that death to which the Fall of Adam subjected him, and provided for the children of God a salvation and exaltation in the worlds to come.

Among those churches which shall thus stand for Jesus as our Elder Brother and Savior, none will face the crisis more unflinchingly than The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This is its duty and its privilege, declared from before the foundations of the world; and when that time shall come to the world, this Church as a Church must stand or fall upon the truthfulness of certain great principles which are fundamental to its philosophy.

The All-Important Question

Christ, at the very beginning of his ministry, convinced the people of the synagogue at Capernaum, of the deep and fundamental truth which underlay his ministry amongst the people,—the truth that he "taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes." (Matt. 7:29.) From this day at Capernaum to the day of his ascension into heaven, the all-important question which ever confronted those he taught, was the question, "Who is Jesus,"—a question of authority.

When later Christ healed a demoniac in the synagogue, the people, with intensified feeling, cried out,—"What a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out." (Luke 4:36.) Nor, as his ministry grew, did this feeling among the people lessen, for later at the conclusion of that greatest of all his discourses—the Sermon on the Mount—where he declared he came to fulfil, not to destroy, the law, and laid down the great elements of the new commandments, the people again were astonished at his doctrine, and again proclaimed that he taught as one having authority and not as the scribes.

The belief in his authority found one of its most perfect expressions in that beautiful, implicit faith of the centurion, who, with an apparent comprehensive understanding of the Christ, besought him to heal the servant, saying:

Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.

For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. (Matt. 8:8-9.)

By What Authority—?

Again, in the final week of Christ's ministry, on the day following his second cleansing of the temple, and his cursing of the barren fig tree, the scribes and chief priests, frightened at the effect of his doctrines upon the people, fiercely, secretly plotting his death, and fearful lest after all they might be rejecting the Messiah, demanded of Christ, teaching in the temple, "By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?" (Ibid., 21:23.)

Thus with them the great problem was authority, for he had already told them that Satan also performed miracles, and, in their desperation, they thrust their enquiry at the very root of his mission.

When the final contest shall take place between good and evil, and there shall be again enacted that creation-old battle typified in the contest between Moses and the Egyptian magicians, then shall it be vital to man to know by what authority the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints perform their works.

What was this power and what was this authority which Christ exercised in his ministry among men? On this point the Gospels speak with the utmost clearness. Not only did the Savior again and again deny any credit or virtue in himself for the power he possessed and the authority he exercised, but he repeatedly affirmed that all he had was the Father's.

In that great sermon which he preached in the synagogue at Capernaum after he returned from the desert place belonging to Bethsaida, Christ said, "For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." (John 6:38.)

Later, speaking in the temple while in Jerusalem attending the Feast of the Tabernacles, Jesus declared: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me." (Ibid., 7:16.)

Then Shall Ye Know

Speaking again in the temple during the same feast and responding to the imperious inquiry of the Jews, "Who art thou?" the Savior said: "... he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.... When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things.... I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me." (Ibid., 8:26, 28, 42.)

When the seventy returned from the missions upon which he had sent them, Christ, in a hymn of praise to God, declared: "All things are delivered to me of my Father." (Luke 10:22.)

At the Feast of the Dedication at Jerusalem while walking in Solomon's Porch of the temple, he again asserted, "... the works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me." And a little later, on this same occasion, when the Jews took up stones to stone him, he said: "Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me? ... If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not." (John 10:25, 32, 37.)

In the temple on the third day of the last week of his ministry, while the scribes and Pharisees were drawing more closely about him their fatal net, Christ, declaring his Messiahship, said:

For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.

And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. (Ibid., 12:49-50.)

Finally in his last address to his Apostles prior to his crucifixion, delivered as he and they were on the way to the agony and the betrayal of the Garden of Gethsemane, Christ responding to Philip's request that Jesus show them the Father, said to the Apostles: "... the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works." (Ibid., 14:10.)

Attributes of the Priesthood

Thus Jesus, during the whole of his ministry, from the first to the last, and always with a perfect understanding of the source of his powers and authority, gave to God the Father the full credit and honor for all the powers, authority, and strength which he ever possessed.

That these powers and authorities were the attributes of the Priesthood of God, seems clear from the words of Paul, who, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, asserted that Jesus was "made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec," and continued:

But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood.

Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him ... .(Heb. 7:24-25.)

But the marvelous, Christlike works of many mighty men, ancient and modern, show that the powers and authority which Christ held and exercised and by which he performed his works, were on the earth before the time of Christ and have been restored since; and that these other workers also have been high priests after the order of Melchizedek.

What is this Priesthood of which Paul spoke? President Joseph F. Smith, speaking at the October conference of the Church in 1901, declared: "... the Holy Priesthood is that authority which God has delegated to man, by which he may speak the will of God as if the angels were here to speak it themselves; by which men are empowered to bind on earth and it shall be bound in heaven, and to loose on earth and it shall be loosed in heaven; by which the words of man, spoken in the exercise of that power, become the word of the Lord, and the law of God unto the people, scripture, and divine commands ... . It is the authority by which the Lord Almighty governs his people, and by which, in time to come, he will govern the nations of the world. It is sacred, and it must be held sacred by the people." (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. (Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, 1939), p. 140.)

"... which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years." Doctrine and Covenants 84:17
