J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Priesthood, an Everlasting Principle

ANCIENT and modern Apostles have declared that, "The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years." (Church History, Vol. 3, p. 386; and see Ex. 40:15; Heb. 7:3.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith announced, "The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed" (ibid., pp. 385-386); and in the Book of Abraham, it is declared that the Priesthood "came down from the fathers, from the beginning of time, yea, even from the beginning, or before the foundations of the earth to the present time." (Abraham 1:3.)

The Lord has revealed in modern times that after and from Adam this Priesthood, the power and authority which God on occasion delegates to his servants, passed in regular succession down through the patriarchs of old, in an order which was instituted in the days of Adam (D & C 107); that it bridged the Flood through Noah, from whom it passed by due lineage to Abraham, who received it from Melchizedek, from whom the higher Priesthood takes its name. From Abraham the Priesthood passed by proper descent to Moses, who received it from the hands of Jethro. Moses attempted to lead Israel according to its precepts, but they would not follow, and then God "took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also," but left the lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, which "holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel; which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments." This lesser Priesthood, God "caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John," who "was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power." (Ibid., 84:25-28.)

This briefly is the account of the Holy Priesthood from Adam to the Lord, in whose hand was all power.

To Preach the Gospel

Did Christ leave any of this power and authority on the earth when he ascended to the Father?

Mark tells us that after Christ returned from the Second Passover he left the Sea of Galilee where he had been laboring and went into a mountain where he called unto himself "whom he would: and they came unto him. And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach." (Mark 3:13-14.)

Thus Jesus began to bestow upon his disciples, and first upon the Twelve, a part of the powers which he himself possessed "to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (Articles of Faith.)

From the record in the Gospel it appears that Christ from this time forward to the end of his ministry, added authority upon authority to those of his chosen followers who were to carry on the work of God after he should go.

Shortly after his tragic visit to Nazareth, the home of his early life, where he was rejected by the people of Nazareth and apparently by his own family—his brethren and sisters, and they had attempted to destroy him, Christ went through Galilee teaching and healing. In the course of this ministry he sent on their first mission the Quorum of the Twelve. As they went he commissioned them with "power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases"; they were to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick; to take nothing for their journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece; and they were to shake off the dust from their feet for a testimony against those who would not receive them. (Luke 4:29; 9:1-6.)

Messiahship Declared

Shortly after the visit of the Savior to Jerusalem to attend the Third Passover of his ministry, Jesus, returning to Galilee, went from thence to the regions of Caesarea Philippi. At this place occurred that wonderful discourse with his disciples in the course of which Peter for the first recorded time declared Christ's Messiahship, and was promised certain keys of the Priesthood. This great discourse began with the Savior's question: "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" The record continues:

And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?

And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.

And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Matt. 16:14-19.)

The promise to give thereafter unto Peter "the keys of the kingdom" seems clearly to show that up till this time, certain keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood had not been conferred upon the Apostles. What are these "keys" of which the Savior spoke? President Joseph F. Smith has declared that these "keys" are "the right or privilege which belongs to and comes with the Priesthood, to have communication with God ... . It is the right to enjoy the blessing of communication with the heavens, and the privilege and authority to administer in the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, to preach the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins" (Gospel Doctrine, p. 142); and the Prophet Joseph declared that these "keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority." (Church History, Vol. 3, p. 386.)

The Transfiguration

It was but six days after the great testimony of Peter, and Christ's promise to him, that the Savior took Peter, James, and John into a high mountain apart "and was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light. And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him," and a cloud "overshadowed them: and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him." (Matt. 17:1-2; Mark 9:7.)

Modern inspiration tells us that it was at this time that the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood were given to Peter, James, and John under the administration of the Savior, Moses, and Elias. (Church History, Vol. 3, p. 337.)

Is it to be wondered at that now possessed of these keys, Peter, in a burst of that emotion of which he of all the Apostles possessed most, should exclaim: "Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias." (Mark 9:5.)

But the Twelve were not the only ones whom Christ sent out to preach his Gospel and administer in its ordinances, and therefore, upon whom he conferred the Priesthood in whole or in part. Just after the Transfiguration, Jesus "appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come." (Luke 10:1.)

These seventy were given power and authority similar to that given to the Twelve when they were sent out; they were to carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes; they were to bestow peace upon whatsoever house they entered; they were to heal the sick, and to preach the kingdom of God; they were empowered to wipe off from their feet the dust of any city which did not receive them as a witness against it. When these seventy returned to Christ, they themselves were filled with wonderment and joy over their work, for, said they to the Lord, "even the devils are subject unto us through thy name." Then the Savior "rejoiced in spirit" at the power which the Father had vouchsafed unto them, and said, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you." (Ibid., 10:2-21.)

Divine Patience

But not yet had Christ conferred upon the Twelve the full powers and authority which he was to bestow. More was to come. It was on the evening of the day of Christ's resurrection from the dead. The Apostles, fearful of the Jews, had assembled together behind locked doors. Suddenly Christ appeared in their midst with the greeting: "Peace be unto you." They sat terrified, believing they beheld a spirit, for in spite of all the instructions they had received, not yet did they understand his death and resurrection, nor did they believe therein. Christ, knowing the unbelief of their very hearts, said unto them: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." And when they had seen his hands and feet "they yet believed not." Then with a patience and charity that was divine, Christ asked for food and with them ate their broiled fish and honeycomb, that they might know it was indeed he. (Luke 24:36-43.)

The meal finished, Jesus said again unto the whole eleven present there: "Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained." (John 20:21-23.)

Signs Shall Follow

Finally, Christ again instructed the Apostles and again gave power and authority unto them just before his ascension. He was leading them from Jerusalem out towards Bethany, the home of Lazarus, Martha, and Mary—the place which seems to have held for him the most of peace, the most of sympathy, understanding, and love, the most of home, the home to which, in the hours of his sorest trials he turned, after his neighbors and kin, unbelieving and cruel, had rejected him at Nazareth. Whether as they walked on with him towards Bethany and that home, the Apostles knew of his impending leave-taking or not, and of the further commission he was to give them, the Gospels do not declare; but Christ knew, and we can imagine with what infinite tenderness and love, and perhaps sorrow and yet with what consciousness of divine power and authority he declared unto them:

All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.

Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. (Matt. 28:18-20.)

And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;

They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. (Mark 16:17-18.)

... and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. (Matt. 28:20.)

Thus were the Apostles endowed with powers and authority of the Holy Priesthood to establish the Apostolic Church among the nations of the earth.

The promises made by the Savior as to the signs which should follow believers were literally fulfilled. Beginning with Pentecost they did speak with new tongues (Acts 2); beginning with the healing of the lame man at the gate of the temple by Peter, they did heal the sick (Acts 3); they did cast out demons (Acts 16:16; 19:12); and Paul was bitten by a serpent and did feel no harm (Acts 28:5).

For a time the Apostolic Church grew with vigor; but soon errors in doctrine crept in; fundamental principles were abandoned; and a falling off began. One cannot read the various Epistles of Paul, of Peter, of James, and of John, nor the great visions of the Apocalypse, without perceiving how rapidly there came into the Church that condition of which the Savior spoke when leaving the temple and, awearied with the tumult, the caviling, the abuse and insult of his murderers, he went out toward Bethany and reaching the Mount of Olives, sat down and told them the signs which should precede his coming.

Evils Did Come

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that the evils and the iniquities which Christ in that sermon predicted, did come; that the false prophets and the false Christs spoken of by him, did appear; and that the wickedness of the peoples of the earth became so great that God took from them those powers and authority appertaining to the Holy Priesthood which Christ had bestowed upon the early Apostles, and left man for generations in his wickedness without the directive and saving power of that Priesthood.

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that finally there came upon the earth that condition which is so wondrously described by John when he tells of the woman upon whose forehead was written, "Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth"; the woman who was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication, the woman drunken with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus; the woman about which the angel said, "I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns.... These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: ... And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth." (Rev. 17.)

The Vision of John

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that then was made fact that other vision of John:

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fal'en, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. (Rev. 14:6-8.)

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that the Gospel was restored through Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and that the restoration of that Gospel carried with it the restoration of the Holy Priesthoods, Aaronic and Melchizedek; that the Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John the Baptist at Harmony, Pennsylvania, on May 15, 1829, in the following words:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. (D & C 13.)

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that later, Peter, James, and John, those upon whom the Savior, Moses, and Elias had conferred keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood at the time the Savior was transfigured, came and conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery that same Priesthood; that Peter, James, and John later ordained and confirmed Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to be Apostles in his Church and special witnesses of his name (ibid., 27:12); that still later, in 1841, the Savior revealed unto Joseph Smith the officers belonging to the Priesthood after the "order of Melchizedek, which is after the order of mine Only Begotten Son." (Ibid., 124:123.)

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that as in the days of Christ so in modern times, Seventy have been called "to preach the gospel, and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world." (Ibid., 107:25.)

To Go into All the World

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that in this day the Lord has instructed his servants to go into all the world and to preach the Gospel to every creature, acting under the authority of the Holy Priesthood given unto them by God, baptizing in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and laying on hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, even as the Apostles of old. (Ibid., 35:6; 68:8.)

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that they who believe and are baptized shall be saved and they that believe not shall be damned. (Ibid., 68:9.)

It is the testimony of the Latter-day Saints that their members, endowed with the Holy Priesthood of Melchizedek and holding the proper offices thereunder, have gone into the world to preach the Gospel and that the same signs which followed the Apostles of old have followed them. They have cast out devils; they have spoken with new tongues; they have taken up serpents; if they have drunk any deadly thing it has not harmed them; they have laid hands on the sick and they have recovered. And all this has come under and pursuant to the promise made to them by the Lord himself in these days when he said:

Therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost.

And these signs shall follow them that believe—

In my name they shall do many wonderful works;

In my name they shall cast out devils;

In my name they shall heal the sick;

In my name they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf;

And the tongue of the dumb shall speak;

And if any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not hurt them;

And the poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them. (Ibid., 84:64-72.)

As Did the Primitive Church

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that God has established his work in these last days never again to be thrown down, that he has caused his Church to be established with the same officers and powers that existed in the Primitive Apostolic Church, for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has prophets, apostles, patriarchs, high priests, seventy, elders, priests, teachers, and deacons as did the Primitive Church.

It is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that since through the apostasy, and by reason of it, the Holy Priesthood was taken away from the earth, and since through direct revelation and the administration of those ancient men who held the Priesthood, that Priesthood has been restored to the earth upon the heads of those who established and who have since carried on the work of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that therefore this Church, and this Church only, possesses the powers and authority which have from the beginning of time been exercised through the Holy Priesthood and which Christ himself exercised while he was on this earth and which he bestowed upon his Apostles and seventy as recorded by the Gospels, these powers and that authority which alone are the "power of God unto salvation."

Finally, there has been conferred upon Joseph Smith, and there has by him been transmitted to his successors in office down to the present day, the exact authority which was conferred by Christ upon the Apostles of old, in accordance with the promise given to Peter when he declared his first great testimony of the Messiahship of Jesus. The Lord, speaking to Joseph Smith, said:

For I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things, and make known unto you all things in due time.

And verily, verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven.

And again, verily I say, whomsoever you bless I will bless, and whomsoever you curse I will curse, saith the Lord; for I, the Lord, am thy God. (Ibid., 132:45-47.)

Thus the Latter-day Saints declare that they have the same power and authorities, the same Priesthood, which were possessed by the ancient servants of the Lord and by the Savior himself; that they received these powers and authorities under the direct administration of angels and by direct bestowal of Christ; that upon no other people have these powers and authorities been conferred; that by no other people are such powers and authorities now possessed.

As the Lord Has Declared

The Latter-day Saints believe that without the powers and authorities of that Holy Priesthood there is no real joy or happiness in this world, nor salvation and exaltation in the presence of God in the world to come. As the Lord has declared to his servant, the Prophet:

Which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years.

[The lesser or Aaronic Priesthood] ... also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

...For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies....

And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord;

For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood. (Ibid., 84:17-22, 33, 35-39.)

Thus in these last days has God spoken unto us his children.

God grant to each of us, as in his infinite knowledge, mercy, and wisdom shall seem to him best and wise, a living, burning testimony, such as came to great-hearted Peter of old, that when the day of consuming trial shall come, we shall know that God is God, that Jesus is the Christ, the Lamb of God, the Redeemer of the world, that the Holy Priesthood is the authority of God delegated to man for the accomplishment of God's purposes on the earth, and that in and through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel which has been again restored to the earth in all its fulness and glory.

"... the principle of power which existed in the bosom of God, by which the worlds were framed, was faith; and that it is by reason of this principle of power existing in the Deity, that all created things exist; so that all things in heaven, on earth, or under the earth, exist by reason of faith, as it existed in him."

Lectures on Faith 1:15
