J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Living Bread

LOOKING back across the nineteen hundred years that have gone, we marvel that of all of those who walked and talked with Jesus in Galilee and Judea, so few indeed understood or believed his message. And of the countless thousands who have lived and heard his message since his time, how scant the number that have really believed and walked in his way. It has been with great multitudes, even as with the Pharisees in their hypocrisy:

This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. (Mark 7:6-7; Matt. 15:8-9.)

The "Living Bread"

The multitudes flocked to him in Palestine, not for the spiritual truths he proclaimed, nor to follow the pattern of life he declared and led. They cared little for either of these. They came to him because he healed their sick, made whole their crippled, cast out from them their evil spirits. And yet because he cast out devils, they accused him of being in league with Beelzebub (Matt. 12:24 ff.; Mark 3:22 ff.; Luke 11:14-36); when he healed on the Sabbath day, they sought to kill him. (John 5:16 ff.)

They thronged in greatest mass to him when he fed them loaves and fishes without charge, and when, hot in their wild selfishness, they sought to make this free, generous Provider their king.

But Jesus declaring, "I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever" (John 6:51), his disciples murmured and many of them thereafter walked no more with him, for they understood him no more than did the woman of Samaria at Jacob's Well when he discoursed to her about the "well of water springing up into everlasting life" (ibid., 4:14); he proclaiming his own mission, the Pharisees and chief priests sent officers to arrest him (ibid., 7:11 ff.); he declaring he was the Good Shepherd, they said he had a devil (ibid., 10:1 ff.); he explaining his oneness with the Father, they again sought first to stone him and then to take him (ibid., 10:22 ff.); he affirming that "Before Abraham was, I am," they again tried to stone him (ibid., 8:55 ff.); he declaring his divine Sonship, and the resurrection, they sought to kill him. (Ibid., 5:17 ff.)

Evil Powers Knew Him

At Nazareth, his friends and neighbors would have cast him down headlong over a cliff for proclaiming a universal salvation, save that he "passing through the midst of them went his way." (Luke 4:16-30.) Later, rejected again by these and by his own kinsfolk and household, his brothers and sisters (so runs the record), he declared in comment and reproof:

A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house. (Mark 6:1-6.)

But the powers of evil knew him. The Gadarene demons proclaimed him, they knew his message and its truth as they besought him not to cast them out into the deep, bodiless (Matt. 8:28-34; Mark 5:1-20; Luke 8:26-39); so knew him the demon in the synagogue in Capernaum (Mark 1:21-28; Luke 4:31-37), and the demons on the day of miracles when Peter's mother-in-law was healed. (Matt. 8:14-17; Mark 1:29-34; Luke 4:38-41.) And Lucifer, the "son of the morning" (Isa. 14:12), he who fell so far, to the very depths of hell, he knew him on the Mount of Temptation and sought his destruction. (Matt. 4:1-11; Mark 1:12-13; Luke 4:1-13.)

Rejected on the Cross

But his being cast off by the world and by his own did not fill his cup of rejection. At the crucifixion, while the passers-by and the soldiers mocked, scoffed, and reviled him (Matt. 27:39-44; Mark 15:29-32; Luke 23:36-39), he hung on the cross alone, save for a thief on either side, forsaken not only by the throngs of the idle curious, but forsaken by the scores he had healed, by the multitudes he had fed, by the greedy crowds that would have made him king; he hung, forsaken by his disciples, even by his Apostles who had boasted they would be devoted and loyal, even to death itself (Matt. 26:35; Mark 14:31), forsaken by all except his mother, her sister, and Mary Magdalene, and John the Beloved (John 19:25-26), and some women who stood afar off. (Matt. 27:55.) So crucified and hanging in his infinite, forsaken loneliness, his spirit about to go, his mighty grief burst forth in that cry of mortal near-despair, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matt. 27:46; Mark 15:34.)

So he died that by his death we and all other of God's children, born since Adam, might live.

The Resurrected Lord

Then at the break of the third day, the stone was rolled back from the mouth of the tomb, and the Christ arose, a glorified, resurrected being, flesh and bone and spirit reunited, making the perfect soul, the First Fruits of the Resurrection.

Thus Christ's saying to Martha, "I am the resurrection," is an everlasting truth, as unchanging, as enduring, as uncompromising as eternity itself.

To the pressing multitude he preached his great sermon on "the bread of life":

For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world. ...

I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. ... (John 6:33, 51.)

And speaking to his Apostles in the Passover chamber, Christ reiterated:

I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me. (Ibid., 14:6.)

And this fact exists and rules men and the universe whether men accept it or reject it. Eternal truth is not dependent for its existence upon the will or the understanding or the belief of man.

We declare as did Paul that in the resurrection, bodies arise in different glories, dependent upon the kind of lives lived on this earth. (1 Cor. 15:40-43; and see D & C 76 and 78.) We get hereafter that glory, that plane of existence, that status which our lives lived here fit us for. For a law has been given governing all things. If we would get a glory, a reward, we must live the law, do the things, that shall entitle us thereto. If we cannot abide the law, do the things, upon which the glory, the blessing is based, we cannot abide the glory itself. (D & C 88:13 ff.)

And "the way, the truth, the light, and the bread of life" of Jesus are for every one of God's children, freely given to every one who seeks.

The Sermon on the Mount

In the greatest sermon of all time, delivered on the Mount to the multitudes, he taught us some of the essential elements of "the way, the truth, the light, the bread of life," saying:

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for their's is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled.

Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.

Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God....

Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.

But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. (Matt 5:3-9, 43-44.)

Divine Command of Brotherly Love

This divine command of love gives the one and only remedy that will bring lasting peace out of the bloody tragedy that is now devastating the world. Hate is born of Satan; it fosters murder, the second crime in degree of all that God has listed. It strikes the friend of today and makes him the enemy of tomorrow. Once enkindled in a nation, it becomes a fiery furnace that consumes the people that lighted it. Hate-mongers brew a poison that makes victims of themselves. Hate, loosed and world-wide, breaks beyond direction or control. It eats away the righteousness of the nations, it corrodes their tolerance, it rots out brotherly love, it debauches the highest and the lowest, it prostitutes all that civilized man holds most dear, it attacks even the sacred relations of the family hearth.

We Christians professing the name of Christ and proclaiming his Gospel, give the lie to our professions and our proclamations, we "become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal" (1 Cor. 13:1) if we do not live the brotherhood of man; if we do not ourselves obey this divine law of love. So sure as there is a God in heaven who decreed this law, just so surely is there no escape therefrom. But if we live the law, if we live the way of the Christ, we shall inherit the celestial glory, of which Paul spoke (1 Cor. 15:40); we shall be of them "whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical" (D & C 76:70), we shall be of them who "shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever." (Ibid., v. 62.)

Gives a Prayer

In closing I voice a prayer:

Our Father in Heaven: Turn toward us, thy suffering children, thine listening ear. Heed our words of travail and sorrow. Lead us into paths of righteousness. Teach us the humility of thy Son. Grant us power to resist the Adversary. Keep us from temptation. Give to thine erring sons and daughters thy peace and thy comfort.

Bestow upon us in rich abundance the gift of faith, faith in the Gospel of the Christ, for that is a gift of thee, faith in thy goodness, thy mercy, thy love. Build in us the testimony of truth and grant us wisdom to know the truth, for that will make us free.

Cause that charity and patience and forbearance and love of fellow man, may come and abide with us. Banish from our hearts all hate, for where hate resides, thy spirit and righteousness cannot dwell.

We would be thine obedient sons and daughters, walking in the paths thou hast marked for us, keeping thy commandments, following the steps of the lowly Jesus, thine Only Begotten Son. We know our weaknesses and infirmities, we know the flesh is weak. But our desires are for thee and thy ways. Help our spirits to be strong for we would live thy word. Build in us an ever-growing testimony that Jesus is the Christ, thy Son, the Redeemer of the world.

Aid us to this end in our frailties and imperfections. Lead us so to live that we may inherit the celestial glory and abide with thee forever and ever.

And, O our Father: Work out thy divine purposes speedily among the nations, that peace—the world's peace and thy peace—may again fill the earth. And thine shall be the glory and the honor forever.

"But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God."

Luke 18:16
