J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Rich Young Ruler

THE young people of today are peculiarly blessed, and when I say peculiarly blessed, I mean that they are blessed in a peculiar way. Never before in the history, so far as we know, of the world, has there been such a wide diffusion of education among any great people, as exists today among the Latter-day Saints and the people of this nation. Never before in the history of the world, so far as we know, has a whole generation been nurtured in the luxury which has existed among the young for the past fifteen years, and there has been brought to us as servants everything which science could develop or discover.

But that is not the only heritage which the young people have. Not only this material blessing, if it shall prove so to be, have they possessed, but they have also had spiritual and intellectual blessings, more than have come to any other generation within the memory of man. And these heritages are for them carefully to guard.

Youth's Challenge

We sometimes hear the expression used: "A challenge to youth." To me the challenge to youth is the preservation of these heritages.

It is quite true that there have come along with the blessings some evil and some error. It is quite true that we are not entirely sure, perhaps, with reference to certain things, as to whether they are blessings or curses. One of the tasks which the young people will have to face, one of the problems which they will have to answer and solve, is to divide the good from the bad, and in that work I know of nothing that can be more beneficial than a true cultural development which shall develop and make grow the spiritual side of themselves, which will ennoble their thoughts and raise them above the ordinary vicissitudes and problems of life.

It would be a sad thing to me, indeed, if out of a situation of want—in some cases of distress—it would be sad, I say, to me, if out of that there should come to us only a consideration of the material things of life. Sad shall it be, indeed, if all that we shall think about shall be how much we can get of the riches of this life, and riches you know are just as attractive to the young as to the old.

The Rich Young Man

I want to refer here to that wonderful story of the Savior when he was on the road back from Judea through Perea, coming to Jerusalem for the tragic but glorious end. Many things happened on the way. Among them you will recall that he had them bring little children to him to bless, after which he apparently started out again on the road. I want to read to you from Mark, the story of the Savior and the rich young man:

And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?

That is the problem of every young man and young woman today.

And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God.

Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother.

And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my youth.

Then Jesus beholding him loved him....

He seemed to have all the requirements; he seemed to be one whom even the Master himself might love. Then Jesus said unto him:

One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me.

That was not the first time that the Savior had used those words, "Follow me." On the shores of Galilee he had time and again spoken to those humble fishermen, and each time he had said, "Follow me," they had come after him.

And he [the young man] was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great possessions.

And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! (Mark 10:17-23.)

Two Kinds of Riches

My brethren and sisters, there are two kinds of riches, those of which the Savior spoke here, and those which you young men and women may lay up so abundantly for yourselves in the work which you are doing in the Church, and I beseech you, do not let yourselves wander after the riches which this young man had, and which shut him out from following after the Master, whom all must follow and serve if they shall gain that which God has provided for them.

Do not forget the goodness and the mercy and the kindness of the Savior. Do not forget the blessings which the Gospel has for you. Do not overlook the joy of the Spirit, the joy which comes from living as the Savior has taught us to live.

Remember that when the Savior was here and bestowed the blessings which he, the Divine One, had to give, in no case did he give riches. He gave health, he gave strength, he restored sight, he made the dumb to speak, he pardoned sin, he led people from sin. The one thing that he did not do was to give of earthly riches, and in this conversation with the rich young man, he tells us why he did not make this gift.

And so, I would like to leave with you this thought, this message, that you will seek after the treasures of the Spirit, seek after the riches of goodness and mercy and righteous living. Go always after those things which are good. Follow along as you have been doing, seeking the finer cultural things of life. Discard the dross, cast it aside, trample it underfoot; cherish always and guard that which is beautiful in your lives.

Remember ever that Jesus is the Christ. He is not the mere teacher. He is the Messiah, the Redeemer of the world. His teachings and his works and his miracles were all ancillary to that. They were a part of the mission which he had, but nevertheless, he came to this earth the Only Begotten, the Redeemer and Savior of the world. Never overlook that. Never degrade him to the mere place of a teacher; believe in him, look to him always, worship him as the Redeemer of the world through whom alone salvation and exaltation may come.

Let all your activities, everything that you do in life, let them all lead unto this great fundamental fact, that Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah, the Only Begotten, and there shall come to you in this life joy and peace and happiness; there shall come to you more satisfaction in living and following this life than anything else you could do in this world; and in the life which is to follow after this there shall come eternal lives—the highest glory which can come to man.

"These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee:

"As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.

"And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.

"I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do.

"And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was."

John 17:1-5
