J. Reuben Clark, Behold the Lamb of God ( 1962)

The Atoning Sacrifice

WHEN [^1] the Savior came in through the gates of Jerusalem and moved on, on his lowly ass, to the temple, people looked to him and expected from him an announcement that he was the promised king for whom the Jews were looking. They expected him to proclaim himself a political power. I assume they did not know that more than three years before this time, Satan himself had taken Christ upon the high mountain and had offered to him the kingdoms of the world if he would bow down and worship Satan, and that the Savior pushed the crown aside. The Jews, groaning under oppression, smarting under political suppression, thought that he had come to give them a political life.

But such was not his mission. And as the week wore away and he finished his earthly mission, there came unto the multitudes of Jerusalem a feeling that they had been disappointed, perhaps misled.

The Savior's entire mission was devoted to the spiritual side of life and to the relieving of human suffering, physical and mental. His message is a spiritual message.

The reason for his coming was that he might redeem us from the Fall, that he might be the First Fruits of the Resurrection, that he might demonstrate to us that he was the Only Begotten of God in the flesh, that he might show to us he was the Redeemer of the world.

The Last Supper

For many years I have tried at this particular season of the year to have in mind some of the essentials of the great last three days of the Savior's mortality. I have tried to run over in my mind some of the chief events, the death, the crucifixion, and the resurrection of him who has given us the plan by which we may come back into our Heavenly Father's presence.

Therefore I will go forward beginning on Thursday night, the night of the Last Supper in the Upper Chamber, begun by an unseemly controversy as to precedence and signalized by the institution of the Sacrament, which occurred, I feel, after Judas had left the chamber to arrange to betray the Master. That was a great supper. There were great sermons preached by the Master.

When they had finished they went out to the Mount of Olives, where he preached again, and then a little later they retired to the Garden, and the Savior, taking Peter, James, and John, left the rest of the disciples and went a little farther on.

Then the Savior left them and went still farther on and asked them to wait and watch while he was gone. I do not believe that you can understand, I know that I cannot understand, the kind of agony that he went through in the Garden of Gethsemane when he shed drops of blood. I do not know, sometimes I have wondered if anybody who is not a God could understand that. I repudiate, personally, the idea that his agony was caused by any bodily suffering, any fear of death. There was something deep and beyond that, and what it was I do not know.

The burden of his prayer in the Garden was, "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done."

The Arrest and Trial

Shortly after that Judas returned with the crowd that was to arrest the Savior and did arrest him.

He was taken first, in what they say was an illegal examination, to Annas, the real high priest, the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the titular high priest, who had been installed by the Roman government.

From Annas he went to Caiaphas, and it was Caiaphas, who, in an agony of fear and apprehension said, "I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God." And the Savior said to him, "Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power."

From Caiaphas he was sent to the Sanhedrin (it was now nearly morning) and the Sanhedrin passed what apparently was a formal judgment that he was to be crucified.

Before Pilate and Herod

As the Jews could not impose the death penalty, from the Sanhedrin he was taken to Pilate, against whom Christendom has for nearly two thousand years vented its dislike, and yet, as I read the record, Pilate did practically all that the law under which he operated as stated in the Gospels, permitted him to do. Pilate came back to the multitude on at least five occasions and sought to secure the release of Jesus. At first he returned merely saying, "I find no fault in this man." And the multitude renewed their demand for his crucifixion.

Then Pilate sent him to Herod, and Herod sent him back, and Pilate began again the examination of Jesus. This time, and from then until the end, he pleaded that they take Barabbas and release Jesus. Three times at least this was done and each time they said, "Release unto us Barabbas"—and it was their right, apparently, to demand the release of one man on this occasion—"Crucify him,"—Jesus.

During this latter examination it was that Pilate's wife sent to Pilate a letter beseeching him not to do anything to this man. The result of one of the latest examination nations was that Pilate took a basin and washed his hands and said, "I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it"; and the multitude cried, "His blood be on us, and on our children." It is my faith that this has been so for nearly two thousand years.

Pilate ordered that a title be placed on the cross written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, "The King of the Jews." He flatly refused to have the title either changed or removed.

The Crucifixion

Then Jesus was turned over to be crucified, he was scourged, had a wreath of thorns placed on his head. He was stripped of the royal trappings they had mockingly placed upon him; reclothed in his own raiment; then they started for the place of crucifixion.

Jesus was to have carried his own cross, but he was too weak. As he came to the place of crucifixion, they offered him a drink of vinegar and gall, an opiate. He refused it. He then went on to the crucifixion.

Having in mind the modesty which I am sure attached to him, recalling the experience of Peter on the lakeshore, how offensive it must have been when they stripped him naked and then laying the cross on the ground, they laid him upon the cross, the crosspiece under his shoulders, a peg protruding from the upright beam, which he straddled to support his body. They first nailed his hands and then his feet. Then as the next step in this, the cruelest death of which the ancients knew, they raised the cross and let it drop with a jolt into the pit which was dug to contain it, causing the one crucified to suffer excruciating agony.

First Words on the Cross

The first words the Savior uttered were, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."

We can dimly perceive the loneliness which came to him. Apparently only John was present of the disciples, and the women from Galilee and the mother.

Second Words

Of the thieves, one began to upbraid him and the other to plead for mercy, and it was then that what was called the second outcry from the cross occurred, Jesus saying to the one who spoke kindly, "To day shalt thou be with me in paradise."

Third Words

As the Savior looked down into the multitude before him, he saw his mother and John. You recall that he saith unto his mother, "Woman, behold thy son!" Then saith he to the disciple, "Behold thy mother!"

Fourth Words

Then we come to his utter loneliness, when he repeated the words of the Psalm and that outcry of almost human desperation, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"

Darkness Falls

It would seem that at about this time, which was midday, or the sixth hour, darkness fell over the land of Palestine.

Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Words from the Cross

The Savior said, "I thirst," and those in attendance gave him the sponge saturated with vinegar and put it to his mouth.

A little later he cried out, "It is finished," apparently meaning that his earthly work was done. He had gone through his life. He had made the sacrifice.

Finally, just before his death, he cried out, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit."

Thus he became the true sacrifice for the Fall, ordained from the beginning of the world and before.

The Burial

I like to think of the Easter morning two thousand years ago, nearly. Christ, the Son of God, was buried without ostentation or pageantry, without anything but the humble worship of those who were immediately about him. He was carried to his rest and buried in a lent tomb, a newly hewn rock sepulchre belonging to Joseph of Arimathea, recognized as a follower of the Savior.

It is interesting to remember that the day he was buried was the day fixed under the Mosaic Law for the gathering of the first sheaf of the harvest, and as some commentators have noted, that while the women who were seated near the sepulchre returned sorrowful to their homes in the darkness, for their light had gone out, another group from across the Kedron returned joyously, carrying the sheaf, the first sheaf of the harvest.

That was Friday.

Saturday, the chief priests and the Pharisees went to Pilate and petitioned, saying, "We remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the first. Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make it as sure as ye can."

Happenings in the Western Hemisphere

Meanwhile there was darkness on this [the American] continent.

You will remember that there was darkness in Palestine, and that there were some convulsions of nature, but nothing like that which happened on this continent, where the whole face of the land was changed. Apparently at the time the darkness came in Palestine, the convulsions began on this hemisphere.

Cities were sunk, mountains appeared where cities had been, cities were burned, there was widespread destruction which lasted, the historian tells us, only three hours, though many thought it lasted for a much longer time. Highways were broken, roadways were destroyed, whole cities were shaken by the earthquake. The historian tells us first of a storm and then of a tempest and of whirlwinds and of all manner of earthquakes, the cleaving of the rocks, and all the rest.

The Voice

At the conclusion of this, at the end of three hours, the people were mourning and howling, as the word is given in the Book of Mormon, and a voice was heard throughout the land, only a voice, which identified itself in the course of the talk, as the voice of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

And he told them of the cities that had been destroyed, and how. He told them that he was responsible for the destruction. He told them why it was, and the historian tells us that the better part of those who lived righteously were saved, but the rest were destroyed.

Then the voice told them, as I see it, preparatory to the message that he was come to them after his ascension—this was a voice during the darkness—he told them he had come to fulfil the law of Moses and that thereafter burnt offerings were not acceptable to him, but that they should give to him humble hearts and contrite spirits. That was to be their sacrifice. So he told them, this voice, that their old sacrifices were done away. He ceased speaking, and there was silence.

The voice came the second time and told them how often he would have gathered them, Israel—those where he spoke and in Palestine—how often he would have gathered them as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wing, but they would not. Then the voice ceased.

There was silence, and then they began an outcry, lamenting that they had not followed his commandments, that they had broken them, and so had suffered.

That was one thing the Savior did while his body was in the tomb—he came to America and gave them the instructions and the report of the destruction to which I have just referred.

The Dead Hear His Voice

But there is another apparent occupation of his while he lay in the tomb. You will remember that at the Second Passover, where he healed a man at the pool of Bethesda and being reproved for doing that, he had told them, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live." That is all that he said at that time.

Peter enlarges on this principle and tells us (as we have interpreted it, though the exact text does not say so, but at least it gives a clear implication thereof), that during this period while he lay in the tomb, he preached to the spirits in prison "which sometime were disobedient" in the time of Noah, and gave them another chance, "that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit."

To the condemned, believing thief on the cross, Christ said, "To day shalt thou be with me in paradise."

Those are the two principal items about the activities of the spirit of Jesus Christ while he lay in the tomb: coming to America to give instructions and report the destruction which had occurred on this continent, and, preaching to the spirits in prison.

Time, space, disappear when Deity moves; we do not see them in connection with the operations of our Heavenly Father, nor of his Son.

The Resurrection

Returning now to the morning of the resurrection—Sunday—no mortal eye, so far as I know or have read, saw Jesus emerge from the tomb. An angel came down and rolled the rock away from the door. It interests me as to why the Savior himself did not do it. But the record says an angel came.

Before daybreak in the morning, while it was still dark, a priest climbed to the topmost part of the great walls that enclosed the temple precincts and stood there looking southward. He stood four hundred and fifty feet above the valley floor. The priests below called out, "Is it yet light?" and the second question, "Is it light as far as Hebron?" And when the answer came back, "Yes," that was the signal for the beginning of the morning sacrifice in the temple.

At that same hour a solitary woman, half-running, half-walking, went out from the narrow streets of Jerusalem across the valley to Golgotha, where on Friday they had laid away in the tomb our Lord and Savior. She found the stone rolled back. Looking in, she perceived the body was not there. The tomb was empty. She hastened back to Peter and John, whom she had just left and told them.

To this point of time and for some time after, none of the Apostles seemingly had understood what we understand now so clearly, that Jesus was to die and be resurrected the Christ.

Peter and John, running, John outrunning Peter, for he was younger, reached the sepulchre. John looked in but did not enter. Courageous Peter, coming up, strode in and saw the burial clothes lying about. The napkin was carefully folded and placed at one side. John believed. Peter seems not yet to have been convinced. They returned.

And then it would appear that Mary, coming alone, I suppose as fast as she could, came to the tomb the second time. She stood weeping. Within the tomb she saw two angels sitting, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body had lain. They asked why she wept. She answered that they had taken away her Lord, and she knew not where they had laid him. They told her he had risen.

The Resurrected Christ Appears to Mary

She turned about and saw someone, who she supposed was the gardener, and so she said to him, "Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away." The figure spoke, calling her by name, "Mary."

Then, as it seems to have been the case all day, something happened and she recognized the Master, and would have rushed and embraced him, but the Savior said, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father ... and your Father; and to my God, and your God."

Shortly after this, the two Marys came with other women, bringing with them a hundred pounds of sweet spices to be used for the preparation of the body for final burial. They did not understand, either. The women looked in and saw the two angels there. And the angel said to them, "Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth. He is not here. He is risen."

From then until now, the words of that angel stand a witness to us of the actuality of the resurrection.

Christ Appears to the Women at the Tomb

Christ appeared to the women at the tomb. They saw him. They heard his voice. They knew he was resurrected. While he forbade Mary to touch him, he permitted the women to hold his feet.

Christ Appears to the Disciples

Sometime during this first day, he showed himself to Peter, and, in the late afternoon, to the two on their way to Emmaus. "And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." As he sat at meat with them, "he took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them." Their eyes were opened, they knew him, and he vanished from their sight.

They returned to Jerusalem, met with the Twelve, except Thomas. The doors were shut. They told of their visit with the risen Lord. Even as they spoke, Jesus stood amongst them. He reproved and calmed their fears. "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." He asked for food. They gave him and he ate a piece of broiled fish and honeycomb.

Eight days later, the Twelve being again in a room with the doors shut, Thomas now being with them, Jesus again suddenly stood in their midst. He bade Thomas to look at and touch his hands; to thrust his finger into the spear wound in his side, and then, said he, "be not faithless, but believing."

On the shores of the Sea of Galilee, he appeared to Peter, and Thomas and Nathanael of Cana, to the sons of Zebedee and two others, who had gone fishing. "After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once," and of James. Eleven of the disciples visited him on a mountain in Galilee, where he had appointed them to come.

The Ascension

Finally, after forty days, he assembled them together in Jerusalem, and then leading them out as far as Bethany, where Mary and Martha and Lazarus lived, and while they still beheld him, "a cloud received him out of their sight." Two men stood before them in white apparel, and said to them: "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven."

Christ had risen. He had made the great Atoning Sacrifice for our sins.

How glorious is the resurrection (planned from before the foundation of the world) of the Christ, designated in some scriptures, even as of that time, as the Lamb of God. I cannot comprehend what the resurrection did. I have read nothing that explains to my mind what the resurrection, biologically or physiologically, is. I feel quite convinced that if it were explained, that it would be in language and invoking principles that I would not understand. The Lord has given us all that we need to know—that Christ is our Savior, the Redeemer of the world, the One through whom we attain that destiny which is marked out as possible for all of God's children who earn it.

Eternal progression is brought about through that Atonement. We may go on and on forever. That is our destiny through the Atonement of Jesus Christ.

May God bring this fact, this principle, this opportunity, and this destiny into the minds and hearts of all of us, and may we, so knowing and so believing, live his principles and obey his commandments.

"Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice yeinhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

"Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out.

"His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

"From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail." Doctrine and Covenants 76:1-4

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A composite of several sermons delivered on Easter Sunday.
