Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Are Mormons Christians?

I am grateful to the President of the Church for assigning me to come to Britain and to other parts of Europe at this time because it gives me, first an opportunity to meet quite a number of friends whom I have known in former days here and elsewhere, and second, an opportunity to become acquainted with new friends, new members of the Church, and to see the effects of Church organization in this country.

I bring to you the love and blessings of President McKay. He asked me to express to all the members of the Church and to all the friends of the Church his greeting and his love. He, more than sixty years ago, was in this country as a missionary, and I, fifty-eight years ago, was here myself. And so we have, he and I and others, a feeling of warmth for the people over here.

I am advised that there are some here tonight who are not members of the Church and perhaps not acquainted with its teachings, and I wish, on behalf of the leadership of the Church, to extend a welcome to you. I also wish to express to you who have recently joined the Church the satisfaction that we feel in the fact that tens of thousands are joining the Church in many parts of the world-almost a hundred thousand last year. It is remarkable that in a Church so new, so young, there should be as much interest as there is in its teachings, doctrines, and organization. I find as I travel about that there is a growing interest in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Sometimes the interest is unfriendly and critical; sometimes there are those who find it desirable to say unkind things about the Church, but there is a growing feeling everywhere I travel that here is something that should be seriously considered.

Illustrative of that, some months ago the President received a letter from the head of the Theological Presbyterian Seminary in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In the letter he asked President McKay to come or send someone to tell them what we teach. He wished to know what the Mormons have that seems to attract the attention of so many people and to hold the interest of its own people. The President was not able to go and asked if I would take his place, which I tried to do. In the course of the discussions we had with this group, I found an interest which seemed to be rooted in a sincere desire to know how to solve their own problems in their own church-largely a problem of indifference, as they said, a problem of trying to get the people to participate and to come to church and to conform their lives to the teachings of the church. And, as I say, they tried to find out what it was that we have that seems to work, as they thought, somewhat better than what they are trying to do.

One of the things that I would like to discuss with you for a few moments grew out of the discussion I had at that time. I was asked, "Are the Mormons Christians?" I asked him to define what it means to be a Christian. He said, "I think it is one who believes in Christ. " To this I agreed, but, I would add, "One who shows by his life that he believes in Christ, one whose life is patterned after the life of Christ."

Central to everything we teach is faith that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world, the Redeemer, the Son of God. He, under God the Father, was the creator of all that is. Many scriptures substantiate this.

As Paul said:

Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:

For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

—Colossians 1:15-17

We believe not only that He was the babe of Bethlehem born of the Virgin Mary, the youth that lived in and around Nazareth of Galilee, but that He was actually the Son of God: He was the Jehovah of the Old Testament. Again I repeat, central to everything we teach is the doctrine that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God.

I was asked, "If you believe that, why have you a book other than the Bible from which you teach?" That is a question that I think some of our new members, and perhaps some of our older members wish to think through with me for a moment. Why do we have scriptures in addition to the Bible?

First may I assert, as positively as I can, that we believe the Bible to be the word of God. The King James version of the Holy Bible is our Bible. I have had occasion many times in many places to defend our position with respect to the Bible and our faith in it, and I think they who have time to interview our young men and older ones, and our young women as well, will find a rather unusual familiarity with the teachings of the Holy Bible. It is this truth that some have not been able to understand or have not known about.

God is no respecter of persons. He is the God of all the world; He is the Father of all men in the spirit; He loves all men with the same love. When the events recorded in the Bible were written, nothing was known of America. There was no knowledge that there was beyond the waters such a land. Actually that land was very densely populated, and there is ample and increasing evidence of that truth, namely, that there were millions of people in America prior to the time of Christ and subsequent thereto. Due to internecine wars, a large proportion of them were destroyed. But is it not reasonable to expect that a people living somewhat isolated from the rest of the people of the world should, if they were God's children, and if He loved them as He loves all his children, be given the gospel? Is it not likely that they would have had prophets and apostles among them, teachers led and directed by their Heavenly Father? It seems to me that simple justice would require an affirmative answer to that question.

The people in the Western Hemisphere, as well as the people in the Eastern Hemisphere, had visitations from God, instructions from Him through holy prophets raised up by Him, and what He taught them would be scripture the same as his teachings in the Holy Bible-the New Testament and the Old Testament as well. I repeat that Jesus of Nazareth, the Messiah of the New Testament, was the Jehovah of the Old Testament, so what he taught in America became scripture to those people just as what He taught the people of the Holy Land became scripture there.

Time will not permit tonight, but I wish that I had time to discuss what the Book of Mormon is and what it teaches. I must be content to say that there is no teaching in the Book of Mormon that is in any way contrary to the teachings of the Holy Bible. That would have to be true if God did teach the people in America the same as he taught them in the Eastern hemisphere, because God's word is the same in all places.

So the two books, the Book of Mormon and the Bible, became one. One is the story of Judah, the stick of Judah as Ezekiel calls it, the other the stick of Joseph. One tells the story of people among the Jews and their contemporaries and descendants and the other tells of the people of Joseph, who were descendants through Ephraim and Manasseh, and who went to America under divine direction and there lived, built great cities, and had a great civilization. After the visit of Jesus to them they lived for some 200 years in perfect peace, but later through sin and transgression there came upon them, as there have come upon us, perilous times, wars, tribulation, sorrow, and death.

During my lifetime there has been a great change in the attitude of people with respect to the Book of Mormon-a change which has come about largely because more people are coming to know what the book is. Scholars are beginning to study it and are considering it on its merits and judging it by what it teaches rather than prejudice.

Any thoughtful person who wishes to criticize the belief of another person should be fair enough to get the truth with respect to what that person believes. I am under no obligation to defend what you say I believe if I don't in fact believe it. Let me say what I believe and then you can attack my beliefs but don't set up something that you say I believe and then ask me to defend it. And so it is with the Book of Mormon.

I hope that our friends who are here tonight, as you hear more about the Mormons or Latter-day Saints, will take time to obtain accurate information concerning us.

I want to emphasize again that as a member of the Church I believe the Bible to be the word of God, but I'm very grateful to find another book which corroborates and confirms the Bible. I am grateful that the dealings of God with the millions of people in America have been abridged into a record just as His dealings with the Israelites have been abridged into the Bible. I find the two books in perfect agreement, one supplementing the other. My study of the Book of Mormon, and it has been a lifetime study, convinces me that no man could have written that book just as no man could have written the Bible.

Peter says, "Holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." I am convinced that any who will read the Bible with an open mind and desire to know, will find that the Bible is the word of God. By the same token they will find that the Book of Mormon is also the word of God.

When I was presiding in the Mission here some years ago, I received a letter from a professor at Oxford University. He wrote, "I understand that you are the head of the Mormon Church in Britain. I am writing to ask you who wrote the Book of Mormon. I am a professor of languages, ancient and modern, and I want to know who wrote the Book of Mormon. I have just finished reading it for the second time. I hope you will not write and say that Joseph Smith wrote it, because I have read something of his life and of his story. He was not an educated man and he could not have written that book. Don't tell me that any of his associates wrote it because they could not have written it. That book was not written by any modern man." This was the statement of a very scholarly gentleman from Oxford University. When I wrote and told him that Joseph Smith did not claim to have written the Book of Mormon, that it was a translation from an ancient record, he wrote back immediately and said, "That is most intriguing, because as I read the book I saw evidences that it is a translation from an ancient record-that is my specialty." He said, "I am going to come up and talk to you about it," and he did.

When he came to London we talked for quite some time, and he was delighted with what he had found. He said, "Mr. Brown, you haven't yet told me who wrote the Book of Mormon."

I said, "Perhaps you could tell me who wrote the Bible?"

"Well," he said, "the Bible was written by many men. There are records here (we had the Bible before us) from Genesis to Malachi, and from Matthew to Revelation in the New Testament. Many writers, many authors, had to do with the making of this book."

"Well, sir, there were many authors, many writers, of the Book of Mormon. It isn't the work of any one man."

"Well," he said, "you say it is a translation from an ancient language. Tell me, who translated it?"

I replied that the book was translated by Joseph Smith, the Prophet, by the gift and power of God.

He threw up his hands and said, "Now our interview has come to an end. I cannot believe, I cannot accept that declaration. In the first place, God doesn't have anything to do with the writing of books, and, in the second place, in these days the Lord does not give revelations."

Of course, I asked him whether or not God had something to do with the writing of the Bible, and he said, "Yes, but that was a long time ago."

"Well, isn't it possible that the Lord is the same today as He always was? Has He lost the power to talk to men or to instruct them or to give them His holy Spirit so that they may translate his word correctly? Isn't it possible?"

"Yes," he said, "possible, but it isn't done."

"Who says it isn't done?"

"Well," he said, "I say so."

"Well, perhaps in your experience it isn't done, but there were people in the time of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and Ezekiel, and Hosea, Joel, and Peter, James and John and Paul, and others who didn't believe it was possible that there were prophets and apostles among them. So it is today, there are apostles and prophets in the world today."

I want to say to you, our friends who are here and to you new members, as you become better acquainted with these books-the Bible and the Book of Mormon-and as you bring your lives into conformity with what they teach, you will find joy, a peace of soul exceeding anything you have known.

May I tell you another incident. A man came into my office in London. This man was an ex-army officer from India. He said, "I am the diplomatic correspondent for The People. My employers have asked me to write a series of articles against the Mormons. I thought it only fair to come to you and talk about it before starting those articles."

I said, "You say you are going to write against the Church?"

He said, "I certainly am. What I am going to write will not be good, will not be favorable."

I said, "It is interesting that you know enough about the Mormons to write authoritatively about them. Would you mind telling me just what you know?"

He said, "I don't know a `darn' thing."

"You mean to say you are going to write a series of articles on a subject you don't know anything about?"

"Well," he said, "That's what I said, but I see how silly it is really."

"Wouldn't you like to know something about the Mormons?"

"Yes, I really would."

"Now, my friend, if you will give thirty days of your time before you write those articles and study the subject, as I assume you would do if you were going to write on any other subject, do you not think such information would improve your articles? I happen to have done a little writing myself and I never undertake to write on any subject without trying to get all the information I can get on that subject. I think that is only fair to those who you expect to read what you write. Now would you take thirty days to investigate and study the Mormon doctrine and then write your articles?"

He said, "Where can I get authentic information?"

I told him that at Ravenslea we had the best library in Europe on the Mormon question. "Everything that has ever been written against us is there-and all the things that have been written in favor of the Church, all the works that have been published by the Church are there. Now if you will go in there and spend thirty days searching out what the Mormons really believe, then I'll be very glad to have you write your articles provided you are an honest man, provided you tell the truth, provided you will have an open mind and rid yourself of prejudice."

He said, "I'll do just that. I'll spend thirty days," as he said, "plugging up on Mormonism."

I thought it only fair to warn him that if he spent thirty days in that library reading on Mormonism he would ask for baptism. When I told him that he said a lot of things I couldn't repeat here tonight. "Why," he said, "the idea that I would become a Mormon is preposterous!"

I said, "I thought it only right to tell you that's what is going to happen to you if you are honest and open-minded. When you come out you will ask for baptism."

He went into the library; he read and studied; and, as he afterwards told me, he prayed, because in his reading he had read in the Book of Mormon, that anyone who wants to know can ask of God and he will reveal the truth of it unto him.

I went home in the meantime and was teaching at the Brigham Young University when I received a cable-less than thirty days after our interview. The cable was brief but to the point. It said, "I think you will be interested to know that I am being baptized next Friday."

I cite that and other things tonight just to indicate that any honest person who is open-minded and who frees himself of prejudice, who will study what the Mormons teach, will find that we are Christians and that, as mentioned in my opening statement tonight, central to everything else we teach is the eternal truth that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God. And if you find that to be true, then I am sure you will no longer question our Christian status.

Here is a statement made by a professor from Cornell University in America: "I am perfectly willing to say to anyone that I believe the Book of Mormon is one of the most famous and widely discussed books ever published in America."

A former Secretary of Agriculture in the United States, wrote, "Of all the American books of the 19th Century, it seems probable that the Book of Mormon is the most powerful. It reached perhaps only one percent of the people of the United States but affected this one percent so powerfully and lastingly that all the people of the United States have been affected by it."

"The book itself," says another, and this was published in 1930, "The book itself remains on which was founded the greatest religion of the continent and of the century. It is not only the book itself but the wonderful influence it had on America that counted."

I am not here tonight simply to talk of the Book of Mormon. I am here to, in sincerity and humility, bear my witness that Jesus is the Christ and that He has spoken again to the earth, that there has been a new revelation from heaven, that the gospel has been restored, that the Priesthood of God is upon the earth, that there are apostles and prophets living in the world. The Lord has not cut us off, the heavens are not closed, the lines of communication are still open and God is still at the helm.

I say to you, my brethren and sisters, that if my last statement is correct, namely that the line of communication is open and God is still at the helm; if the people of the world, the Christians of the world, if our Western allies could believe that statement, that God is in charge and that the heavens are open and that there is revelation; if they could believe that it would be the most inspiring and reassuring message in the world today. Hundreds of millions of people are being systematically indoctrinated with the abominable idea that there is no God, that Jesus is a myth, and that religion is an opiate. I say to you tonight that in anticipation of the very times in which we live, the God of Heaven has spoken again, the heavens have been opened and revelation has come, and we, the members of The Church of Jesus Christ, are trying to carry this message to all parts of the earth, for we were commanded, as were the apostles of old, to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. The promise is made that all who believe and are baptized shall be saved, and certain signs shall follow them that believe.

I want to say to you, that I know that those signs have followed the believers. I know there is prophecy and the gift of tongues and healing and revelation and other gifts that were enjoyed in the days when the apostles were on the earth. I know this from my personal knowledge-I am not telling only what I have heard others say.

If what we say is true, it is the greatest truth that has come to this earth since the resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ the Lord-the greatest truth because it announces that he has come again and spoken to men, organized his church, given men the priesthood, and set up his kingdom pursuant to the prophecy of Daniel and of John.

God bless you my friends. God bless us all that we may face these troubled times with faith rather than fear, that we, believing in Christ and God the Father, may not feel that the adversary can overcome us. Ominous though the times are, I say to you that truth will triumph. He who leads the great forces in the name of Israel's God will triumph. And I want to say further that he who is leading the forces of Communism and other isms of that kind is none other than Lucifer, the fallen Son of the Morning, Beelzebub, Satan.

I say with Joshua of old, ". . . Choose you this day whom ye will serve . . ."; (Joshua 24:15).

I leave with you my testimony, my blessing, and my prayer for your welfare. I express my gratitude for your willingness to come and hear us tonight, and I ask these blessings upon you in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.

— Monks Park, England, October 26, 1962
