Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Be Aware-Beware

First I am asked to bring to all the greetings, the love and blessings of President David O. McKay and the general authorities of the Church. We all appreciate the fine record you have made and the way you have upheld the high ideals and traditions of this university-the largest church-sponsored university in the West.

When Matthew Arnold said, "I am tormented with a desire to put a whole book into a page, a whole page into a phrase, and a whole phrase into a word," I am sure he expressed your wish for me as you approach the ordeal of listening to a baccalaureate sermon. Knowing something of your penchant for the concise, the compact, the neat in expression, I am tormented with a desire to compress a sermon into a few simple words. In that effort I pray for divine guidance and your patience and sympathy.

While it is sometimes misleading for a speaker to give a name or title to his speech, may I suggest two unrelated words as possibly indicative of what I might say. They are BE AWARE and BEWARE. At least that might give some hope for brevity. To make sure of some capsules of truth I shall quote from what other men have said even though that will emphasize the contrast between the mediocrity of the original and the excellence of the quotations. One professor said to a hopeful student: "Your manuscript is both good and original, but the part that is good is not original and the part that is original is not good."

We who have almost finished the part assigned to us by the Director on the stage of life find it difficult to resist the impulse to pause at the exit and look back across the stage as you enter, even though looking back causes some nostalgia. We look forward with some apprehension, knowing that science has placed in the hands of irresponsible and sometimes wicked men the power to destroy our civilization. But though the future does look somewhat ominous, we have confidence that you, who must meet that future, will be equal to it. Science and religion have made available to you effective tools-physical, mental, moral and spiritual tools-which your graduation here indicates you are at least partially prepared to use, and therefore the outlook brightens, and what seemed ominous becomes auspicious.

Cicero reminds us that "each stage of existence has been allotted its own appropriate quality, so that the weakness of childhood, the impetuosity of youth, the seriousness of middle life, the maturity of old age-each bears some of nature's fruit which must be garnered in its own season. Each has something which ought to be enjoyed in its own time."

The exit from this stage is an entrance to another, and for this we are grateful. We are going somewhere, and, as every exit is an entrance and vice versa, your arrival indicates that you came from somewhere, and so we are fellow pilgrims, for a time at least. We, your elders and teachers, are now prepared to relinquish the pilot's seat and let you take over the controls. As the training pilots, your teachers, "bail out" let none of you hope their parachutes will fail to function even though you may think they were responsible for some of the turbulence of the past few years.

We almost envy you the next fifty years. While we do not claim to know very much about the detail of the whence and the whither of life, we like to exercise the prerogative of age and give unsolicited counsel, advice, and warning before "that which came from out the boundless deep turns again home." But lest this becomes a funeral, rather than a baccalaureate sermon, let us look forward rather than back. Prophecy, meaning you, is more interesting and exciting than history, meaning us.

First then we say BE AWARE, for the degree of your awareness will determine the measure of your aliveness. Some have eyes but see not, ears but hear not, and hearts that do not understand. No day will dawn for him who is asleep, and no dream will come true for him who only dreams. One successful man said the three rules for success are, WORK, WORK, WORK. If you would be consciously and acutely alive you must resolve to keep eternally busy. Our challenge is BE AWARE and our caution is BEWARE. Beware of the deceptive thought that graduation means arrival, that your education is complete, that the need for effort, concentration and constancy was met and satisfied during the four college years. BEWARE of the insidious hardening of the intellectual arteries which results from lack of use.

It is important that we seek to learn something of life's source, its purpose and its potential destiny. As one learns to discriminate and to choose-and choosing involves rejecting-from among life's various and varied offerings, he progressively learns to savor life and this keeps his taste buds functioning with a satisfying keenness.

You have learned already that learning involves some unlearning. As one wise, untaught man observed, "It ain't my ignorance that done me up, it's what I knowed that wasn't so."

He who would leave footprints in the sands of time must not be content to sit especially on stepping stones. All of you know that every landing field is also a runway for a new take off. We must resist the temptation to abide upon arriving at an intermediate goal. There can be no loitering on life's airfield. One must get on the plane or be left behind.

As we progressively become aware of ourselves, our universe, and the purpose of our being, we envision certain goals and ideals toward which to work. If you enthrone high ideals in your hearts and minds, they will mirror your destiny and become a part of you. "Know then thyself," said the poet, "presume not God to scan, the proper study of mankind is man." With self awareness we discover the innate music and beauty which the Creator planted in our hearts and minds; the loveliness which enshrouds our purest thoughts, our finest impulses. As we become aware of the latent beauty of the soul we stand in awe, wonder, and reverence. We are made humble and inquisitive before life's unexplained mysteries, but proud and grateful that we are part of it all; thankful that we can wonder and search, comprehend, aspire, unfold, and achieve.

The human body has been called God's greatest miracle and the human brain the finest piece of mechanism in the universe. No brain specialist knows how the mind works with the mechanism of the brain. We know that man is a unit of consciousness, self-active and creative. Certainly then he is not less important in the economy of the universe than the infinitesimal electron.

I quote from Leon Gutterman, publisher of Wisdom Magazine.

"The wise man protects his brain and his mind, which is the manipulator of the brain, from all that would do them harm. Ignorance is a vice-a form of self-inflicted injury that leaves its mark of weakness on the brain. Ignorance means brain decay. Seek wisdom and understanding with a faith-hungry heart."

Stupidity is inexcusable. Elbert Hubbard said, "Genius may have limitations, but stupidity is not thus handicapped." And another has added, "Better be unborn than untaught, for ignorance is the roof of misfortune."

Wisdom has a stimulating influence on the brain. It helps to lift us above ourselves, our petty, individual aims, our narrow and selfish desires. The pursuit of wisdom is at once a humbling and ennobling work, humbling because we can accomplish so little within the narrow limits of mortal life, but ennobling because the glory of God is intelligence, and seeking and gaining wisdom leads to the glory of intelligence.

To lack wisdom is no disgrace, To lack desire for wisdom is a pity, But to desire wisdom and not know how to find it is a tragedy.

The human soul, body and spirit united, is transcendent among all of God's creations. Beside it the vaunted works of man are puny and insignificant. BEWARE of the stifling pride which may be engendered by admiration of man's capacity. The so-called self-made men are endurable so long as they do not worship their alleged creators.

He who would enrich his personality and live abundantly must glorify his intelligence with the warmth and glow of love for God and fellowmen. In other words, the head and heart must support each other. Someone has said, "The education of the heart is the heart of education." The greatest heart that ever beat in mortality was the educated heart of Jesus. The greatest sermon ever preached appealed to the hearts more than to the heads of his fortunate listeners; and the same appeal has come down through the centuries on the printed pages of all the languages of the world.

The Apostle Paul's matchless chapter on love came from an educated heart and a richly furnished mind. He said that the eloquence of men and angels, without knowledge and faith sufficient to move mountains are nothing without love; and further that bestowing, though it be lavish and even sacrificial, if it lack love will profit nothing to the giver.

But while we admonish you to love your fellowmen-and at your age nature doesn't need much encouragement-we earnestly warn you to beware of love's counterfeit. Passionate lust is the most poisonous and debasing of all of Satan's false allurements. Young men and women, as you associate together let all your thoughts, words, and actions be so clean and pure that their publication to the world would cause you no embarrassment.

Let us become progressively aware of the spiritual equipment which Providence provided for our protection and development. We are endowed with creative intellect, motivating imagination, enduring zest and vitality, adventurous curiosity, aesthetic appreciation, insatiable ambition, and the sensitive balance wheel of conscience.

But to fully and wisely realize and employ these endowments you must, as Paul enjoined,

... Take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.

Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;

And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace;

Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:

Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints.

—Ephesians 6:13-18

Although in this age science has made available to us almost miraculous material equipment in the use of which you will develop some skills, you will find that courage, fortitude, faith, and constancy are basic and indispensable in the continuing and relentless struggle which is life.

Even more than in Paul's day you will wrestle against principalities, powers, the rulers of darkness in this world, and spiritual wickedness in high places. The enemy is well organized, numerous and militant and has fiendish and cunning leadership; of this you should BE AWARE and of this you must BEWARE.

Be constantly aware and increasingly more worthy of your image nature, for of all of God's creations only man was created in His image. He breathed into man the breath of life, planted in him the seed of Godhood, and entrusted him at birth with a precious fragment of the divine mind to develop and mature in the harsh soil of mortal life. Let each one be aware of his ever-emerging best and cultivate a divine discontent and candid self-criticism.

We were sent into this world to learn the meaning and purpose of life by active participation in the exciting drama of human existence. In life, unlike baseball, everyone must participate. There are no benches on which to vegetate and no dugout in which to hibernate. Only the angels can be spectators in the grandstand.

Our education is just beginning, and that is true and will always be true of all of us, both here and hereafter. Life will continue to be a commencement, a beginning, and those two words will, carrot-like, be forever dangling and beckoning along the way. Beware of arriving, for that puts an end to the journey, deadens interest in horizons, and kills the stimulating spirit of adventure.

We inherited the choicest land of all the earth and with it the freedom vouchsafed by an inspired Constitution. Freedom cannot be static or passive, it must be active, nurtured, and maintained. Always remember that you hold this heritage in trust for those who, in turn, will come into possession and management upon your exit from the stage. Do not betray your trust.

Become aware of and partake of the glory which is America. Your Americanism should be a "cry in the heart, a fire in the brain, a prayer in the soul" as it was defined recently by a happy refugee. The following appraisal is from "Sunshine Magazine":

"God built a continent with glory and filled it with treasures untold. He bedecked it with soft, rolling prairies, and pillared it with thundering mountains. He studded it with sweetly flowing streams and mighty winding rivers. He graced it with deep shadowed forests, and filled them with song. But these treasures would have meant little if the myriads of people, the bravest of the races, had not come, each bearing a gift and a hope. They had the glow of adventure in their eyes, the glory of hope in their souls, and out of them was fashioned a nation, blessed with a purpose sublime. They called it America.

Yes, this is America, yet in these troublesome times it is well to remember what Daniel Webster said: "God grants liberty only to those who live it and are always ready to guard and defend it. Let our object be our country. And, by the blessing of God, may that country become a vast and splendid monument, not of oppression and terror, but of wisdom, of peace, and of liberty, upon which the world may gaze with admiration forever!"

BEWARE of the infiltration of alien ideologies. Americanism and Communism are as incompatible as light and darkness. Appreciate the honesty, loyalty, and patriotism of the vast majority of your fellow-Americans, and never impute to any of them motives meaner than your own. Remember that intelligent and honest men have honest differences. Refuse to join the hysterical pessimists whose colored goggles make blue look red, while white appears as pink or yellow.

Be temperate in all things. Stay on the highway which experience has built, and avoid the extreme right and extreme left-there is danger on the soft shoulders which border the paved highways. Detours are sometimes disastrous.

Our individual dignity and self-respect are based upon, and our hopes and ambitions are justified by, the fact that we are the offspring of Deity. You cannot afford to forget that fact. It is permanently, unavoidably, and sometimes painfully true. That relationship makes it impossible to do wrong and feel right. Sin and evil are repugnant to our inner, better selves. "Wickedness never was happiness."

Our goal is eternities ahead and if we would keep on the beam we must keep contact with the tower. To paraphrase a familiar hymn, do not under any circumstances forget to pray. We need this balm of Gilead at the gates of every day.

When sore trials come upon you, or your soul is full of sorrow, when your heart is filled with anger and you need grace to forgive another, in fact, in all of life's vicissitudes, you will need the help and comfort which come from communion with him who is your source and destiny.

If we keep this contact with Divinity it will be a constant reminder of our derived and participative role, our divine source and destiny, and will enable us to retain our sense of purpose and direction. In an age which denies and sneers at the lessons of yesterday and mistrusts the future, you must humbly seek divine guidance, else your great expectations will be engulfed in deep disillusionment.

A sense of relationship and co-partnership with God involves the concept of universal brotherhood and that will help to develop intelligent tolerance, open-mindedness, and good-natured optimism. Life is really a battle between fear and faith, pessimism and optimism. Fear and pessimism paralyze men with skepticism and futility. One must have a sense of humor to be an optimist in times like these. And you young women will need a sense of humor if you marry these young men and try to live with them. Golden Kimball once said in a conference, "The Lord Himself must like a joke or he wouldn't have made some of you people." But your good humor must be real, not simulated. Let your smiles come from the heart and they will become contagious. You may see men on the street any day whose laugh is only a frozen grin with nothing in it but teeth. Men without humor tend to forget their source, lose sight of their goal, and with no lubrication in their mental crankshafts, they must drop out of the race. Lincoln said, "Good humor is the oxygen of the soul." And someone paraphrased, "The surly bird catches the germ."

Among the most imperative needs of every generation are faith, courage, fortitude, and tolerance, all of which must be developed and become adequate. You will need courage, which is more than lack of fear. Courage is meeting fear with firmness and fortitude. All who are faint-hearted should read the words with which Henry IV greeted Crillon after an important victory had been won: "Hang yourself, brave Crillon, we fought at Arques and you were not there."

Be dauntless in your pursuit of truth and resist all demands for unthinking conformity. No one would have you become mere tape recorders of other people's thoughts. Be modest and teachable and seek to know the truth by study and also by faith. There have been times when progress was halted by thought control. Tolerance and truth demand that all be heard and that competing ideas be tested against each other so that the best, which might not always be your own, can prevail. Knowledge is most complete and dependable when all points of view are heard. We are introducing you into a world of restlessness and skepticism, where old things are not only challenged but are disappearing; but into a world of miraculous achievement, undreamed of accomplishment and terrifying power, as witness what Astronaut Scott Carpenter did today on his triple orbit of the globe.

"A new world was born when Einstein's theory of relativity put us on the track of atomic energy and made atomic annihilation possible," said David Sarnoff. "In our own lifetime we adopted two little children of nature-the atom and the electron-we cannot see, touch, feel, or smell them, but we have seen and heard convincing evidence that they are here. They were not invented by man. They were discovered by or revealed to man."

Science offers us wonderful tools for helping to create the brotherhood of man on earth, but the cement of brotherhood does not come from any laboratory. It must come from the heart and mind and spirit of man.

Another quote from Sarnoff: "As we wrest more and more secrets from nature and transmute them into service for mankind, the logic and rhythm of life take on more meaning. The myriad suns of which our own is as a single grain of sand in the Sahara, the majestic cycles of the celestial movements, the precise operations of natural law, these could not be regarded as mere accidents.

"Their harmonious relationship and their effects upon life on this planet cannot be comprehended by our limited mortal mentality. But an intuition beyond mere reason informs us that they are manifestations of a Divine Intelligence, the Supreme Architect of the universe. Science provides no substitutes for the lessons of universal harmony embodied for mankind in religious teachings and moral precepts. It makes clear that material progress is a delusion unless it is put to the service of eternal spiritual values."

Science and religion are partners in man's constant effort to learn the truth about himself, his universe, and God. They are the two most potent forces in civilization. The human being has been created with a mind that can encompass the whole world within a fraction of a second, yet his physical senses lag woefully behind. With his feet he can walk only a limited distance. With his hands he can touch only what is within reach. His eyes can see at a limited range, and his ears are useful at a short distance only, but science and revelation are overcoming these limitations.

Scientists tell us that when television has fulfilled its ultimate destiny, man's sense of physical limitations will be swept away and his boundaries of sight and hearing will be the limits of the earth itself. With this may come a new horizon, a new philosophy, a new sense of freedom and, greatest of all, perhaps, a finer and broader understanding between all the peoples of the world.

The success of our revitalized missionary work in all lands where we have gone is evidence that a reaction has set in against cynicism, materialism, and false and uninspired theology and philosophy. People have been perishing for lack of vision, hungering, not for food alone, but for salvation, while age-old truths and values, beyond the material and temporal, are gnawing at the heart and spirit of man.

Peace and brotherhood can be achieved when these two most potent forces in civilization-religion and science-join to create one world in its truest and greatest sense. Continue to become acquainted with human experience through history and philosophy, science and poetry, art and religion. Every discovery of science reveals clearly the divine plan in nature. The remarkable harmony in the physical laws and processes of the universe, from the infinitesimal to the infinite, that surpasses mortal understanding implies a Supreme Architect, and the beauty and symmetry of his handiwork inspire reverence.

BEWARE of man's capacity for monumental mischief and his tendency to lose sight of moral values. In these ominous times moral values are not only desirable but they are imperative. The survival of the race depends upon their conscious cultivation.

Education is in the fullest sense the entire process by which individuals and groups modify, redirect, stimulate and control their native tendencies. It seems obvious then that continuing to seek knowledge and education is the high road to salvation. A man is saved only as he gains knowledge. But mere accumulation of facts, though they be encyclopedic, will not save a man if he lacks wisdom.

It is not measured by knowledge or intellect alone, but will be reflected in your search for learning, in the scientist's search for facts, the philosopher's search for understanding, and in every man's search for truth and the freedom which comes with it. Learn to stretch your minds by constant preparation, enrich your spirits by constant prayer, increase your stature by companionship with great people and great books. Thus may your potential God-like status become real and actual through ever-increasing intelligence, which is the glory of God.

—Baccalaureate Address, Brigham Young University,

May 24, 1962
