Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Be Prepared

I come to you tonight, brothers and sisters, with a message from the President of the Church, a message which consists of two parts. First, he asked that I bring to you his love and blessing and gratitude-gratitude for the work you have done and in anticipation of the work you are going to do. The second part of his message was given to me when I asked him what I should say. He gave me two words only, and I am sure you would be glad if I would say those two words and sit down. The words were: "Be prepared." I hope that does not sound too ominous, but you would know it was serious if you had heard him say it. Now I do not want that to indicate that my talk is going to be one of warning, or prediction of dire calamity, but everyone, I am sure, is aware of conditions we face and I think more than anyone else the President of the Church is greatly concerned.

Now unless you should think that I am going to be really serious, I would like to have you smile because after all we must keep a sense of humor whatever comes. I think of all the people in the world we should be the happiest. We have the greatest and most joyous message in the world. I think when we get on the other side, someone will meet us with a smile (unless we go to the wrong place and then someone will grin), so let us be happy. But let our happiness be genuine-let it come from within. We need to keep happy, especially those of us who are growing older. President McKay told me to stop talking about age because, he said, "by reference it includes me, and I refuse to admit that I am old." But I personally am approaching middle life and some of the rest of you will approach it soon if you live. Just yesterday I picked up a little prayer, I do not know who wrote it, but I said "Amen" to it when I read it. I do not know that you will enjoy it until you are my age, but try and remember-it may be helpful when you are old.

Lord, Thou knowest better than I know myself that I am growing older, and will some day be old. Keep me from the fatal habit of thinking that I must say something on every subject on every occasion. Release me from trying to straighten out everybody's affairs. Make me thoughtful, but not moody; helpful, but not bossy. With my vast store of wisdom it seems a pity not to use it, but Thou knowest, Lord, that I want a few friends left at the end. Keep my mind free from the recital of endless details, and give me wings to get to the point. Seal my lips on my aches and pains-they are increasing and love of hearing them is becoming sweeter as the years go by. I do not ask for grace enough to enjoy the tales of others of their pains, but help me to endure them with patience. I do not ask for improved memory, but for growing humility and a lessening cocksuredness when my memory seems to clash with the memories of others. And teach me, O Lord, the glorious lesson that occasionally I may be mistaken. Keep me reasonably sweet. I do not want to be a saint, some of them are too hard to live with, but a sour old person is the crowning work of the devil. Give me the ability to see good things in unexpected places, and talents in unexpected people, and give me the grace to tell them so.

I repeat that you will appreciate that more when you need all those things he asked for, as I do. And in addition to what he said there, and leaving the jocular for a moment, I say, "O Lord, teach me what to say and how to say it."

President McKay did not give me any other message for you tonight, but I should like to enlarge upon his statement, so pregnant with thought.

I read another line:

Faith must venture beyond knowledge, but must always meet the test of practical life and religious experience. In addition to the intellectual imperative, there must always be a moral imperative. Religion is not only good faith, but good works. Religion requires righteousness.

I am taking that line of thought for a few moments because I believe that the faculty of the Brigham Young University is the most influential group in the Church. You exert an influence on the lives of the future leaders of the Church. Your position is unique and challenging and, I fear, sometimes frightening when we think of what that future holds.

Going on, he says:

The spirit of truth is the spirit of religion, whether occupied with sticks and stones or revelations and morals. There is a religiousness in all pure search for truth about anything as well as about everything. The failure of religion to foster knowledge in its own house has an indirect but a far reaching effect on the whole educational system.

It was that last sentence which caught my eye. This is a Church institution, founded and supported by the Church. They who teach in this institution are converted, dedicated people.

One of the reasons for calling this assembly, as I understood from President Wilkinson, was that the suggestion had come from the First Presidency that something of the Mission President's Seminar be carried over to this campus. I shall not go into any detail as to what was done in that Seminar-we were together eight days. But the thought that caused the First Presidency to indicate that something of the spirit of that occasion should be transfused into this group is a sobering thought, for you too are missionaries. The difference is that your investigators are members of the Church. Many of them, however, are not converted. Challenge that if you wish. When I say not converted, I mean there is much for them to learn. I think most of them will say, "I know the gospel is true," but I ask "Do they know the gospel?" Of course if it is the gospel it is true. It is that thought that I would like to bring from the seminar to you missionaries, faculty members, members of the staff. You are to teach the gospel to the finest group in all the world, the most challenging, the most promising. And if your teaching is not effective and does not carry over into the lives of those you teach, you will be held accountable. I am not saying that this campus should be turned into a Sunday School class; I am saying that truth is fundamental to all learning and that to discover and properly teach truth there must be the spirit of religion.

According to our philosophy in the Church, every person in the Church is or should be a missionary. No matter what his profession or vocation, he should be attempting to spread the message of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ wherever he goes and to touch every life with that message. Your job and mine is to assist the Lord. He needs your help in His avowed purpose to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Ours is the job of discovering and disseminating truth in all fields, never forgetting the source of all truth and always attempting to keep contact with that source. The greatest of all teachers, when He was preparing to leave His disciples, made this stirring comment:

And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.

—John 17:19 Can you do less as you start this year's work than to sanctify yourselves?

We of the Board of Education of the Church challenge you, members of the faculty, staff, academic and non-academic, to bring to us your problems, to express your opinions, to be unafraid to think, and we want you to be sure that you need not fear the consequences of expressing what you think. Of course, it is assumed that you have progressively something more incisive to think with; that you have some knowledge of the subject you propose to teach and that its truth is a part of you. There has grown up in some places a feeling that there is not complete academic freedom here and that there might be dire consequences for freely expressing thought. We challenge you to bring your best thinking to us. We do not expect to always follow all that you suggest, but we certainly need your help, and for that we plead tonight. We are anxious to do everything we can as a Board of Education to assist you in your continued intellectual and moral growth as teachers and as students, so the minds and spirits of the men and women whose lives you touch may continue to be fresh, exciting, dynamic-and hungry.

There must be contagion if your teaching is to be effective. If your students are going to receive inspiration and if the subjects which you teach are to have meaning to them, those subjects must continue to have meaning to you. Only as you keep growing and stretching your own minds will the subjects you teach retain their interest and challenge and not grow old by repetition. Only in that way will you be able to transmit to your students the thing of which I am presently speaking.

We would like you to know we are interested in academic research. You must go out on the research front and continue to explore the vast unknown. You should be in the forefront of learning in all fields, for revelation does not come only through the prophet of God nor only directly from heaven in visions or dreams. Revelation may come in the laboratory, out of the test tube, out of the thinking mind and the inquiring soul, out of search and research and prayer and inspiration. You must be unafraid to contend for what you are thinking, unafraid to dissent if you are informed and honest. We must combat error with truth in this divided and imperiled world and do it with the unfaltering faith that God is still in his heaven even though all is not well with the world.

I am throwing out this challenge without hesitation because I know and admire the men and women with whom it was my privilege to associate some years ago. You will of course always support the administration and the administrators and the men who have to make decisions and adopt policies and, incidentally, provide the money, and the best support is intelligent, co-operative effort.

We have been watching with growing admiration the physical development of this campus, and have been glad to appropriate the necessary funds to enable you to build the most beautiful, utilitarian buildings and campus in the country. We are proud of that, but the Church is growing by tens of thousands every year. Many of our new and old converts will come onto this campus. They will come only half converted, and mere buildings will not convert them. So our second challenge is, let us build a spiritual administration building of which you will be the pillars, to which they may come and from which they may get inspiration and guidance to develop them into faithful and intelligent Latter-day Saints.

Sometimes I wonder if we ourselves are fully converted. I know I am not, in the fullest sense. There is no question in my heart or soul with respect to the divinity of this work, but as I grow older I become more and more aware of how little I know about it. If I am to be truly converted, I must continue to grow, to enlarge my knowledge and understanding and thereby my testimony. Do you remember when the Apostle Paul came out of Arabia, he said, "This is my Gospel"? I think he might have held his hands out, thus, "This is my Gospel," his meaning being that "This much of the Gospel has become my Gospel." The gospel is so large that no one of us understands more than a fraction of it. Then when Paul was in Rome at a later date and about to die, he said again, "This is my Gospel," and I think he might have indicated a larger part of the gospel, that more of the gospel had become his gospel. I pray that God will help us in teaching the youth of the Church to understand progressively more of the gospel, to make it our gospel in the same sense that we make food a part of us, by digestion and assimilation.

I read in a magazine recently, and most of you professors have run across it, some comments and predictions well worth repeating. David Sarnoff, of the Radio Corporation of America, said to be the best informed man in his field in the world today, made some pertinent remarks. Listen. Speaking to young people, he said:

You face the new powers conferred by science to wreck or rebuild the world, and the degree to which you carry faith in God, in your fellow man and in yourselves together with a sense of responsibility and continuing self-discipline, by this you will be able to determine whether these tremendous forces, now coming into your hands, will be used to build a better world or be responsible for its destruction.

Peace and brotherhood can be achieved. Two of the most potent forces in civilization, religion and science, can be used to create one world in its truest and greatest sense. Through science we can reduce the physical burdens of mankind and make the earth more fruitful, create plenty in place of scarcity, break down the barriers of ignorance and misunderstanding and make life more meaningful for everyone. The world needs the upsurge of spiritual vitality to resist the current cynicism and materialism. The gradual elimination of physical hungers will deepen the more elemental hunger for faith and salvation, for age-old values beyond the material and the temporal, they will gnaw at the spirit and the heart of man. Science begets humility. [He makes a prophecy. To you this is prognostication, I suppose. He makes some statements and he makes them fearlessly. One or two only will I read you, telling what we have done and what we are going to do.]

By the year 1978, less than twenty years from now, we will have learned to extract atomic fuel from relatively inexpensive materials, thus making this power both plentiful and economical. The energy of the sun's rays will be effectively harnessed in a worldwide use. Television in full colors will be completely global so that men will be able not only to speak and hear around the globe and around the planets, but to see the entire world in natural colors. Individuals will be able to hold private two-way conversations and see each other as they talk, regardless of the distance separating them. Moreover the beginnings will have been made in the automatic and instantaneous translation of languages, enabling people to understand one another across the barriers of Babel.

Remember the message of the Master, "Go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature"? Sarnoff says science will provide the vehicle and make it possible to do just that. We can stand in Salt Lake and talk to all the world and regardless of their languages they will understand what we say, and thus will the world become prepared for the coming of the Son of God.

He goes on about transportation and automation and material and electric lights. I have marked a dozen of them. He goes on with the matter of food and agriculture, striking developments, and irrigation and flood control, more efficient use of solar energy, electronic acceleration, germination, growth, as well as new chemical and biological discoveries which will greatly expand man's food resources.

As a by-product of economic progress and expanding leisure man will enter upon a period of universal education. Not only will general levels of knowledge rise, but the intellectual climate will be favorable to the development of special talents and individual genius. That might be encouraging to you. He goes into the field of entertainment, and then he says, "As a reaction against current cynicism and materialism, there will be an upsurge of spiritual vitality." He repeated that twice in his article, and again he says, "Science begets humility."

My brethren and sisters, be prepared. All of this will happen. But before it does and while it is happening we are going to have some world-shaking events. When you consider that hundreds of millions of young people today are being relentlessly indoctrinated with the damnable doctrine that there is no God and that religion is an opiate; when you consider how well organized the anti-Christ has become and when you consider the challenge that lies ahead; when you see the hordes on the march and in many instances led by well-nigh maniacs-and I am measuring my words, for the Great Battle is to be between Christ and anti-Christ-your job is to prepare the coming generation of men to meet that onslaught. Unless you can impress into their very souls a knowledge of God and of His laws, His purposes, His program, a recognition of the fact that they are related to Him as His children, they will not be equal to the test.

Again I say, you will have a greater influence on a greater number of people in the Church than any other group, for you meet ten thousand of them each day. We meet them once a week, perhaps, and then we meet only a few. We meet them under different circumstances and talk down to them and they go away smiling, perhaps. But you are right down there among them, and we want to charge you with the responsibility of filling in where we fail. Give to them your individual testimonies of the divinity of this work.

The President said, "Before you leave, tell them what you know about Christ." I cannot do that fully for I would betray a trust. This I may say. He lives. He is real. He is personal. I know it, as Paul knew it, as Job knew it. And by the same authority with which Paul spoke, I say to you, my fellow workers, as though answering his question as did Peter "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." I make that statement humbly, but by the same authority with which Peter spoke. And that statement is inspired from the same source that inspired him, for Christ said, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven." He has been good enough to me to reveal that truth to me, and therefore, as I charge you to go out now and carry that message to everyone whose life you touch, as I bear my witness to you, I hope that you will carry with you the spirit that is here tonight, for that spirit only can convert this choice young people. Again I say, your investigators are members of the Church in the main. Convert them, bless them, lead them, inspire them, and to the degree that you do that, God will bless you. That He may, I humbly pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Address to B. Y. U. Faculty, September 11, 1961
