Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Learn Continually

In my opinion, there are no people in the world to whom the challenge of this generation's vast outpouring of knowledge is more direct and more imperative than it is to the Latter-day Saints. In fact, one of the great and eternal truths enunciated by the Prophet is that a man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge. Again he said: "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." "The glory of God is intelligence."

Among the things, then, which we have to incorporate in our education is a hunger and thirst for knowledge, a continuing quest. If the question were asked of any group what they would change if they could live their lives over again, I think the answer would be, "My education." Education has been said to be a continuous life-long process. From the revelations of the Lord we find that it is an eternal process. What one knew at twenty-one, at thirty-five, or at sixty is never enough to last a lifetime. The degree of our intelligence in business, profession, home life, family life, social affairs, civic life-in fact, our religious and personal philosophy-is largely determined by our education.

The wise are too aware of their weaknesses to assume infallibility. The man who knows the most knows how little he knows. I am thinking now in terms of the people who are listening there in your audience-many of them college graduates who have gone out into life.

Teachers tell us that the aim of a liberal education is the improvement of the mind that the mind grows with the acquisition of knowledge and skill. As our understanding deepens and as we gain new insights, our capacity to do and to be and to become increases. There are limitless areas all about us which are as yet unexplored, and they become increasingly evident as we push back the horizons of our knowledge.

It seems to me that all adult people should be deeply impressed by ideas. There is a set of books recently published known as The Great Books of the Western World. It is a complete set given to the explanation of ideas. In it we find a discussion of the ideas of the great men of the past two or three thousand years. All self-educated men and women continue to plunge, as it were, into the sea of books and try to think their way out of an apparent wilderness of ideas. They fight and struggle for knowledge and undertake to coordinate and systematize it. This quest for knowledge becomes, then, an important and necessary part of life. It does not end-in fact, sometimes it does not even begin-in college.

In the first place, it is of utmost importance that we feel and appreciate the need for keeping abreast of what is going on in the world. I am concerned with the Latter-day Saints as a group, concerned that they shall never feel that because we say we have the truth our search for truth has therefore ended. What we have is truth, but there is much truth that has not yet been revealed. We must keep open minds and be inquiring constantly into the latest ideas, inventions and propositions that are available to us in current literature. Our acceptance of the gospel is just the beginning of our education. This must be added upon.

We should therefore be students of current events, read assiduously a few of the best magazines and current books in order to meet informed and intelligent people and be able to discuss the gospel with them in the light of the latest discoveries of students and scholars in the physical and social sciences, in the humanities and the arts. Let us measure all so-called "new truths" by the standard of basic truth, which is the Gospel of Jesus Christ. These truths do not become obsolete, nor do they change; but our interpretation may be faulty incomplete. In fact, we know it is.

No one of us can, even in a lifetime, know more than a small part of what there is to be known. Therefore, we must select from what is current and up to date the course of study in which we find the greatest interest and become proficient in it by reading and discovering everything that appears or is available in that field. Then, in addition to our special interest, we should learn something about other fields of knowledge and thus gain and increase our general understanding and knowledge of as many subjects as possible. But we should know some one subject well enough to teach it to others.

When the gospel was restored, the Lord advised us, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that a great and marvelous work was to come forth. Since that time there has been a revolution in knowledge in all fields of human endeavor. It is therefore incumbent upon us to be well informed and proficient through study, reading and prayer, The Lord never puts a premium on sluggish thinking. Sluggishness of spirit is most deplorable. We must be prepared to meet men of science and knowledge and present to them the gospel in the light of what they already have.

I have been asked for suggestions on how we may acquire a working knowledge of the classics in literature and in current thought. Of course I immediately refer to the Standard Works of the Church. In man's quest for God and the good life, there is one book which continues to be indispensable. Let me quote a word from Leon Gutterman, editor of the Wisdom magazine. He says:

The Bible has been more widely, more carefully, and more critically read than any other book. In this book are infinite wisdom and infinite love. It is a book of faith, a book of morals, a book of religion. It teaches man his own individual responsibility, his dignity, and his equality with his fellow men.

If we would find joy in sorrow, strength in weakness, light in darkness; if we would learn how to bear adversity and scorn and how to fight life's battle courageously; if we would find the best way of living, the noblest way of thinking, the most comfortable way of growing, it would be well for us to consult God's chart and steer our lives by it. It will show us where the harbor is and how to reach it without running on the rocks, and will keep us from the bottom of the sea.

Men cannot be well educated without the Bible, for it is, in itself, a liberal education. No person who wishes to come in contact with the world of great thought can afford to be ignorant of the Bible.

I sometimes fear that our own members are not as well acquainted with the Bible as they ought to be. I quote again:

Reading the Bible will not, of itself, satisfy the needs of faith. There must go with it a proper interpretation and a necessary understanding.

We as a people have not only the Bible but other books from which we can quote and which we often read. They help us with our understanding of the meaning of the words contained in the Bible or in this set of books which is known as holy scripture. Reading the Bible helps us to release our minds and enables us to lay hold on the vaster meanings of life. It gives us faith that dispels darkness, conquers fear and inspires courage. We need to refresh and deepen our lives and keep them from becoming hard and dry, short-sighted and spiritless.

May I quote from the late John F. Kennedy, who wrote shortly before his death:

The moral precepts and phrases of the Bible are woven into the fabric of our national life. Its wisdom has traveled with our people because it helped them to live creatively, helpfully, victoriously. It will travel with mankind in all his adventures.

Today the Bible has been published in 1,165 different languages or dialects, which are spoken by 95 per cent of the world's population. These translations are of inestimable value. It is not enough for the Bible to be translated, published, and distributed. The Bible must be read.

While making a lifetime study of the Standard Works of the Church, one should also become familiar with the classics, with Shakespeare, Milton, Tennyson, and Wordsworth. He should read something of the philosophers and scientists, should find out how boundaries of knowledge have been altered and extended in religion and in literature. One should know something of the writings of Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, and the later philosophers, who, while they err in many respects, will start a man thinking independently and courageously on the meaning of life and its purpose.

A man should study also the lives of great men. But before pursuing that thought may I, in addition to what I said about the Bible, draw attention to the value of the Book of Mormon in our reading. The Book of Mormon has many forms of literary technique. It employs figures of speech, such as similes, metaphors, hyperboles, and others; narration, exposition and description, oratory, epic as in the travels of Alma and the dealings of Nephi and his brothers. You will find lyric and logic in Moroni's argument to unbelievers; and parables as in the parable of the tame and wild olive tree. These interesting types of Hebrew literary forms are to be found in the Book of Mormon.

None of us can afford to overlook the value of the Doctrine and Covenants as we undertake to read what the Lord has said to us in this age. There is nothing finer that can be written or read anywhere than some words written in Section 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants, where we read:

How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.

—Doctrine and Covenants 121:33

If we are to have the benefit of that kind of revelation from the Lord, we must keep open and inquiring minds and never allow ourselves to be in the position of what might be termed the "hardening of intellectual arteries."

I mentioned studying the lives of great men. I suggest that everyone should become familiar with the lives of great men by reading biographical histories. There is no more profitable reading than biography. If one will become familiar, for instance, with the history of Abraham Lincoln as written by Carl Sandburg, he will there learn how to live, what to do and what to refrain from doing. He will be given courage to meet life's problems.

It would be well for us to read the writings of men like Winston Churchill and Woodrow Wilson, to know something of Thomas Edison and other inventors, to become familiar with philosophy. Here you will do well to read Will Durant's Introduction to Philosophy. Become acquainted with James, Overstreet, and St. Augustine. In short, view the gospel through the eyes and lives of great men. In this way one's appreciation of the gospel will be enlarged, and his ability to present it effectively to educated people will be increased. In that connection we should not overlook the poets, for the poets have been and are, in a real sense, prophets. We should become familiar with the great poems, the epic poems, and the more recent writings of the best poets we have today. All of this together, and much more of course, will help to make an educated man.

Another question I am asked is what I do to keep up, to practise this continuous learning I am advocating. Really, I would not wish to hold myself up as an example to anyone. I have had to pretty well educate myself. I think I can say, without boasting, that I seldom go anywhere without a book. I might add, again without boasting, that I very frequently start my reading at three o'clock in the morning. I find the best time to read is when I am fresh. If I can read from three to six o'clock in the morning, I am then ready to come back to the office and take up the regular duties of life. But for those who do not wish to keep this kind of schedule I might suggest that thirty minutes of reading every day will, in a very short time, take one through a lot of good reading-philosophy, religion, science, the arts, and so on.

As I indicated earlier, it is impossible for any one of us in this life to learn more than a small part of the world's sum of knowledge. When my opinion is sought about priorities I am glad to suggest some things, although I would not presume to have this known as an outline for students or scholars, because I lay claim to neither of those categories. I think, however, that if I were to try out of my own experience to list the kinds of knowledge I would be searching for, I would of course in the first instance seek a knowledge of anatomy and chemistry, physiology and psychology, pedagogy, history, sociology, and political economy. All of these and other subjects come to my mind when I am thinking of what I would read first.

These help me to understand myself and my relationship to God. Man is more than the mere chemical substances which constitute the tissues and humors of his body. Man may be a poet, a hero, or a saint. He is prodigiously complex, but our knowledge of him is founded on imprecise data.

The materialists and the spiritualists accept the same definition of crystal of sodium chloride, but they do not agree with one another on the subject of man and what he is, what he may become. In fact, our ignorance on the subject of man is profound. Many of the questions on this subject remain unanswered.

But to Latter-day Saints, man is a child of God with the seed of godhood in him. Aside from the prophets, the ancients had not even the most elementary notion of the structure and function of the brain, the liver, or the thyroid glands. Life and existence, moral suffering, craving for the unknown, are all phenomena to the student unless he relates them to the gospel and sees in man a child of God destined to become like that from which he came. A study of the spiritual life and philosophy attracted greater men than the study of medicine. Our minds delight in contemplating simple facts. We have a certain repugnance to attacking complex problems. We love to discover the meaning of life, but we do not possess the technique capable of penetrating the mystery of the brain and the harmonious association of its cells.

I think, in other words, that our first study should be the study of man, not only as such, but in his relationship to Deity. In the study of man we come to make a study of God, of His word, and of His wishes with respect to man. Someone has said, "God speaks to us when we read the Bible; we speak to Him when we pray." All men should be praying men, should devote themselves not alone to kneeling in prayer, but in engaging in prayer wherever they are and whatever they are doing, that they may keep contact with the spirit of the Divine. That will lead them into an investigation of the meaning of life. That will lead them into inquiring into what the great men of the past have thought, have said, and have written. That will help them to understand why they are here and where they are going, as well as where they came from.

The first and most important study for all of us, then, is the study of man. You cannot understand man without knowing something about anatomy, chemistry, and all the other things which men are interested in today.

I will suggest then, to this fine group that is assembled and I wish I could see them; I think I might get a little more inspiration from the audience if I could see them; but simply talking to you on the telephone I would say seek out of the vast volume of material that has been published the best that can be had. There are too many of the books that sell readily and appeal to the lowest level of intelligence and mediocre taste of the day. In our searching for books to be read, we should not be moved by the desire for amusement, excitement, or diversion. This country is flooded with worthless books, magazines, and newspapers which excite for the day and are forgotten, while thousands of good books remain unsold and unread. In an intellectual sense we live in the back alleys and sometimes eat almost out of garbage cans. This worthless literature is an unmitigated curse to humanity.

As Fielding said:

We are as liable to be corrupted by the books we read as by the companions we have. Great and worthwhile books are prime necessities for complete happiness. They are the daily bread of the soul, the best friends a man can have, and the best consumers of our literature. In great books we find the company of the noble and the great. In their company we can find the answer to our questions, which answers will enrich us with their wisdom. They teach us the best way of living and the noblest way of thinking.

I would like to leave you a blessing. I pray that God will bless these adult students that they may give themselves to a study of the meaning of life, a study of the meaning of man and his relationship to God. I pray that God will bless this group of fathers and mothers, husbands and wives, and their children and children's children, that they may live up to the great challenge of the Lord. "Seek ye wisdom out of the best books" and remember always that a man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge. "The glory of God is intelligence." Man's glory, whatever it may be, will be determined by the intelligence which he acquires, thereby becoming more like God. May He help and guide us in our search for truth.

—Telecast Devotional, Brigham Young University,

June 9, 1964
