Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

The Spiritually Responsive Life!

Do Your Duty-And Be Blessed

I stood not long ago in the nation's Capitol, and was present at the funeral of President Kennedy. There were present, of course, the heads of government from many parts of the world-kings, rulers, presidents, ambassadors, premiers. I felt rather subdued and humbled, as would anyone in the presence of such an aggregation of leadership.

But this morning I find myself in the House of God, where I feel He is present. By comparison all of the rest of these put together do not amount to anything but glitter and show. Authority, yes; responsibility, yes; but when I come into this presence, His presence, I do not address Him as "Your Majesty," I do not address Him as "Mr. President," I do not bow before a crowned head-I come into His presence and say, "Father-my Father." What does that mean? It means there is something of Him in me. It means that my presence there results from that relationship, and that I don't need to feel subservient in the sense that vassals do. I am reminded again and again that He, the God of Heaven, the Creator of all that is, is my Father; and that the Savior of all the world, the Redeemer, is my Brother. Oh, that I could be worthy of these relationships!

At Christmas time, it was my privilege to be in the New England States Mission-in Boston and Cambridge, and in Halifax, Nova Scotia. During my visit there, I was invited to participate in a radio program. At first I was frightened. I was asked if I would submit to a series of questions without any preparation, without any warning as to what the questions might be; if I would permit the questioner to roam all over the field of inquiry regarding the Mormon Church; and if I would submit to such an interrogation for one hour, to be followed by thirty minutes of questions from the listening audience. The interviewer asked me one thing that I had never been asked before, and I didn't know how I was going to answer it.

He said, "Do you think in the final winding-up scene everyone will be a Mormon?"

What do you think? Well, the Bible says the time will come when every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ. When the time comes that everyone confesses that Jesus is the Christ, if their confession is sincere, they will wish to do and to learn those things which will bring them closer to Him. According to Him, the first thing they need to do is repent, and if they repent and change their ways of life, they will have to be baptized. If they are baptized it must be by proper authority, and if authoritatively baptized, they will become members of the Kingdom of God, which is the Church of Jesus Christ give it whatever name you may.

Christ came to save all men, and by His divine atonement He made the resurrection possible to everyone, sinner as well as saint. Yes, the time will come when all men will know something of the glory of God. But the time will not come when I or any other man will arrive at a point in knowledge, experience or understanding beyond which we cannot go. In other words, we believe in eternal progression, and this law of the gospel which requires that all men shall be brought into the Kingdom of God through the door of baptism applies to the dead as well as to the living. The radio interviewer referred to temples, temple work and genealogical work.

Brethren and sisters, I feel-and I am sure you do-that it is incumbent upon us as members of the Church to become better informed day by day, to study, to meditate, to pray, to commune with God, to take advantage of the priceless opportunity to come into His presence. If I should wish to see President Johnson of the United States next week or next month, it would be necessary for me to make an appointment through proper channels and wait my turn, and the waiting may be a long time. If I should want to see the Queen of England, or come into her presence, I would have to go through a long preparation and be introduced properly, and dress properly, and undertake to behave myself properly in her presence. If I wish to come into the presence of God, simply walk up (figuratively) and open the door and say, "Good morning, as Thy son I would talk with Thee." His door is always open, always available. I don't have to have somebody prepare the way for me. I can talk to Him at any time.

I like a little couplet that a soldier boy is responsible for: "I thank Thee, God, that come what may, I may stop along the way at any time of night or day, and talk with Thee." Isn't it marvelous that He is available to us, that He is `not way off somewhere, that we can contact Him, that we can talk with Him!

A man said to me in South America just a year ago now, as I was on a similar program that was broadcast to a very large listening audience, "I would like you to know before we start, Mr. Brown, that I do not believe in God. I am going to interview you on religious questions, and the subject of God will come up, but I think we ought to understand each other at the beginning. I don't believe there is a God-I don't believe in God." I knew that he had been a practicing attorney, and he knew that I had been, and I said, "Would it be well for us to define our terms before we start discussing any subject, as we do in Court?"

"Certainly."

"Would you mind defining for me what you mean by the word `God'?"

I hadn't thought of that. I don't know what I mean by the word `God'."

"Well, then, doesn't it necessarily follow that you don't know what it is you don't believe in?"

Then he said, "I hadn't thought of that."

So I asked, "Well, what is your concept when the word `God' is mentioned?"

He said, "I've always been taught that it is something or somebody that has no body, that's incomprehensible, and if incomprehensible, then probably doesn't exist." He added, "I've always been taught that He is not only incomprehensible, but that he is without any feeling or any parts or any body. He is beyond the comprehension of any person."

I said, "Sir, what you are trying to do is to define nothing."

The best definition of nothing that has ever been published is the Apostles' Creed, the Nicean Creed. What they define, or try to define, is something that doesn't exist. And then I said, "I agree with you. I do not believe in God if that's what is meant by the word. But to me, when I speak of God, I speak of my Father, my Creator, my Savior, my ideal, one toward whom I am moving in life, and one whose glory I may share in eternity."

Then he said, "I wish I could believe that."

After an hour and a half, he admitted to me that he had come closer to believing in God than he ever had in his life.

I do not say these things to boast, but to express gratitude, and to remind you, my brothers and sisters and all of us, of what we have come to take for granted, as we do the air that we breathe-we are unaware of it, we don't think about it. This comprehension, this understanding, this concept of God that is ours is the greatest thought that can come into the heart or mind of a man anywhere in the world. I am a child of God. There is something of Him in me, and therefore there is no limit to what I may aspire to, no status that I may not work for, no glory that may not be mine if I will keep the laws that apply to the kind of growth that I wish to make.

I was reading this morning some words with respect to what one of the ancients discovered, namely that things do not amount to much in this world. I am reading from Ecclesiastes:

I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards:

I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all kind of fruits:

I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees:

I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:

I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.

So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and this was my portion of all my labour.

Then-and I think at that time he, too, perhaps was approaching middle age, as I am-

Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun."

—Ecclesiastes 2:4-11

Rather a sad commentary, isn't it, on a man who had gathered together so much?

Perhaps there is no group in the world who is farther removed from that sort of thing than the workers in the various temples of the Church. You are not here because you are wealthy. I don't suppose there are very many millionaires working here in the Temple. There may be some, and the fact that they have millions won't hurt them unless it gives them a wrong sense of values. Sometimes it does. May I read just a line:

Wealth is not the things we own, the stately house upon the hill, Paintings, rugs, and tapestries, or servants taught to do one's will. In luxury a man may dwell as lonely as in a prison cell. Wealth is not a plenteous purse, the bonds that one has stored away, Boastful balance in a bank, nor jewelled baubles that fools display. Things that really gratify are the things that money cannot buy. Wealth is health, a cheerful heart, an ear that hears the robin's song, A mind content, some treasured friends, and fragrant memories lingering long; Living is an inward art, All lasting wealth is in the heart.

You who are thus engaged are laying up treasures, you are laying up wealth, you are preparing for that which lies ahead. All of us are hoping that we may qualify when the time we sang of this morning shall come:

Come, let us anew, our journey pursue, Roll round with the year and never stand still Till the Master appear. His adorable will Let us gladly fulfill; and our talents improve By the patience of hope and the labor of love. Oh, that each in the day of His coming may say I have fought my way through, I have finished the work Thou didst give me to do. Oh, that each from his Lord May receive the glad word, "Well and faithfully done, Enter into my joy and sit down on my throne."

I am thinking in terms of eternity, in terms of life. Often I think in terms of the impending end of my life so far as mortality is concerned. I don't mean that I expect to die tomorrow or next year, but I will die. And I am thinking of what will happen after I die. There is another hymn we sang when I was a boy:

If you could hie to Kolob in the twinkling of an eye And then continue onward with that same speed to fly, Do you think that you could ever, through all eternity, Find out the generations where God began to be? Or see the grand beginning where space did not extend? ...

I have been following the progress of the astronauts in the newspapers, and by radio and television. In fact, I met John Glenn in Washington recently. They have been out there way beyond what any of us can imagine. "Can you see the grand beginning where space did not extend?" Glenn says there is so much more, far beyond anything we have ever gone into yet, that it is beyond the comprehension of the mind of man. The works of God continue, and world and lives abound; Improvement and progression have one eternal round. There is no end to matter; there is no end to space; There is no end to spirit; there is no end to race. There is no end to glory; there is no end to love; There is no end to being; there is no death above. . .

I thank God for the privilege of worshipping with you this morning. I have been communing with Him since 3:30 this morning, reading His holy word, talking with Him in prayer, glorying in life and its opportunities, and finding satisfaction in anticipation of the future. I have been thinking seriously-I presume more than usual because in the last two weeks I have been called upon to speak at the funeral services of six different friends who have passed on, and always on those occasions we think not alone of this life but of that life. So this morning in thinking of the work you are doing, I almost envy you.

And now I must end where I began: Being a son of God, conditioned upon my obedience to the laws upon which blessings are predicated, there is no height to which I may not aspire, there is no glory that may not come to any one of us, man or woman. Again I emphasize that your glory and your reward and your status in the world to come will not be less than President McKay's if you do your duty where you are asked to labor. You don't have to hold any particular office. Priesthood is necessary, of course, and that will be the saving power for men and women. I was reading this morning from the 65th section of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Hearken, and lo, a voice as of one sent down from on high, who is mighty and powerful, whose going forth is unto the ends of the earth, yea, whose voice is unto men-Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth.

Yea, a voice crying-Prepare ye the way of the Lord, prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom.

Pray unto the Lord, call upon his holy name, make known his wonderful works among the people.

Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. Amen.

—Doctrine and Covenants, Section 65

God bless you, my brothers and sisters; by virtue of my office and the Priesthood I bear, I bless you collectively and individually. There are those who have come here this morning with some burdens on their hearts. There are those who are carrying some heavy crosses. There are those who are sorrowful and bereaved. There are those who are somewhat lacking in understanding of the reason for things. I had a call yesterday from Chicago, where a mother's little newborn babe, not properly formed, is doomed to die, and the mother said, "Why, why, should this happen?" There are those here this morning who have been asking, "Why, why is my lot what it is?" The only answer I can give is this: God, your Father, is all-wise and has a love for you beyond anything that any man can comprehend. In wisdom and all-pervading love, He is guiding us, and whatever happens to us we may eventually understand to be a blessing. In my own life, I find myself expressing gratitude to God for some of the things which, if I could, I would have avoided, but through those experiences I learned some lessons I could not have learned in any other way. And now, looking back, I thank God that He gave me strength enough to carry my cross. The greatest lesson He taught us while He was on the earth was how to carry a cross, and do it uncomplainingly.

God bless you, and all of us, that in these perilous times we may keep our eyes on the light that shines ahead, and never be discouraged whatever our lot may be, wherever it may be cast, whatever our duty or responsibility or calling may be-let us do our job to the best of our ability. I promise you in His name that if you do that, you will be entitled to all the glory anyone can get, and it will be a progressive glory, being added upon hour by hour throughout eternity until we shall achieve the kind of glory that will entitle us to the designation of Godhood. That is your goal. That is your possibility. If you will keep your eyes upon that goal, you will not see the troubles that are down in front of you-you will walk right over them.

God bless you that you may go home this morning with renewed courage, faith, assurance, hope, and a new power to continue to the end. I leave this blessing with you that there may be love and harmony, understanding, and the peace which He said He would give, the peace that comes to the heart of every person who obtains the glorious concept that God is his Father. Then you may come to Him and be taken into His arms and say, "Come what may, I have nothing to fear." I leave that spirit of peace with you this morning, and my testimony of the divinity of this work, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Address to Temple Workers,

Salt Lake Temple Annex,

January 12, 1964
