Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

On Temple Building

My brethren and sisters, it is always humbling and challenging to stand before a congregation of Latter-day Saints, but, especially on a significant occasion like this, one is overwhelmed with a feeling of inadequacy. As has been indicated we have assembled today under the inspired direction of the President of the Church to break ground for the beginning of a great structure and a great work.

One purpose in building temples is that we may be of service to our fellowmen, both the living and the dead. Service was the very center of the life and teaching of the Savior, and love of God and of fellowmen was declared by Him to be the first two commandments. We are told in the Book of Mormon that "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are . . . in the service of your God." Basic to this vicarious work is the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. Man is an eternal being-physical, mental, moral, aesthetic, and spiritual. Moreover, man is the son of God and that means that there is something of Him in every man. Our purpose in life is to develop that which is God-like in us, overcome the downdrag of mortality and achieve immortality and eternal life.

Perhaps there may be some here who do not understand the theology and philosophy of the Latter-day Saint or the Mormon people. The Church has many distinguishing features but none more unique than the doctrine of the salvation of the dead through vicarious gospel ordinances performed by the living for the dead in the temples dedicated for that purpose. The fact that we perform saving ordinances for our dead indicates that we must have a conviction that life and love continue after death. God is eternal, and God is love, so love is eternal, and death does not divorce us from the objects of our affection.

Temple building to us is different from building chapels, or tabernacles, or meeting places. We build temples for the express purpose of having a holy place into which the worthy may go to perform ordinances calculated to bind together the living and the dead. Personally I should not like to contemplate the hereafter without my wife and my children, my parents and their parents, my brothers and sisters. I should not like to contemplate an existence, especially one that is going to continue forever, if I could not enjoy that existence with those whom I love. And so we build temples in the name of the Lord.

Only those who are believed to be worthy are permitted to go into the temple because we sincerely believe that it is the house of God, it is sacred, dedicated to His holy name. It is a place to which He Himself may come. Therefore, no unclean thing should enter there. When we build other Church buildings, we invite the public to enjoy them with us, but as in the days of Moses and Solomon and others, when we build and dedicate a temple to the living God, we invite only those who accept the gospel and maintain its standards.

Temple building has always been an important part of the gospel. After the children of Israel crossed the Red Sea, Moses was inspired to build a sacred tabernacle that could be transported, taken with them in the wilderness. In it was placed the Ark of the Covenant and only those specifically authorized were permitted to officiate in it. Of this Dr. Talmage wrote:

No sooner had they escaped from the environment of Egyptian idolatry, than they were required to prepare a sanctuary, wherein Jehovah would manifest His presence and make known His will as their accepted Lord and King.

The Tabernacle, which from the time of its construction in the wilderness and thence onward throughout the period of wandering and for centuries thereafter, was sacred to Israel as the sanctuary of Jehovah, had been built according to revealed plan and specifications. It was a compact and portable structure as the exigencies of migration required.

—James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord, p. 3 This ark of the Covenant was later placed in a tabernacle by David.

David assembled the material for building a temple, but because of transgression, he was not permitted to build it. His son built the magnificent temple of Solomon, one of the greatest buildings of all time. At various times it was destroyed and rebuilt and at the time of Christ, though it was known as the Temple of Herod, the Lord honored the temple and punished those who desecrated it. In this the dispensation of the fulness of times new revelation was given making temple building a distinctive duty of the Church.

Sometimes our friends have asked what do we do in the temples. While there is nothing secret about what goes on in the temple, it is sacred and some things are so sacred that we do not discuss them except in holy places. The ceremonial work includes baptism for the dead, ordination and associated endowments in the priesthood, marriage ceremonies and other sealing ordinances.

You members of the Church in this area are now given an opportunity to participate in the building of one of the great temples of the latter days. To the degree that you give of yourselves and of your material wealth, you will be blessed through the building of this house in your community. And our friends of the area will appreciate and enjoy the beauty of a sacred temple of God on this choice location. It will be a blessing because of its sacred character.

In these ominous and perilous times men are hoping and praying that some divine interposition will enable them to come closer to the Lord and have the security that comes with increased faith in Him. May God bless us and help us that we may appreciate the great heritage that is ours, be worthy of our ancestors who left so much for us to build upon, be worthy of those with whom we now associate and be worthy ancestors to those who may follow us. I leave my testimony with you that this is the work of God, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored, through the prophet Joseph Smith, that Jesus of Nazareth is real and personal.

I leave my blessing with you, my brothers and sisters of this temple area, and pray that God will bless you in your baskets, in your storehouses, in your fields, in your businesses, and especially in your homes; that the spirit of virtue, love, and harmony may bind your families together throughout eternity. I bless you that the spirit of temple building may rest upon you and I promise that each and every one who makes any contribution even though it may only be comparable to the widow's mite, will receive a blessing from Him to whose name we shall erect this temple. May the peace of heaven abide with you I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Groundbreaking Ceremonies, Oakland, California,

May 26, 1962
