Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Love One Another

With another Christmas behind us and another new year before us, we combine retrospect with prospect, express appreciation for past blessings and look to the new year with anticipation, even though the international horizon seems dark and foreboding.

The secret of the popularity of Christmas is that it brings peace to the minds of millions who, for one day at least, think more of others than of themselves, more of giving than of getting.

If this formula for happiness-love one another-is effective for one day, may it not work at other times, at all times? If by giving we receive, and by dividing we increase, why not make happiness permanent by carrying the Christmas spirit throughout the year?

Each year closes its volume of history and experience, leaving memories of some joyous days; of some success; of some achievement. Also of some sorrowful, anxious days; days of fear and misgiving and doubt.

As we look back we see that much of our worry was needless, caused by fear of what might happen. We crossed bridges which existed only in imagination. We suffered in anticipation of troubles which did not come. Therefore, our unhappiness was of our own making. Fear made us falter and worry made us weak. As we remember our doubts, fears, and weaknesses we hear Him again say, "O ye of little faith." (Matthew 6:30.)

In our individual and family lives during the past year we were confronted by problems, some of them grave and serious. We met reverses and some sorrow, but by His grace, our strength was sufficient.

May all members of the Church meet the new year with love in their hearts for all men, guided by the Holy Spirit, and accompanied by three companions: faith, hope, and courage.

We need stout hearts to meet the future, a future pregnant with unborn events and big with possibilities. Fear and apprehension will but unfit us for the fray. They conjure up unrealities, magnify and distort the possible future fact until it looms so large that we see no escape and cringingly await the crack of doom.

The evil of tomorrow loses much of its size as we approach it. Our eyes are not fitted with telescopic lenses so we must await a close-up for a proper focus, and then we shall find ourselves equal to the task. Persistent climbing levels the hills and gives added strength to travel on.

Looking back we see that the pattern of our lives, which sometimes seemed so baffling, has taken shape and meaning. We needed only faith to try, hope to inspire, and courage to endure.

Listen, then, to the voice of the angel of hope as she whispers, "The night passes; morning breaks, the day is dawning; it can be done; carry on!"

We look forward with calm assurance as we remember the Savior's oft-repeated admonitions: "Fear not" (see Luke 5:10, 12:7, 32; John 12:15); "Be not troubled" (see Matthew 24:6; Mark 13:7; John 14:1, 27); "Peace be still" (see Mark 4:39). Faith made His calmness majestic, courage made Him Master of all. He never lost hope, for He knew God's love. He now bids us take His yoke upon us with a promise that our burdens will be light.

His guidebook for the pilgrim was the simple "Follow me.

May faith inspire hope and courage, and may love encompass all. With these companions, and with the help which He has promised, we will be greater than anything that can happen to us.

—Message to the Central British Mission, January, 1962
