Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

You are an Original

Young men and young women, you who stand on the edge of life, you who are just coming into it, coming into your own; you who are just beginning to feel the thrill and the power of young manhood and young womanhood; you who are just taking over the control of your own lives. I'd like to chat with you a few minutes as one who has been over the road. I'm not going to preach a sermon and say, "don't do this and don't do that." I'm going to, if I may, talk to you as a father, as a lawyer, as an army man, as a business man, as a church man. I'm going to try to bring you some viewpoints with respect to religion which, if you will be open minded and teachable, I think might be useful to you as you go down the road of life.

First, I'd like to say to you, young men and women, religion is not just a matter of saying your prayers and paying your tithing and keeping the Word of Wisdom. Religion is not just a matter of going to church. Religion is not just a matter of any outward form or ceremony. Religion is a way of life. Your life. What are you going to do with it, and why? Do you want to succeed? Well, what do you mean, succeed? I'll save that for another discussion, but you answer it. Just what is it you want? What success are you talking about? What kind of a man, what kind of a woman do you want to be? What would you like your friends to think of when they think of you? What kind of imprint and impression do you want to make on the world?

Do you realize, young men, young women, that each of you is an original? There never was another like you in this world. God throws the mold away every time he makes a man, never makes an identical twin. I wonder why! I think He made you what you are in order that you might do some particular thing better than anyone else in the world could do it; and if you don't find what that work is and do it, that particular work will not be done. God expects that you will do your work and do your share. Now if you are going to qualify to do any type of work, you need to be prepared to do the thing you're expected to do. You must have the right kind of education. When I speak of education, I'm not speaking only of that which you get in your mind. I'm speaking, and I may say mainly, from the standpoint of that which helps direct the course of your life.

The education of the heart is important. I have met some very highly educated men, as the world views education, who have been thought to be successful and have thought themselves successful. I have met them at the peak of their so-called success and have met them after they have gone over the top and were about ready to leave and evaluate their own lives. And I've been amused at the unanimity of these so-called great men on one point. Their success-real, genuine, lasting success-has been dependent upon the education of the heart. Faith in God, faith in themselves, faith in their fellowmen and willingness to serve-these have been fundamental in the lives of many great men whom I have had the pleasure of meeting.

Boys and girls, your character, your standards, your ideals-you are important! God expects you to be true. He sent you here at this time because He knew something of your preexistent work, because you are better than we, your elders, for the job that you have to do. You have come upon this planet in an atomic age. There will be more power in your hands than your grandfathers ever dreamed of. You will travel at greater speed, you will be able to contact millions where we contacted ten. Your influence and your life and your prestige are going to affect His work, and it was because He knew you were true in the spirit world that He sent you here now. I pray you, be worthy of that trust. I pray you, do not be cheap, do not be foolish enough to ruin your life for a moment of thrill. Be men, be women, be honorable Latter-day Saints.

I bear you the testimony of a man who at least stands somewhere nearer the grave than he was a hundred years ago. I bear you the testimony of one who knows that he is going to meet his Maker soon; and looking back over life's road, which is varied and intensely interesting, I say to you: Jesus of Nazareth appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

I pray God we may all be worthy. May we never forget, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Smithfield Stake Conference, September 26, 1954
