Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Talking to the Oldsters

This afternoon for just a little while I should like to talk with the older folk about what the Church really means to us. People sometimes think they have made sacrifices for the Church when they have gone on missions or labored at home and perhaps have deprived themselves of some worldly riches in order to serve in the Church. I feel that whatever contributions we have made, whatever we have tried to do for others, we still owe a very great debt of gratitude to the Church and to the Lord and we shall not live long enough to pay it. If a man devotes his whole time to serving his fellowmen and serves devotedly for a long lifetime, he will not be able to repay one millionth part of what God has done for him. And so if we can be helpful to others, and in this "horizontal" religion we can reach out and lift and benefit and bless, I am sure we shall be ourselves rewarded in ways far beyond anything we may presently understand or comprehend.

In talking with the young people this morning, we attempted to present to them some ideas with respect to the faith we have that this is God's work that it came as a direct result of a revelation and vision from heaven and that following the visitation of the Master and the Father, angels were sent on different errands. Authority was given and men were commissioned, the Church was organized and the great missionary system instituted. As we grow older and look back over the history of the Church, we see what was done by men who had not the advantages that some of us have today, but who did stupendous things in a remarkable way. When we see the result of their work, the changed attitude of many people, when I remember that when I went to England the first time there were mobbings, drivings and persecution and a number of people gave their lives for the gospel, I am led to wonder if I am worthy of my heritage. When I think of my own grandfather with the Mormon Battalion; when I think of what he gave because he was a Mormon (he spent seventeen years in the mission field, and all but two of them with only one leg, the rest walking on crutches); when I think of what my own parents did, of my angel mother who raised seven boys and seven girls on a ranch, the sacrifices she made and the imprint she left in the hearts of those fourteen boys and girls with respect to God and religion and life and service; when I think of these things and of the pioneers who came west under such trying circumstances, of those of them who went north as we did into Canada and others south into Mexico and into other outlying places-when I think of such people I think of what has been put into this work and what you and I have inherited because of their sacrifices. It makes me desire to do everything I can do to show my gratitude for their faith and devotion.

I am sure that I shall be ashamed, when my time comes-if I am permitted to go where my father and mother are-if I cannot conscientiously say to them, "I tried to follow your example." I think we older ones need to be reminded of our duty! I think we need to be reminded that we who are older are in a very large measure responsible for what might happen to those who are younger. "Twas a sheep not a lamb that strayed away In the parable Jesus told, A grown-up sheep that strayed away From the ninety and nine in the fold. "And why for the sheep should we seek And earnestly hope and pray? Because there is danger when sheep go wrong; They lead the lambs astray. "Lambs will follow the sheep, you know, Wherever the sheep may stray. When sheep go wrong, it won't take long Til the lambs are as wrong as they. "And so with the sheep we earnestly plead For the sake of the lambs today, For when sheep are lost, what a terrible cost The lambs will have to pay! "The Echo," C C. Miller

I think we older people need to think of that. I think we need to examine ourselves and see whether we measure up. I think we older ones should question ourselves as to whether or not we in our inner selves have arrived. We were baptized; we had some faith; we repented, partly; we were confirmed, and then were ordained to the priesthood. But are we justified from there on in just sitting in a chair with our hands on the shelf that nature provided for older people and walt to go to heaven? Is that our estimate of the meaning of faith and of service and of the Church and God?

We released a man three weeks ago from an office in the stake and while what he said was facetious, I have thought about it since. Brother Lee said, "What are you going to do now that you are released?" He said, "Well, I think for the first ten years I'll just sit in a rocking chair on the front porch," and when asked what he was going to do after that the man said, "I'm going to start to rock!"

Have you seen people who have arrived, who have done all they are going to do, who are just going to heaven immediately when they die? There are going to be a lot of people surprised. I believe with Dr. James E. Talmage "That any man can go into the highest degree of the celestial kingdom of God when his actions have been such that he can feel at home there." Would you feel at home tomorrow in His presence? I am reminded that the "glory of God is intelligence" and I assume that those around him share that glory in proportion to their intelligence and if that be true then the degree of my intelligence will determine my ability to enjoy my surroundings; and if I do not feel at home in heaven I expect to ask for a transfer, or to get it without asking for it, and I think the transfer will probably be downward. In other words, I'll go where I can feel at home even though I might have to shovel coal.

Through the years I have wished I might help to convert Latter-day Saints to the genius of Mormonism, not just to the first principles. I would like to say to the Latter-day Saints what the apostle Paul said to the Saints of his day, "Leaving the first principles, let us go on unto perfection." None of us have achieved that yet, and only to the degree that we are constantly growing, gaining intelligence, knowledge and understanding-only to that degree are we fully living our religion. Of course, I believe in the Word of Wisdom and the law of tithing, in saying prayers, going to church, in all the things the Lord said we should do; but I believe it is possible for a man to do all of those things and leave undone the things which the Savior called the "weightier matters of the law." "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." (Matthew 23:23.)

One man who stood in the synagogue, according to the Master, and in his self-conceit he said, "I thank thee God, that I am not as other men," and then he went on to tell how he had fasted, how much tithing he paid and how he had done this and that and said he was thankful that he was not like the poor publican. The publican also prayed but he did not even raise his eyes toward heaven; he only said, "God be merciful to me a sinner." The Savor said that the second prayer was heard, and "this man went down to his house justified rather than the other."

Complacency is a very grave danger in the Church as well as in the world. We need to be aroused to the fact that there is much yet to do in this matter of gaining our salvation. The goal is so high that not only can it be seen from both sides of the valley of life, it is so far distant that we can pursue it throughout the endless ages of eternity, attempting to become like that from which we came-God our Father. We need to study more, to think more, to pray more fervently, to do our full duty.

Some have thought that upon joining the Church and being faithful all trials would end, all difficulties disappear, and all temptations cease. We are reminded of the young bride who, on her wedding day, said to her mother, "I am the happiest girl in the world. I have come to the end of all my troubles."

And the wise mother replied, "Yes, my dear, but you don't know which end."

No, joining the Church doesn't insure us against difficulty. I see faces before me today upon which time has written a history of struggle, hard work and heart-break, disappointment and bereavement. I see men and women here, and I see them all over the Church, who have given everything to the cause, they have struggled with poverty, sickness, bereavement, disappointment and heartbreak, but they've kept on, and day by day they have knelt and thanked God for His many blessings and prayed for strength to endure.

I am always inspired when duty calls me to the home of some of our people who have very little of this world's goods, who have, it seems as one looks on from without, very little to be grateful for. As I have visited with them and have been invited to kneel with them in prayer and have heard them, in broken voices, thank God for all their blessings-as I have listened to their humble prayers, I have been ashamed that sometimes I have complained at my lot.

Just last Sunday someone handed me this, and I like it:

The other day upon the bus, I saw a lovely girl with golden hair. I envied her, she was so gay, and wished I was as fair. When suddenly she arose to leave, I saw her hobble down the aisle- She had one leg, and wore a crutch, and as she stood, a smile. Oh, God, forgive me when I whine. I have two legs, the world is mine. And then I stopped to buy some sweets-the lad who sold them had such charm. I talked with him-he was so pleased-if I were late twould do no harm. And when I left he said to me, "Thank you, you've been so kind. It's nice to talk with folks like you. You see," he said, "I'm blind." Oh, God, forgive me when I whine. I have two eyes, the world is mine. Then later, walking down the street, I saw a child with eyes of blue. He stood and watched the others play-it seemed he knew not what to do. I paused a moment and I said, "Why don't you join the others, dear?" He looked ahead without a word, and then I knew, he could not hear. Oh, God, forgive me when I whine. I have two ears, the world is mine. With legs to take me where I'd go, with eyes to see the sunset's glow, With ears to hear what I should know, Oh, God, forgive me when I whine! I'm blessed indeed, the world is mine!

Brothers and sisters, the Savior never did promise His followers that they would have lives of ease and comfort. In fact, the very insignia of Christianity is a cross! And the being whom most Christians worshipped in the meridian of time was a Man with a crown of thorns upon his head.

Someone has said that if you have not known sorrow, heartbreak, disappointment and bereavement, God has forgotten you. God has been good to us. Sometimes our hearts have been broken. He has let us know we have hearts. So shall we all take courage, take our share of the load, and carry it courageously? One of the greatest lessons the Master taught was how to carry a cross. Let us remember the rest of the song we just sang, How Firm a Foundation"- When through the deep waters I call thee to go, The rivers of sorrow shall not thee o'erflow, For I will be with thee, thy troubles to bless, And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress. When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My grace, all sufficient, shall be thy supply. The flame shall not hurt thee; I only design Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine.

May God bless each one of us that we may have the courage and the faith and the fortitude to be better Latter-day Saints; to gain knowledge, intelligence and wisdom; may we come closer to him until we feel and know His presence and appreciate the eternal and almost unbelievable fact that He, God, the Creator of all, is our Father. May we know there is something of Him in us, which means we can grow into something like Him; and with that faith we will have the courage to meet what comes. Let us never complain if' in the vicissitudes of life, we do not get all the things we would like to have or if those whom we love the best are taken from us.

I stood last week at the bedside of a young mother in the hospital in Salt Lake. The family had sent for me because I had known them in England. I saw a broken-hearted husband. I saw a weeping father and mother. Out of the very depth of his soul I heard that father speak as Abraham of old spoke when asked to sacrifice his son. That father said, "If it be thy will, oh God, so be it." I knelt with them at that bedside and administered to her, and three days later I spoke at her funeral. I saw faith and fortitude and courage such as we do not often encounter. I saw that this fire through which they were passing was a cleansing, purifying thing, consuming the dross and refining the gold.

I have enjoyed immensely being with you. Last night in the Priesthood meeting we asked the members of the priesthood to join with us in prayer asking God to accept an invitation to this conference and to be present by His spirit. As one of His servants I testify to you that He has been here today, and though you may forget what has been said you will not forget what you have felt. You have felt His Holy Spirit.

May it cleanse and purify all of us. May we go from this meeting resolved to learn more of the gospel; to put more of it into practice and, whatever our age, to keep growing, for only through intelligence and the refining influence that works upon us to make us more God-like may we be welcomed into His kingdom.

Peace be with you. The President of the Church has asked us in all of our conferences to carry his love and blessing to the people. Today he is in Canada-in Calgary dedicating a chapel. He is traveling all the time. His vitality is remarkable. God does bless that man, and he is God's prophet. I bring his blessing to you and humbly add my own and thank you for the privilege of having come to you and pray for his blessings ever to attend you, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—San Luis Stake Conference, September 16, 1956
