Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

On Church Service

My dear brethren, I think in a long lifetime of Church service, appearing before various sized groups, I have never felt more humble than I do tonight as I stand before this vast group of men and realize even more are listening in. My feeling of inadequacy is emphasized by the fact that you have asked me to assume some duties and responsibilities for which I am not prepared. I therefore lean heavily tonight on your sympathy and God's goodness.

I do not like to compare the Church to an army particularly, but in some ways the two are similar. In both organizations we are dealing with human beings, and human beings are pretty much the same wherever you find them. I am thinking at the moment of an incident in 1912 when Lord Roberts, then the highest ranking officer in the British Army, came to Western Canada to promote the organization of what was then known as the Militia. He called all of the young officers who were in training into a secret meeting. Among other things, he said to us, and I can only paraphrase:

"Gentlemen, a war is coming. In my opinion it cannot be delayed more than two years. It is going to be the worst war in history thus far, and I have been sent by the King to help prepare the nation for what is ahead."

His prediction, of course, as to the time of the out-break of the war was accurate, because the war started for Britain in 1914. Subsequent to that time, it was my duty to talk to officers in the Army, always under instruction from commanding officers. My purpose and objective was, first, to acquaint the officers, so far as I could with the strength and position of the enemy; second, to remind the men of their duty and to encourage undeviating loyalty; and third then to warn them against the methods employed by the enemy-subtle infiltration and attempted alienation.

We said to these officers, "Your units will not be stronger than their leaders. You can judge the strength of any military unit by the quality of its leaders." And we called upon those officers to be worthy of the confidence of their men. We reminded them also that the lives of other men depended upon their efficiency and loyalty.

Tonight we are speaking to perhaps 50,000 men, and every man is a volunteer and qualified officer. Upon each one of you there is great responsibility regardless of where you are working or the size of the group over which you preside. Here, as in the army, our strength is going to depend in large measure upon the quality of our officers, and our purpose tonight is to warn you Priesthood holders, and through you all the members of the Church, of the existence, strength, location and tactics of the enemy. We remind you that we rely on your absolute loyalty and that preparedness is indispensable.

In the army too frequently when we refer to fitness we think only physical fitness. Tonight we are calling upon all of you officers of the Church to be fit and ready, physically, mentally, morally, and spiritually, for the war that lies ahead, because our foes are determined to destroy all that we hold dear. The enemy is led by men well trained in their type of warfare, and the Devil is commanding officer. Not only must we meet a head-on assault from the enemy, but the more dangerous and subtle attack will be one of infiltration-human termites will undertake to undermine our forces. I believe, my brethren, the time has come when every men who holds the priesthood should figuratively stand himself against the wall and look himself over, ask himself some questions and be honest with his answers. You may as well be honest when you are talking to yourself because the man you are talking to knows who you are and what you are. There are at least two times when a man will be honest, and that is when he is talking to himself, and when he is in his closet talking with God. Here, at least, the truth will be distilled.

Let us then examine ourselves and ask what kind of men we are. We might make a pretty good showing in public, be fairly successful in business or in politics; but let each man ask himself what kind of man he is in the home, in his business, in his private life. If you do not like what you see as you look at yourself, then do something about it. God will not hold any man guiltless who simply confesses his sin and doesn't abandon it, or who admits his weakness and doesn't work for strength.

May I pause here to remind all of us that it matters little what position we hold, but it matters much what we do in the position we hold. Brother Lee referred to Paul's reminder that there is need for all the parts of the body. I am thinking of the Church as the body. No one of us should say or think at any time, "If I were in some other place, I could display my superior ability and faith, but in the position I have I do not have a chance to show what I can do. If I were a bishop or stake president or high councilman or one of the general authorities, of course, I could perform a great work, but down here where I am the work I am doing doesn't amount to much."

Brethren, when we stand before the judgment bar of God-and I am saying tonight as Lord Roberts said in 1912, a judgment day is ahead-I think we will not be asked what position we held in the Church. I think the only question, if any questions are necessary, will be, "What did you do with the job assigned to you?" And if a counselor in an elders' quorum, or a counselor in the bishopric, or a man in any other position anywhere in the Church can honestly say, "I did the best I could to fill the position assigned to me," if he can say that honestly, and if one of the general authorities cannot say it honestly, I would rather be the counselor in the elders' quorum, etc. because the Lord is not going to pay much attention to any inscription one may have on his chest. The Lord is not interested in labels. He knows as we do that labels do not always tell the truth.

Personally, I thank God for the opportunity to work. I am grateful, among other things, that this, the Church of Jesus Christ, gives opportunity to every man and woman, and to children as well, incidentally, to participate in the work of the Lord. There is no position in this Church that is not bigger than the man that holds it, as there is room for growth in every position or calling. Every man should be apprised of that and realize that in each position in the Church there is opportunity for any man to employ all the ability with which the Lord has blessed him.

We come to you tonight to challenge you, to warn you that there is a war now being waged, the most dangerous and devastating-an ideological war, a spiritual war, a war in which the enemy is endeavoring to enslave the bodies and minds and souls of men, and to fight this we must be prepared.

Let us be loyal to the stakes and wards, missions and branches to which we have the honor to belong. Let us be true to ourselves and true to our leaders. Again a quick analogy. I have seen instances where junior officers criticized senior officers because they stayed far behind the lines and did not know what was going on in the trenches. Very often the junior officers were critical of the senior officers because they did not know there was a rat hole in a dugout, forgetful of the fact that the man back there upon whom rested the total responsibility of the entire operation had something to do other than look at a rat hole. He must leave that to the man who happens to be in that dugout.

At the head of our force we have Jesus, the Christ, who joined issue with Beelzebub when the foundation of this world was laid. Beelzebub-the Devil, Lucifer-declared then that he would never rest until he had enslaved the souls of men, and Christ declared that He would never rest until each soul was free to "choose his life and what he'll be." And under the Lord Jesus Christ, we are led by a prophet of God.

We, then, are enlisted in an army with Christ at the head, directing His work through a living prophet. Let us be loyal to them, true to ourselves, and let each of us do the job assigned to us in the place where we are asked to work, to the best of our ability.

I want to assure you that I know what it means to be asked to do a job a thousand times too big for me, and yet I know too that God can take any one of us and do anything he wants to do through us. Let us not spend time asking the Lord to do something for us when He is waiting and anxious to do something through us. Let us not forget that the priesthood we bear is not in us as individuals, but the power of it comes through us. Let us keep ourselves worthy for the power to be transmitted. Let us go forward unafraid as President McKay admonished us at the beginning of this conference. May we have courage and fortitude and faith and the knowledge that though we will undoubtedly have to meet many difficulties, with God's help we need not fear. I like this verse of the "Battle Hymn of the Republic." He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat; He is sifting out the hearts of men before His judgment seat: Oh, be swift, my soul, to answer Him! Be jubilant, my feet! Our God is marching on.

God bless you, my brethren. I thank you for your support. I want to tell you that we have at the head of the Church today one of the greatest leaders of the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. I know this from intimate association with him. God has honored him, and we who sit next to him day by day see the work of the Church being outlined, organized, and going forward under the inspiration of heaven. I testify to you that he is the Prophet of God, and that these men who are associated here with us are true and loyal to him.

I leave you my testimony of the restoration of the Gospel, and I want you to know that the President and all of us have confidence in you. You will not let us down nor be untrue to yourselves, nor become traitors to the cause. Furthermore, you may be sure that ultimately righteousness will triumph, truth will prevail. The Church has been organized and set up. It is the Kingdom of God, and it will never be thrown down.

God bless us to do our part. To this end I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—General Priesthood Meeting, September 30, 1961
