Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

The Discerning Life!

Prepare the Youth

What are the virtues you attempt to instil in the lives of the young people over whom you preside, the things that you have incorporated into your own lives? I know of no better summary of the elements of the abundant life than the one given by the great German teacher and philosopher, Goethe. He said, "There are nine requisites for contented living; Faith enough to make work a pleasure; wealth enough to support your needs; strength to battle with difficulties and overcome them; grace enough to confess your sins and forsake them; patience enough to toil until some good is accomplished; charity enough to see some good in your neighbor; love enough to move you to be useful and helpful to others; faith enough to make real the things of God; and hope enough to remove all anxious fears concerning the future."

The Apostle Peter also set forth a catalogue of virtues. I shall not dwell on them at length, but should like to discuss some of them. He, of course, named FAITH as the first great essential, the moving cause of all action, without which the prophets have told us through the ages it is impossible to please God.

Faith is, in fact, as Paul said to the Galatians, a gift of the Spirit, and it should not be held in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. We all need faith-faith in ourselves and in our fellowmen, faith in our country and our way of life, faith in the ultimate triumph of righteousness, faith in God and in a glorious future.

I am thinking, too, of what faith can do in the lives of the young men and women of the MIA. Your faith in them will inspire them to greater effort. Believe in them, because they are God's children and He needs you to help him in His effort to bring to pass their immortality and eternal life. Unwavering faith engenders indomitable courage, and courage has been called the queen of the virtues because none of them could long endure without it. It is the guarantor of all the other virtues.

As we mature in life we see the logic and wisdom of Peter in listing VIRTUE to follow or accompany faith. Wherever there is loss of virtue there is inevitable loss of self-respect, and self-respect is indispensable to self-confidence, which is an attribute of faith. The righteous and abundant life inspires faith and courage, and the search for knowledge becomes stimulating and fruitful.

Someone has said that "Wisdom is the goal of education; knowledge is the beginning of the way to that end." William Cowper said, "Knowledge is proud that he has learned so much; wisdom is humble that he knows no more."

There is another quality of mind and soul which you exemplify and teach and that is creative imagination. The Lord left this world of ours unfinished in a sense, and calls upon us to use our imagination and our innate creative powers in order that we might discover, improve and enjoy our universe.

The following words of Dr. Stockdale are to the point: "When God made the earth, he could have finished it, but he didn't. Instead, he left it as raw material to tease us and tantalize us and set us thinking and experimenting and risking and adventuring, and therein we find the supreme interest in living. Have you ever noticed that a small child in a nursery will ignore clever mechanical toys in order to build with spools and strings and sticks and blocks a world of his own imagination? And so with grownups, too. God gave us a world unfinished so that we might share in the joys and satisfaction of creation. He left the oil in the Trenton rock. He left the electricity in the clouds. He left the rivers unbridged and the mountains untrailed. He left the forests unfelled and the cities unbuilt. He left the laboratories unopened. He left the diamonds uncut. He gave us a challenge of raw materials, not the satisfaction of perfect finished things. He left the music unsung, the dramas unplayed. He left the poetry undreamed in order that men and women might not become bored with life, but engage in stimulating, exciting, creative activities to keep them thinking, working, experimenting, and experiencing all the joys and durable satisfactions of achievement. Work, thought, creation-these give life its stimulus, its real satisfaction, its stimulating value.

"Progress comes not by some magic word, not by government edict, but from the thoughts, the toil, the tears, the triumphs of individuals who accept the challenge of raw material, and by the grace of God-given talents produce results which satisfy the needs of men."

In the use of knowledge Peter suggests the balance wheel of TEMPERANCE, because knowledge is power and power can be dangerous. Much of the world today is dominated by wilful, godless men who, through technical knowledge, have the power to destroy the world. Knowledge alone will not insure salvation. While it is true that we are saved no faster than we gain knowledge, it must be used with wisdom and develop into intelligence.

Beware of the temptation to use your power or authority for personal aggrandizement. Pride is a besetting sin. When you tell Satan to get behind you do not turn around and face him to demonstrate your conquest. Beware when you think you stand, lest you fall!

While the progress of mankind is built upon the continued reinterpretation of concepts which fail to meet the tests of new-found facts, so far as the Gospel of Jesus Christ is concerned there are certain eternal verities which change not. We hope you will carry the assurance to the young people of the Church, as they seek for knowledge, as they pursue their studies in science and art and other things, that the gospel of Jesus Christ is eternal and unchangeable, its laws are inexorable and immutable. Help them to get a correct interpretation of the principles of the gospel, and to apply them in their lives.

While the past teaches us much, and we must learn and apply the lessons which it has to teach, we should use the lessons of the past as a base from which we may soar out into the uncharted areas of undiscovered truth. As we go forward you and they should cultivate tolerance. Tolerance requires that we respect the opinions of others, that competing ideas be tested, one against the other, so that the best, which might not always be our own, can prevail. Only when all sides of the question are heard are we justified in coming to a conclusion. But never condone evil in the name of tolerance.

I have sometimes thought that if the Lord had laid before me a preview of the whole history of the world and had said to me, "You may choose your own time or dispensation for earth life," I think I would have chosen to come in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times.

Perhaps it would have been interesting to be with Adam in the Garden of Eden, but I am afraid I wouldn't have stayed there any longer than he did. I am afraid the "lone and dreary world" would have been an uninviting place.

It would have been interesting to live in the days of Noah, the Noachian Dispensation, but I doubt if I would have been one of the eight who survived. I think the Dispensation of Abraham was a great one; through him and his sons, Isaac and Jacob, Israel became established. Those were great days, and it would have been wonderful to live at that time.

The Mosaic Dispensation was a glorious time of deliverance and re-establishment, when Israel's leaders walked and talked with God and the ten commandments were given. I do not know that I would have enjoyed the 40 years in the wilderness, especially if I had known what I now know about the possibility of going the same distance in a few minutes, and yet it was a great dispensation. And the other prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, all of the prophets-I would have liked to have lived and known and been with them. It would have certainly been wonderful to have lived in the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time. I love that song:

I think, when I read that sweet story of old, When Jesus was here among men, How He called little children like lambs to His fold; I should like to have been with Him then.

But again, I am not sure if I had lived at that time that I would have been with the minority. I am not sure that I would have followed the Christ. I might have cried as did the majority, "Crucify him." Of course, none of us would wish we could have lived in the years immediately following the Christian Era, or through the Dark Ages, but the time that I would have chosen to live if I could have witnessed the events of all the dispensations and known the end from the beginning would have been the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times, our own time, and I would have chosen America for my home. Owen Seaman expressed this thought in the following verse:

Ye that have faith to look with fearless eyes Beyond the tragedy of a world at strife, And know that out of death and night shall rise The dawn of ampler life: Rejoice, whatever anguish rend the heart, That God has given you the priceless dower, To live in these great times and have your part In freedom's crowning hour. That ye may tell your sons who see the light High in the heavens-their heritage to take- "I saw the powers of darkness take their flight; I saw the morning break."

But sometimes I almost wish I had been born 50 years later and been a member of your generation because I see for you the greatest opportunities and challenges of all time.

We call upon you to go back to your stakes, your missions, your wards, and your branches and instill into the hearts of the young people of the Church, first, faith in God faith in themselves, in their country, and in the ultimate triumph of righteousness.

Carry back to them hope and courage and the necessity of being vigilant, alert, and prepared. Teach them that integrity is to the heart what knowledge is to the brain. Teach them to be honest, true, upright and virtuous. For the battles which lie ahead they must be equipped with the whole armor of God and then they will relish the prospect of the future.

God help us all that we may do our part to prepare for that future, ominous though it may be. I leave a blessing with you MIA workers. From my heart I pray God to bless and guide you as you undertake to help to guide the youth of the Church, the reserves of the army of the Lord. I pray that God will bless you in your homes, in your work, in your play, and that He will give you faith and courage and fortitude to make you equal to your tasks. I pronounce this blessing upon you and promise that these things will be yours as you continue to inculcate into the lives of those over whom you preside in the great MIA cause the saving principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

I again leave my testimony of the divinity of this work. I know better than I know anything else in the world that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. It becomes my duty and my privilege to so testify, and I do it in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—MIA Conference, June 17, 1962
