Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

The Influence of the Primary Association

My dear co-workers, officers and teachers of the great Primary Association of the Church, President McKay wished me to bring to you his love, confidence and appreciation for the great work you are doing in this, one of the greatest of the organizations of the Church. All of the general authorities join with him in wishing for you and promising to you the rewards which come from serving the Lord through Serving His children.

I do not wish to start on a negative note, but it is impossible in these times to speak in public without making reference to the conditions and challenges which confront the leaders and peoples of the world. There is at work in the world today an age-old menacing power which is better organized now than at any time in the history of the world. Hundreds of millions of people are enslaved by that power. In fact, hundreds of millions of children are being systematically indoctrinated in communistic countries with the idea that there is no God, that religion is an opiate, and that Christ is a myth.

If I were instructing a group of army officers just prior to a battle, I think I would alert them as to the size and the objectives of the enemy so they might be prepared to meet him. It is in that spirit that I bring to this select group just a word with respect to the kind of enemy we face.

That enemy is making a relentless attack on three fronts-the home, the Church, and God. On all three fronts the Primary workers of the Church are enlisted, behind the lines, to equip and prepare our children, the reserves of the Church, to step into the front lines and replace casualties. No group is doing a more effective work than this great organization.

As your work is primarily concerned with children, I like to combine the words Home and Primary, and make a hyphenated word. These words, and the institutions which they represent, have the same connotation-Love.

I would like to read a line from the Doctrine and Covenants:

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God.

But I have commended you to bring up your children in light and truth.

—Doctrine and Covenants 93:38, 40

In the Book of Moses, The Pearl of Great Price, we read:

Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; . . .

Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, . . .

—Moses 6:57, 58

Dr. Milton Bennion gave us a definition of teaching which I think will endure. "All teaching is or ought to be a fine art based upon adequate scientific foundations. The teaching of religion is in the broadest meaning of that term the finest of fine arts. Teaching by example, both in conduct and in attitude, is always better than teaching by precept alone."

Isaiah in olden times, said, "And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." (Isaiah 54:13.) Teaching the children to love the Lord is the prime object, the very purpose of Primary work. But the teacher must be what she teaches. We often hold up before our classes the ideal of the Christ and say to them that He was a perfect man. We repeat His admonition: Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. I would like to remind the Primary teachers, many of whom are mothers, that when you are teaching little children of the perfection of Christ, the degree of their comprehension of what perfection means is measured by what they see before them in you.

He who teaches religion or teaches about God must not only possess the idea of God but must be himself possessed by that idea. A great teacher once said: "Both teachers and students must realize the need for goals and ideals to unify their energy, to integrate their personalities, and to draw forth the potentially best in them which otherwise would lie dormant. They must have the love for and the desire to emulate the great ideal which is Jesus. He prefers active emulation over passive adoration."

When one glorifies such a vision in his mind, and enthrones such an ideal in his heart, he has a blue-print by which he builds his life. Let us hold up before ourselves and our students the ideals of a perfect person. If we are going to say with Jesus, "Be ye therefore perfect, . . ." then we, their parents, their teachers, must undertake to approach some degree of perfection.

It was said in the temple this morning, and it seemed to me appropriate here, that too many of us go through life unaware of our surroundings, of our opportunities, of our privileges, and of our responsibilities. All of us need to stretch our minds, to enrich our spirits by meditation and prayer, and to purify our souls by great companionship. Great companionship makes one feel his own insignificance and yet he is filled with a desire to stretch his mind to reach up, to be and to become more like that which he admires. And so as we teach the children to love and worship God they will seek to become like that which they adore.

I think, my dear sisters, the quality of your teaching depends in large measure upon your attitude toward your work. What is it you are doing and for what reason? You have all heard, of course, the old story of three men working cutting stone for a cathedral. When a visitor asked the first man what he was doing, he said, "I'm cutting rock." The second man was asked, "What are you doing?" "Well, I'm working for three dollars a day." The third man replied as he removed his cap and looked up at the unfinished cathedral, "I'm building a cathedral." Are you working for so much a day, are you just fulfilling an assignment, or are you building character?

You are working on materials far more valuable and more enduring than the materials in a cathedral. Every imprint you make will be eternal. Parents and teachers will be judged largely by the quality of their work. I wish I could qualify to stand beside the dedicated Primary workers of the Church and be judged with them and somehow borrow a bit from their glory.

Jesus said, "And for their sakes I sanctify myself, (John 17:19.) I am very sure that all Primary teachers and officers and most parents desire to sanctify themselves for the work which lies ahead. But that work is not always easy. It is a wonderful privilege, it is a great challenge, to be asked to labor among those of whom the Savior said, ". . . of such is the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 19:14.) Oh, I'm quite aware that in some of your classes you have wondered what heaven must be like. I think I see a little red-headed, freckle-faced bundle of electricity and dust in a class. Yet, that boy may become the President of the Church. We have to look through and see the soul of a child. The Lord will qualify and prepare you to meet your responsibilities. The poet said: "Because the way was steep and long and through a dark and dismal land, God put upon my lips a song and placed a lantern in my hand."

Doctor Beck tells us, and I hope we can remember some of this: "Truth never comes to a child disembodied or detached, but always with the slant and quality of the teacher's interpretation of it. It is as if the teacher's mind and spirit were the stained glass through which the sunlight must fall. All that passes through the medium of living personality, takes the tone and quality from that contact."

The pupils may not grasp the lesson from their books, but their teachers are living epistles known and read by all of them. What we are too often drowns out what we say. Precepts may fail, but personality never does.

You know, sisters, things don't just happen in the spiritual realm any more than they do in the realm with which we are better acquainted. All things are caused. I am thinking of the tremendous responsibility you have. Referring again to military reserves, no army is stronger than its reserves. Unless the reserves are prepared to step into the places of the front line troops and carry on, no army will succeed; neither will any church organization.

These whom you are teaching are the future bishops, stake presidents, mission presidents, general authorities, heads of the women's organizations (Relief Society, MIA, Primary Association), and you are preparing them for that which lies ahead.

The influence of the Primary in the home is an influence greatly needed in the home. The mother has a lot to do besides teaching Primary lessons and the child needs to get out of the home and make new contacts, push back horizons, and find new worlds. These children are going to come home and say, "Mother, my Primary teacher taught me what you taught me. It must be right." What a wonderful combination-home-Primary.

Sometimes it is the privilege of the mother to help her child to transfer his allegiance, measurably at least, from her to God. Mother is really another name for God in the minds of little children, but there will come a time when she will not be with them. They lean on her; they trust her; they receive nourishment from her; but the time will come when they must rely on someone else. The adept mother, aided by the skillful Primary teacher, prepares the child to transfer his affection and his dependence to their Heavenly Father.

May I tell a little story? More than half a century ago, I was standing on a little railway station platform in Cardston, Canada. I was leaving for England on a mission. My saintly mother stood there with me and held my hand. This is what she said. "Hugh, my son, do you remember when you were a little boy you often had bad dreams, nightmares, and you called out to me as I was sleeping in the next room: `Mother, Mother, are you there?' Do you remember I always said, `Yes, my son, I'm here. Just turn over and go to sleep. Everything is all right.'" She said, "My boy, five thousand miles must now separate us, across a continent and an ocean. You are not going to have bad dreams only at night, but many times, in the daytime, you are going to want to call for help and comfort. Son, when you are beset with difficulties, when you meet temptation, when you are confused and don't know where to go, call out and say, `Father, are you there?'" She said, "My boy, I promise you He will always answer and you need not fear."

My dear sisters, through the intervening years, countless occasions have arisen where men could not help me much, when I felt alone, where I had a nightmare with my eyes wide open. I have taken the advice of my mother and have said, "Father, are you there?" Now He has not spoken to me audibly; He has not appeared to me personally; but He has always answered me. There has come into my heart a quiet peace which enabled me to know that I could, figuratively, turn over and go to sleep.

Sisters, can you imagine how you would feel if suddenly the Lord should say to you, "Here are twenty angels I have just sent down from heaven. I want you to prepare them for a future mortality." Can you imagine how you would shrink from teaching angels? Yet, that is exactly what He has done for you. These little ones left His presence just a few days ago. You are teaching them to form correct habits; you are teaching them to believe in the gospel of Christ; you are teaching them that the doctrine of communism is the doctrine of Satan. You are teaching them there is a God, that the Church is divine, and that Christ is their Redeemer. God bless you in that teaching. Changing times have made it somewhat more difficult than it used to be perhaps, and yet the Lord has promised to make all of us equal to our tasks if we will put our trust in Him.

It is wonderful to know that at the close of a day we have done some little good, have sown a seed or plucked a thorn. If I could know when each day dies, I'd brought some joy to tired eyes; If I could know when falls the night, I'd helped to make some child's life bright; If I could know at set of sun, The fruit of some good deed I'd done I'd count my life of grander mold Than if I'd simply garnered gold.

I must not detain you, but I cannot leave you without referring to what I think is one of the most sublime incidents in all history, recorded in 3 Nephi. You are familiar with it, but let us hear it again together. And having heard it, let us rededicate our lives as parents and Primary officers and teachers to the great task of preparing the reserves of the Church for the battles that lie ahead.

Jesus was often moved to tears when He was in the presence of children. Let us read then:

And it came to pass that he commanded that their little children should be brought.

So they brought their little children and set them down upon the ground round about him, and Jesus stood in the midst; and the multitude gave way till they had all been brought unto him.

And it came to pass that when they had all been brought, and Jesus stood in the midst, he commanded the multitude that they should kneel down upon the ground.

And it came to pass that when they had knelt upon the ground, Jesus groaned within himself, and said: Father, I am troubled because of the wickedness of the people of the house of Israel.

And when he had said these words, he himself also knelt upon the earth; and behold he prayed unto the Father, and the things which he prayed cannot be written, and the multitude did bear record who heard him.

And after this manner do they bear record: The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father; And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father.

And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of praying unto the Father, he arose; but so great was the joy of the multitude that they were overcome.

And it came to pass that Jesus spake unto them, and bade them arise.

And they arose from the earth, and he said unto them: Blessed are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full.

And when he had said these words, he wept, and the multitude bare record of it, and he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them. And when he had done this he wept again;

And he spake unto the multitude, and said unto them: Behold your little ones.

And as they looked to behold they cast their eyes towards heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them.

—3 Nephi 17:11-24

My dear co-workers, I speak for the President when I say to you, ". . . Behold your little ones." Angels in heaven are your associates in teaching them the gospel. You parents, remember that home is the nearest thing to heaven, or should be, and that parenthood is next to Godhood. When any person, Primary teacher, officer, or anyone else helps the parents to improve the home they are helping to accomplish His avowed purpose ". . . to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

One of the responsibilities that rests upon every man who is called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ is to bear witness of Him. I bear my witness to you today, my fellow workers, that Christ is real and I know it. God is personal and I know that. Christ is the Redeemer and the Savior of the world. When you are in the service of the Primary and the home, you are in the service of the Christ, the Son of God. I know better than I know anything else in this world that this is the Church and Kingdom of God and every person permitted to participate in any capacity in it is privileged and favored of our Heavenly Father.

Another duty and privilege of the general authorities is to bless the people. By the authority that I have to bless, I leave a blessing with you dear sisters. God bless and reward you for your devotion. God bless the general board, the general presidency, the stake presidencies, and the ward workers. God bless the mothers of Israel. God bless the homes of these people. God bless us all that we may rededicate ourselves to Him and to His work.

I leave this testimony and this blessing and say to you: though you may not remember much that has been said you will never forget what you feel at this moment-for the Spirit of the Lord is hovering over this great congregation of devoted women. If your eyes were opened, you would be able to see there are angels even as they were seen on this continent when Christ visited the Nephites. May the influence and power that is here go with you to your homes, to your wards, stakes, and missions. I leave you that blessing, that promise, that testimony, humbly, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Annual Primary Association Conference, April 5, 1962
