Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Dedication to Freedom

President Chase, members of the faculty, distinguished guests, and fellow students: Because it was my privilege to attend the funeral service of President John F. Kennedy, you have honored me by asking that I participate in this memorial service.

With thousands of others, I was deeply moved by the dignity and solemnity of the funeral and memorial services, where kings, presidents, prime ministers, and heads of states from most of the nations of the world had assembled to mourn with the American people and to pay honor to a truly great world leader.

First may I pause to pay tribute to one who is living. I have never seen a finer demonstration of courage, fortitude, and faith than I saw in the rotunda of the Capitol Building in Washington, D. C., when a tragic heroine, clasping the hand of her little daughter, walked calmly into the enclosure, knelt for a moment by her husband's casket, kissed the flag, and with admirable poise and head erect left the building.

From the moment following that awful rifle shot when she cradled his head in her blood-stained lap, through the vigil at the hospital where he died, sitting by his body during the plane flight to Washington, supervising the preparations for the funeral, the march to St. Matthew's Cathedral and then to the rites in Arlington National Cemetery-through it all she displayed courage, dignity, and self-discipline, which had been so characteristic of her husband and which are now revealed as innate and mature virtues of that valiant first lady, Jacqueline Kennedy.

While the last year has in many respects been a happy and prosperous one, we were stunned and grieved by the shocking tragedy which occurred in Dallas on November 22, when the most promising young man of this generation was cruelly shot down by an assassin.

Our whole nation was engulfed by a wave of horror, grief, and shame, but as President Eisenhower said: "Our country quickly absorbed the shock and closed ranks behind the new president. Thanks to the foresight of the founding fathers who provided in our Constitution for an orderly succession to the office of president, there was no faltering of our government or hiatus in our executive leadership. Once again our democratic system demonstrated to the world that although any political leader may pass suddenly from the scene, the institution of the presidency itself continues firm and secure." This fact proves that the American political system is tough and resilient.

It is well that we remember when we speak of the government that it is, after all, what Theodore Roosevelt declared it to be: "The government is us. We are the government, you and I."

Let us think for a moment of the real meaning of our Constitution, of our Declaration of Independence and the things for which they stand, and of our glorious flag which is an emblem. Just what these things stand for is well stated by a modern author as follows:

The flag for which the heroes fought, for which they died, is the symbol of all we are, of all we hope to be. It is the emblem of equal rights. It means that this continent has been dedicated to freedom.

It means universal education; light for every mind, knowledge for every child.

It means that the schoolhouse is the fortress of liberty.

It means that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed; that each man is accountable to and for the government. This responsibility goes hand in hand with liberty.

It means that it is the duty of every citizen to bear his part of the public burden, to take part in the affairs of his town, his county, his state.

It means that the ballot box is the ark of the covenant; that the source of authority must not be poisoned.

It means that every citizen of the Republic, native or naturalized, must be protected; at home, in every state; abroad, in every land, on every sea.

It means that all distinctions, based on birth or blood, have perished from our laws; that our government shall stand between labor and capital, between the weak and the strong, between the individual and the corporation, between want and wealth, and give and guarantee simple justice to each and all.

It means that there shall be a legal remedy for every wrong.

It means national hospitality; that we must welcome to our shores the exiles of the world, and that we may not drive them back. Some of them may be deformed by labor, dwarfed by hunger, broken in spirit, victims of tyranny and caste-in whose sad faces may be read the touching record of a weary life-and yet their children, born of liberty and love, will be symmetrical and fair, intelligent and free.

—From "The New Colossus"

by Emma Lazarus

How often we have read on the Statue of Liberty these poignant words:

Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door!

Herbert Hoover gave us this summation:

America means far more than a continent bounded by two oceans. It is more than pride of military power, glory in war, or in victory.

It means more than vast expanse of farms, of great factories or mines, magnificent cities, or millions of automobiles and radios.

It is more even than the traditions of the great tide westward from Europe, which pioneered the conquest of a continent.

It is more than our literature, our music, our poetry. Other nations have these things also.

Perhaps the intangible we cannot describe is the personal experience the living of each of us, rather than in phrase, however inspiring.

The meaning of our America flows from one pure spring. The soul of our America is its freedom of mind and spirit in man. Here alone are the windows through which pours the sunlight of the human spirit.

Here alone is human dignity not a dream, but an accomplishment.

To this continent for nearly three centuries and a half, men of all races have migrated and no one has been forced to come. Curiously most who did come escaped from some dissatisfaction, disappointment, or disillusionment, from poverty, hunger, fear, inequality, oppression, bigotry. These came to America in their millions, from every land and here they found what they sought most; freedom to live their own lives as they chose.

There are other governments in the world, totalitarian in their nature, which have sworn to bury us, who feel they can overtake us, outdo us, supersede and subjugate us. It is of the utmost importance that the youth of our land become aware of the dangers that threaten us, aware also of the strength of our position and the source of that strength, be alerted to the responsibilities that rest upon them to preserve our land and our form of government for future generations.

Herbert Hoover emphasized the need for us to instruct our youth in the faith of our fathers when he said. "A nation is strong or weak. It thrives or perishes upon what it believes to be true. If our youth is rightly instructed in the faith of our fathers, in the traditions of our country, in the dignity of each individual man, then our power will be stronger than any weapon of destruction that man can devise."

Freedom is a live and growing plant which must be nurtured, cultivated, pruned and kept fruitful. Freedom, like life, is a process, a growth where the new is perpetually crowding out the old. There is a constant wearing away and renewing. The beautiful blossom of today is by tomorrow wilted and dry and must fall by the next tomorrow and be forgotten, while the new bud comes and is heralded for its brief day. So the freedom of today, if not kept up to date by adjustments to suit new seasons and new occasions, may dry and become musty, and actually become serfdom.

Freedom without discipline is a delusion and spills over into license, where law is not respected and where decorum is not known. When, however, in the name of discipline, men are robbed of their right to think or speak or act; when the will of the few is imposed on the many; when the dignity of the individual is denied and responsibility to God rejected; then Communism will flourish and the people become slaves.

If you are to enjoy those inalienable rights with which you are endowed by the Creator, you will not fawn before flattery, cringe before denunciation; nor will you yield to your own lawless impulses.

Sometimes the emigrants or refugees from other lands see this America of ours against a background which is alien to us and some of their definitions of our country and our liberties cause us to realize that we may be too close to the forest to see the trees. Hear this from a German refugee: "Americanism is not a birthplace nor a birthright; it is a vision in the brain, a cry in the heart, a flame in the soul. He who lives it may have it, and he who lives it not may never have it, though he may have the names of all the patriots on his family tree."

And then listen to a Frenchman, still loyal to his beloved France: "With no disloyalty to my beloved France, I embrace America. I salute its courage and audacity, its kindness and good will, its turbulent energy and unquenchable zest. I love America because I find here both the freedom that ennobles life and the discipline without which freedom becomes anarchy."

You are all familiar with the words of Walt Whitman, with his characteristically rugged prose-poetry. He said:

Sail, sail thy best, oh ship of Democracy Of Value is thy freight- `Tis not the present only, the past is also stored in thee: Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone- Not of the Western continent alone: Earth's resume entire floats on thy keel, O ship Is steadied by thy spars; With thee, time voyages in trust. The antecedent nations sink or swim with thee, With all their struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars. Thou bearest the other continents; theirs, Their's as much as thine is the destination port triumphant, Steer then with good strong hand and wary eye, O helmsman-thou carriest great companions. Venerable, priestly Asia sails this day with thee, America, And Royal feudal Europe sails with thee- How can I pierce the impenetrable blank of the future; I feel thy ominous greatness, evil as well as good. I watch thee advancing, absorbing the present, transcending the past. I see thy light lighting and thy shadow shadowing as if the entire globe But I do not undertake to define thee- hardly to comprehend thee.

Those of us who went through two world wars and thought we had fought a war to end wars and to make the world safe for democracy, those of us who saw the subjugation of nations and the pitiless occupation of free lands by tyrants-we realize that we must never seek peace by submitting to slavery.

After two world wars and our experience in Korea, and now in the midst of a continuing cold war, we are coming to realize that our best defense lies in the moral strength of our people. In a recent issue of Sunshine Magazine appeared the following:

Despite the most costly rearmament program in the history of the world, the rising tide of crisis and confusion continues to threaten to engulf America and the cause of freedom.

Yet, from their discouragement and disillusionment, the American people are beginning to remember something they have too long forgotten-that only from their moral strength can they generate the power to preserve their precious way of life, and to keep alive the flames of freedom which, in the chaos of the world around us, symbolized the one hope for liberty-loving peoples everywhere.

In recent years, we have heard more of our leaders-military, political, and religious-call for the reawakening of the true American spirit in our people. America is great in proportion that she makes sure that she will have great men in the next generation.

Let us beware of extremists in this land of ours, groups who attack the integrity and impugn the motives of some of our greatest patriots. Let us not be deceived into accepting their un-American and un-democratic philosophies even though they carry some anti-Communist banners. President Eisenhower wrote:

Democracy is nothing but the opportunity for self-discipline. We owe it to ourselves to be deeply interested in political issues, to be thoughtful about the policies of our country-but we are simply endangering our democratic system when we go to extremes, deal in vilification, make threats against our own officials, and incite violence and lawlessness. The individual who unthinkingly goes to such extremes is weakening the whole structure of self-government.

We hope the young people of this institution, this state, and of our country will be loyal to our institutions, loyal to our leaders, and dedicated to the principles set forth in our Constitution. All of us are opposed to Communism, but we do not fight Communism best by weakening and dividing our own forces or destroying the faith of others in the integrity of our leaders.

Let us seek rather the historian's perspective and see this conflict with Communism, not as a holy war, but as a difficult and perilous struggle with an implacable foe. We live in a world in which there is a diversity of economic systems, political creeds and philosophic faiths. We know, in part at least, what a nuclear war would mean. To avoid it is the common interest of all mankind and this interest must transcend all conflicts of ideology and national ambition. We need cool heads, strong hearts, dauntless courage, and mutual confidence if we are to bridge the dark abyss.

Let us conclude with a paragraph from a speech which President Kennedy prepared for delivery on that fatal day in November-a speech he was not permitted to deliver, but he left us this sublime paragraph:

We in this country, in this generation, are-by destiny rather than choice-the watchmen on the walls of world freedom. We ask therefore that we may be worthy of our power and responsibility-that we may exercise our strength with wisdom and restraint-and that we may achieve in our time and for all time the ancient vision of "peace on earth, good will toward men." That must always be our goal-and the righteousness of our cause must always underlie our strength. Or, as was written long ago: "Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain."

Thus President John F. Kennedy speaks to us from among the thousands of others living whom we call dead. They gave their lives for freedom. They now pass to us the torch as he did. We must hold it high and not break faith with him or them. Their task-our task-will not be finished until universal and permanent peace is established in the earth.

—Memorial Service for President John F. Kennedy,

Utah State University, January 7, 1964
