Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

God Bless His Memory

My brothers and sisters, fellow Americans-and all Americans should be brothers and sisters-I greet you today in the name of President David O. McKay who sends a greeting and blessings to you. He would have been here personally if it had been possible. He would have come in response to an invitation from President Kennedy's family to attend the funeral service in the Cathedral. Because he was unable to come, he was requested to send someone in his place. So it was my privilege to attend that service.

It was my pleasure to sit with President McKay and President Kennedy in the suite of the Hotel Utah at the breakfast table recently. Our conversation was free and easy and unrestrained. He paid high tribute to the Mormon people and to the Mormon leader his friend, David O. McKay. Little did we think at that time that we would not meet again.

There may be some who would wonder as we approach the end of a day of mourning why we should figuratively add a footnote to a volume, why we should meet and express our feelings and extend our prayers and wishes to the bereaved after a full day of memorial services. But it seems fitting, inasmuch as all could not attend the funeral service which was held in St. Matthew's Cathedral, that we meet in our own chapel in prayer and meditation. As has been stated, a similar meeting was held today in the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. The President of the Church felt as we all feel that such meetings are appropriate in order that we might express the sorrow of our hearts on this, one of the saddest days in United States history. It seems to me second only to Lincoln's martyrdom. In both cases our country is deprived of a great leader. It was impressive to sit in the Cathedral, witness the Mass, listen to the eulogy and be a part of an international gathering to mourn an international loss. There were in attendance the heads of state from many parts of the world, kings, presidents, premiers, ambassadors, leaders of religious organizations, to do honor to a young man who in the prime of his manhood was struck down.

We meet often in our wards to pay our respects to departed loved ones and friends. Especially when the head of a family is taken we come together to try to bring solace, comfort and faith to the widow and children of the deceased. Today the head of a national family which is known as the United States of America has left us suddenly and we meet to mourn his passing. Our international neighbors have come because they wish to share our sorrow. While Latter-day Saints everywhere are shocked and saddened by this awful tragedy, we express gratitude for our form of government and thank God that He has through the history of the nation raised up great leaders in time of crisis.

I think I could not do better this afternoon than to refer briefly to some things that have already been said. I have no doubt that all of you have read and heard what the press, radio and television have carried but a few things have impressed me deeply and by way of emphasis I should like to refer to them. First may I call attention to Senator Mansfield's touching and eloquent tribute in the rotunda of the Capitol beside the casket.

"There was a sound of laughter. In a moment it was no more. And so she took a ring from her finger and placed it in his hands. . . . There was a father with a little boy, a little girl and the joy of each in the other. In a moment when it was no more, she took a ring from her finger and placed it in his hands. There was a husband who asked much and gave much and of the giving and of the asking wove with the woman what could not be broken in life. And in a moment it was no more and she took a ring from her finger and placed it in his hands and kissed him and closed the lid of the coffin."

And another beautiful tribute paid to this brave, wonderful woman.

"Only one person has managed to pierce the black pall of horror and unreality that has gripped the whole nation since last Friday. It is Jacqueline Kennedy, the President's widow. Mrs. Kennedy has borne herself with the valor of a queen in a Greek tragedy. Shock alone may have explained her dry-eyed composure, but Mrs. Kennedy has moved with more than the mechanical compliance that sometimes overtakes people in appalling circumstances. Everything she has done seems to be a conscious effort to give to his death the grandeur that the savagery in Dallas was calculated to rob it of. It has been as though she had been trying to show the world that courtesy and courage did not die in Dallas last Friday. Nor the tradition that was personified by her husband struck down in brutal irrelevance. She agreed to his burial in Arlington National Cemetery rather than in Boston so that he would belong to the Nation and would not in the end have the stamp of local tragedy. She has overwhelmed White House aides with her meticulous attention to the melancholy arrangements that had to be made. She designed herself the memorial cards for his requiem Mass. She suggested that she should receive the foreign dignitaries who had come from so far away to pay him last honor."

This morning I read the following from Justice Holmes: "Man is born to act; to act is to affirm the worth of an end; and to affirm the worth of an end is to create an ideal." John F. Kennedy had an ideal which he held constantly before him, became part of his character, was burned into his soul. He loved not only the America which we inherited but the America which he envisioned: The America which was conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. He dedicated his whole life-not only gave it at the moment of the fatal shot but dedicated the whole of his life to make real the ideal which Lincoln made immortal by the phrase so well known to all Americans but still not fully realized: A government of the people, for the people, by the people which should not perish from the earth.

I was impressed, too, by these words from the Chief Justice of the United States and this I think is by way of warning. "If we really love this country, if we truly love justice or mercy; if we fervently want to make this Nation better for those who are to follow us, we can at least abjure the hatred that consumes people, the false accusations that divide us, and the bitterness that begets violence. Is it too much to hope that the martyrdom of our beloved President might even soften the hearts of those who would themselves recoil from assassination but who do not shrink from spreading the venom which kindles thoughts of it in others. Our nation is bereaved, the whole world is poorer because of his loss but we can all be better Americans because John Fitzgerald Kennedy has passed our way, because he has been our chosen leader at a time in history when his character, his vision and his quiet courage have enabled him to chart for us a safe course through the shoals of treacherous seas that encompass the world."

In the inaugural address of President Kennedy he affirmed his conviction that the rights of men came not from the generosity of the state but from the hand of God. Again a quote from his inaugural which I think will go down in history as one of the greatest: "let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and success of liberty." Again he said: "Civility is not a sign of weakness and sincerity is always subject to proof." I want to underline that last statement especially to the members of my own Church. "Sincerity is always subject to proof." Let us not think because we feel and know we have the truth that we have all the truth for there is truth yet to be revealed. Let not our knowledge that we have the truth stifle our search for more truth. Let us build into our characters the kind of faith that will accept the truth when it comes and by its coming perhaps modify some of our ideas about the truth.

If I were asked what to my mind is the outstanding characteristic of this unusual young man I would say it was his courage. The courage that enabled him to take the blame for an unfortunate incident, a series of events for which he was not wholly to blame. I refer to the first Cuban crisis. And then again the courage to stand up to that man who leads the forces of the adversary, who have an ideology diametrically opposed to ours; this young man had the courage to stand up to him and say "Take your missile bases out of Cuba." And he said it before the whole world. I am not here to eulogize that man as a leader of any political party. In fact I'm not here necessarily to eulogize him but to thank God for his life. As time goes on we will come to realize that it was our good fortune to live at a time when a world leader was raised up to chart the way and to inspire and fire the youth of our land and of the world. God bless his memory.

And now what shall we take with us as we leave here today, to ponder as the days go by? Earnestly I pray that God will bless the people of our Church and the people of our land that they may find a new birth of freedom, and to that end I bless you my brothers and sisters that in your homes, in your neighborhoods, wards and stakes there may be love, harmony, peace, charity, kindness and consideration. That there may be in the home respect and strengthened discipline. May God bless the people of the world that they may come to realize the peace which Christ promised, He himself came to the world to restore the gospel under the direction of his Father and gave men the right to speak and act in his name. For you, for all of us, I thank God for that restoration and all that it implies and foreshadows.

Included in the restoration is priesthood leadership. We shall raise a standard to the nations which they can follow with safety. I think the last verse of one of our national songs will yet become international and be sung and prayed by all people.

Our Father's God to Thee, Author of Liberty, To thee we sing. Long may our land be bright With freedom's holy light, Protect us by thy might, Great God, our King.

The only king this country knows, the only king under whom we shall serve, is the King of Kings.

Again I say, God bless the memory of John F. Kennedy. God bless his widow, his children, other members of his family, that this shocking tragedy may tend only to unite them and make them even more grateful for the great country their son, husband, father, brother was permitted to serve and lead for all too short a term as its Chief Executive. I close with this prayer: "Oh God, bless all of us that we may profit from the experiences of life, be made better by its adversities and equal to its challenges. Let thy Holy Spirit rest upon the people of this nation that we may weed out all hatred and contention, that we may never sow seeds of hatred, suspicion and distrust. In the name of Jesus Christ. Amen."

—Memorial Service for President John F. Kennedy,

Chevy Chase Chapel, Washington, D. C.,

November 25, 1963
