Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Goals and the Goal

It is a pleasure indeed to meet with a group of young people who are just starting on the journey of life and to discuss together the meaning and purpose of life, the goals we expect to reach along the way, and the final goal, which at an early age we should visualize and keep in mind throughout our lives-that is, immortality, eternal life, and eternal increase, which means eternally becoming, achieving, progressing.

We are all constantly pushing back our horizons, making new discoveries, adjusting ourselves to new environments, and seeking to achieve success.

From the time the tiny tot is in his crib on through the journey of life until he reaches eighty or ninety years of age, he encounters new experiences, is released from the barriers of ignorance and ineptitude and is or should be constantly preparing for that which lies ahead.

The world of the little child is bounded at first by the encircling arms of its mother. Later its world consists of a crib with restraining and protecting barriers lest it fall and suffer pain. Then, as it begins to walk, it finds there is a room outside the crib much larger than the crib but still with barriers to restrain and to protect. Still later he goes to other rooms and finds the house has many rooms, and he explores each one with glee, amusement, and amazement.

Having learned to walk and talk, he may venture outside the house, into the lot with its protecting fence or hedge, and is intrigued by his larger world. As he enters even larger areas of activity the restraining and protective arms of parental guidance are progressively withdrawn and he assumes responsibility for his decisions and conduct. He crosses the street, goes to school, rides in the car, mingles with other students, learns to read and write and calculate, to reason and to think.

Along the way he will learn to follow instructions, to observe rules and obey orders, and he will learn that disobedience is followed by sorrow or punishment. In other words, he begins to learn that there are rules to every game, including the joyous game of life, and if he breaks the rules he will be sent to the sidelines or out of the game and be listed as a poor sport.

It is important while we are still young that we decide what we want to be, where we want to go, and the price we are willing to pay to get there.

If you are in Salt Lake City and wish to go to Los Angeles or to New York, you will consult road maps, travel agencies and experienced travelers; you will make sure your car is in good condition, that you have gas in the tank and money in your pocket for expenses.

Before you start on the journey, you must learn something about the car in which you are to ride, how to start and stop and guide it and what to do in cases of emergency.

Having learned enough about the car to keep it in good order and to make repairs if necessary, having learned how to drive, you set out upon your journey. You go east or west according to the goal you seek.

Let us suppose you are going to New York where a fortune awaits you on condition that you arrive there with your car in good condition and you yourself in good health.

You will observe and obey the guide posts along the way, some of them flashing or reflecting danger signals which, if you are wise, you will heed, especially the warnings of steep hills or sharp curves or roads under repair. You will heed the speed limit signs and obey the law, else you may be detained or have an accident and made incapable of continuing the trip and thereby lose the reward.

You must have patience and endurance and the stamina that will enable you to continue on when the going is hard, to resist the pull of alluring detours or delays.

You may have some discouraging experiences, a puncture or a blowout, or be handicapped by reason of some part of the car failing to function properly.

How foolish would be the traveler who would become discouraged along the way because of difficulties, give up the trip, and thereby forfeit the reward that was promised! What the wise traveler does is make repairs, purchase extra parts if necessary, and travel on.

Our mortal life is but a journey at the end of which we may receive certain rich rewards conditioned upon obedience to specific rules or laws of life. The value of this reward is not measured in material things. Its value exceeds all the worldly wealth imaginable, for it is eternal life.

The car in which you are to travel through life is your own body. The light which shines upon the road ahead is knowledge and the Holy Spirit. You are expected to learn how to care for and control this priceless vehicle, to keep it in perfect condition and, by observing the road signs, move onward with confidence toward your goal.

Here, too, you will have delays, disappointments, difficulties to overcome, problems to solve. Your success or failure will depend upon your increasing knowledge, your self-discipline, your observance of the rules of life, the ability to read and the wisdom to obey warning signs along the way.

As with the road signs on the highway where you notice certain reflector signs which are visible only if the lights of your own car are shining upon them, so on life's highway there are many warning signs and signals, but the light of the Spirit must flash upon them else they may be invisible and therefore disregarded with serious consequences.

How tragic it is to see an old man reviewing his past, regretting his conduct, as he sees what he might have been. I am reminded of a story, "The Face of Judas Iscariot," written by Bonnie Chamberlain and reported in the Readers Digest recently.

THE FACE OF JUDAS ISCARIOT

"An old priest told me this story.

"Centuries ago a great artist was engaged to paint a mural for the cathedral in a Sicilian town. The subject was the life of Christ. For many years the artist labored diligently, and finally the painting was finished except for the two most important figures: the Christ Child and Judas Iscariot. He searched far and wide for suitable models.

"One day while walking in the city he came upon some children playing in the street. Among them was a 12-year-old boy whose face stirred the painter's heart.

"The artist took the child home with him, and day after day the boy sat patiently until the face of the Christ Child was finished. But the painter still had found no model for the portrait of Judas.

"The story of the unfinished masterpiece spread afar, and many men, fancying themselves of wicked countenance, offered to pose for Judas. But in vain the old painter looked for Judas, as he envisioned him-a man warped by life, enfeebled by surrender to greed and lust.

"Then one afternoon as he sat in a tavern, a gaunt and tattered figure staggered across the threshold. `Wine, wine,' he begged. The startled painter looked into a face that seemed to bear the marks of every sin of mankind.

"Greatly excited, the old painter said, `Come with me, and I will give you wine.'

"For many days the painter worked feverishly to complete his masterpiece. As the work went on, a change came over the model. A strange tension replaced the stuporous languor, and his bloodshot eyes were fixed with horror on the painted likeness of himself. One day, perceiving his subject's agitation, the painter paused in his work. `My son,' he said, `what troubles you so?'

"The man buried his face in his hands, sobbing. After a long moment he lifted pleading eyes to the old painter's face.

"`Do you not then remember me? Years ago I was your model for the Christ Child.'"

—Bonnie Chamberlin

Reader's Digest-condensed from "Saturday Review"

Changing the figure of speech for a moment, let us say that each of us is equipped with an easel and brushes and we stand before the white canvas of time. The paints we must use are our own thoughts, our emotions, and our conduct. We have a wide variety of colors to choose from, and the picture we paint will depend upon our own discrimination in the selection of the colors which again we refer to as our thoughts and emotions. We will achieve either harmony or discord, and as we work on the canvas, we have a vision in our minds and our creative imagination impels us to higher achievement. We see ourselves as the men and women we want to be, as the artist working with considerable freedom knowing that each stroke of the brush leaves a lasting mark upon the canvas of time which may mar the painting or add to its beauty.

All should seek to select positive colors of heart and mind and spirit and mix them so as to produce the desired results. Some of the colors are patience, determination, endurance, self-discipline, hard work, love, and faith.

Of the many essentials to eternal progress, there are six that are indispensable. We list them as: Faith Knowledge Wisdom Intelligence Integrity Endurance

It is obvious that faith comes first, because it inspires action, and without it we are told we cannot please God. It is faith that keeps a person going when the weak-hearted fall out of the race. It is faith that enables a man to fight on when the odds are against him.

We are told that a man cannot be saved in ignorance. Therefore we list knowledge as the second essential ingredient of a successful life. We underline and emphasize the importance of continuing education, gaining knowledge, and the power that comes with knowledge.

But knowledge alone, without wisdom to use it properly, may be dangerous. We therefore list wisdom as the third essential. A well-educated man may be a very dangerous man if he lacks wisdom and character.

We are told that intelligence is the glory of God. It is obvious that it will determine man's glory as well. In fact the measure of man's salvation depends upon the degree of his intelligence, which simply means that by gaining intelligence we achieve a more God-like status.

Integrity is essential as it holds one to his course. It is, in fact, the core of character; its component parts are honor, honesty, industry, vision and valor.

But all of these put together will not suffice as we approach the end of the road unless we have endurance. The lord has said that only they who continue to the end shall be saved. A man may be physically fit, mentally alert, intellectually brilliant, but unless his character is underslung and overgirded by integrity and stamina, he will fail. A man may run a good race for the first part of the course, but unless he has the stamina to make the final sprint, others will cross the finishing line ahead of him.

All through life, from the time we are born until we pass into the great beyond, we are discovering truth, gaining experience, becoming aware of an ever-enlarging world and universe, and thus preparing for the greatest experience of them all which we refer to as death.

As our knowledge of the world and of the universe increases, we are led with awe and wonder at the glory of it all and are amazed to find that undeviating law is at the very heart of the universe. Whether it be in the infinitesimal atom or electron, or among the planets, or into outer space there is evidence of thought and purpose and design, and we see that all things in nature are controlled and regulated by eternal laws. With this thought comes the question to the inquiring mind: "Who was at the controls when all this was set in motion?" We have spoken of the little child whose exploring mind took him from the crib to the limits of his bedroom, later into other rooms of the house, out into the yard, and still later to the school or church and other parts of the town in which he lives, still later to other large cities and other states, and perhaps to foreign nations. All along the way he finds it necessary to adjust himself to changing conditions, to keep his life in harmony with the laws that obtain; and he will be impelled by his own curiosity and questing spirit to learn all he can as he goes from one environment to another.

So it is with the human soul. We shall not at this time discuss its pre-existent state, but from the time of its birth into this life until death the human soul instinctively pushes back its horizons, ventures into new fields, explores new areas and eventually new continents, tries to learn something of the stars and planets and suns, of which we are becoming increasingly aware. The whole process of living is a process of education to the alert and inquiring mind. It is important, then, that we get some understanding of the purpose of life, of its origin and destiny. This understanding is more important than the study of Greek or Hebrew or the sciences. They, of course, may be taken in our stride, but it is important that we learn early in life some of the fundamental laws that have to do with man's eternal soul. Woodrow Wilson once said, "Education has always yielded its best fruits when associated with religion."

Our scientific progress is not an unmixed blessing. We have so much freedom and so great abundance that we are confronted with more decisions than were our forebears. There is, therefore, greater risk of making wrong decisions. We must choose the kind of thoughts we indulge, the books we read, the companions with whom we associate, the shows we attend-and, most importantly choose our mates for life-with eternity in mind.

Let us keep in mind that our mortal life is just a very small part of eternal life, but it helps to condition our souls for that which lies ahead, either for good or ill.

In an article entitled "The Footpath to Peace," Henry Van Dyke wrote the following:

To be glad of life because it gives you a chance to love and to work and to play and to look up at the stars, To be satisfied with your possessions but not contented with yourself until you have made the best of them, To despise nothing in the world except falsehood and meanness, and to fear nothing except cowardice, To be governed by your admirations rather than by your disgusts, To covet nothing that is your neighbor's except his kindness of heart and gentleness of manners, To think seldom of your enemies, often of your friends, and every day of Christ, And to spend as much time as you can with body and with spirit in God's out of doors- These are the little guide-posts on the footpath to peace. —Henry van Dyke

—Conferences of Salt Lake City Seminaries,

Salt Lake Tabernacle, November 9, 1963
