Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Be Prepared for the Countdown

Today the astronauts are the heroes. We are hearing much about them, and they are doing much for science. I should like to consider each of you as an astronaut, one who was launched from another sphere and is temporarily on this little space island preparing to continue an endless flight. You are here to continue your education, your search for truth, to improve and qualify yourselves for what lies ahead.

Each of you is, potentially at least, an architect, a sculptor, a scientist. But for the moment just let us think of you as an astronaut, an astronaut who has been carried to this phase of your endless journey, to this momentary stopping-place. You have been provided with a miraculous space suit or capsule, the mortal body. Each of you has been given a divine spark, which will continue to ignite that super-fuel which we call truth and knowledge-and of this there is an inexhaustible supply. A constant refueling, by preparation during your stay on this island of space, will enable you successfully to continue the next stage of your journey.

Before this venture-and I warn you that it is crammed with risk and temptation-you will be provided with plans and specifications, rules and regulations, maps and compasses, a complete instrument panel. Best of all, there is available to you a Master Pilot, a perfect teacher. You should be reminded that time is limited, and that it is of supreme importance. In fact, the countdown on your next flight started when you landed here, and it will continue without interruption. Only the Counter knows which number will signal the take-off, the launching for the next stop. It may come at any time.

Your curriculum will be exacting and detailed. Your training will be rigorous but rewarding. You will be trusted with free agency, the right to choose your own course and your conduct. But you should know that, like all other astronauts, strict obedience to undeviating law is absolutely prerequisite to successful flight. The condition of your physical, mental, moral and spiritual health will be checked and noted on your boarding pass, and constant self-discipline and self-mastery will keep you on your course.

On succeeding stages of your journey you will become acquainted with and utilize various units of time and space. For a moment I shall paraphrase Dr. Henry Eyring, a renowned scientist. As of now you are content with such units as seconds and seasons, meters and miles. But later you will become concerned with the chemical world of molecules and atoms, where electrons complete their revolutions in one one hundred million millionths of a second (grasp that if you can-I can't), and where one inch measures one hundred million atoms. Then in outer space you will find the revolutions of planets measured in years rather than in fractions of a second. The unit of distance is the light year, which, as you know is a one-year journey at the speed of light, 186,000 miles a second-perhaps about 10,000 million miles. Later you will penetrate the spiritual realm where time and space shall be no more, referred to only as eternities and limitless. Thus in thought, and later in reality, you will be able to see and comprehend the infinitesimally small and the infinitely large.

At the end of your stopover on this island you will jettison part of your equipment, the mortal shell. How foolish and unrealistic it is to speak of this necessary metamorphosis as death or think of it as the end of the flight. On this subject I bring you word from the noted Dr. Wernher Von Braun, the space and missile scientist. Dr. Von Braun stated:

Many people seem to feel that science has somehow made religious ideas untimely or old fashioned, but I think science has a real surprise for the skeptics. Science, for instance, tells us that nothing in nature, not even the tiniest particle, can disappear without a trace. Nature does not know extinction. All it knows is transformation.

Now if God applies this fundamental principle to the most minute and insignificant parts of his universe, doesn't it make sense to assume that he applies it also to the human soul? I think it does. And everything science has taught me-and continues to teach me-strengthens my belief in the continuity of our spiritual existence after death. Nothing disappears without a trace.

Now I ask you, do you think it is possible that in this universe, created and governed according to eternal law, the most intelligent creatures in it are here by chance? Is it possible that there was no plan or purpose or design? Did the Creator make a stairway leading to nowhere? Or did he plan a flight leading to a certain fatal crash? Your flight is to be eternal, and you are to be at the controls, with full responsibility and freedom to choose your course and your conduct-and to take the consequences.

How tragically and unforgivably foolish it would be for a pilot to discard his oxygen mask, to leave the controls, and to take a whiff of some exhilarating gas for a momentary thrill, or in some other way deliberately incapacitate himself, endanger his whole flight and condemn himself to be eternally grounded!

Young people, prepare yourselves during your brief stop on this island in space. Cultivate the attributes which will make you ready for any eventuality of service in the Kingdom of God. Be obedient to the laws and commandments which have been given by the Master Teacher. Catch the Torch and hold it high, I pray. In the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Youth Conference, Washington, D. C., July 14, 1963
