Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Well Done, Carry On

Jesus said, "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do." (John 17:4.) We hear from Paul: "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." (2 Timothy 4: 7.) And in Ecclesiastes we read: ". . . the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. . ." (Ecclesiastes 9:11.) In this age of speed there is danger of losing sight of the importance of being able to finish the journey. A good start is a promise; a good ending, its fulfillment.

The student whose brilliance enables him to recite his daily lessons with very little preparation but who cannot pass the final test may in looking back realizes that his brilliance was a handicap, as all easy victories are if the result is lessened effort.

Many a fight has been lost by the over-confidence which sometimes comes from winning the first few rounds. To lower one's guard in the final round may mean defeat, and then all the fine fighting throughout the match will have gone for nothing.

There is some talk today of "lightning warfare," but we are of the opinion that the nation which can win the last battle will dictate the terms of peace.

It is important that we make sure that the goal toward which we labor is a worthy one. The speed with which we travel toward it is less important than the fixed purpose, the sustained effort which will enable us to achieve it. Making sure one is right in his undertakings and then massing all his energy to carry through to the end-these are the important considerations. The man who so wisely said, "Be sure you're right, then go ahead," Might have added this, to wit, "Be sure you're wrong before you quit."

While life lasts, one must look upon each new achievement as a challenge and a beginning. Mile posts marking the way were not intended for camping grounds.

The gospel is a challenge to finish the course, not simply to begin it. All the fine accomplishments of a worthwhile life may be defeated by a poor ending.

He was able to pass through Gethsemane and with full knowledge of the road ahead go on to Calvary, and not until then did He say, "It is finished." To have stopped at any point of great achievement along the way, in the temple, his victory when he said to Satan "get thee behind me," the matchless sermon on the mount, on the mount of transfiguration, or even in the valley of Gethsemane, would have been to fall.

Always when missionaries are released they are admonished to carry on, for completing a mission is not by any means a final goal. There still remain many battles to be won. There is no final goal. That which appears so may be attained only by undiscouragable effort. It in turn will prove to be another guidepost to the future.

—Millennial Star, October 19, 1939
