Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Man's Potential God-Like Status

Some years ago when I was on the campus here, I happened to sit next to one of the professors from an eastern university at a banquet given by the faculty. This man had been on the campus for two or three days, and turning to me he said, "Why is it that your people have such a zest for education? There seems to be some spirit on this campus other than just seeking for intellectual or physical development. What is it?" I informed him that we believe that a man cannot be saved in ignorance, and that, therefore, education becomes a part of our religion. We believe that "the glory of God is intelligence."

He thought for a few moments and said: "This is the first time I have seen education pursued with the zeal usually found only in religion. I have never before known such devotion, such worshipful devotion, to education."

Now, our early pioneers, when they first landed, began building schoolhouses and churches. They had a belief that there is an instinct in the human soul causing it to reach out, look up, push back horizons, seek for answers, and search for God.

Your presence here this morning indicates that you have the same attitude, the same instinct and hunger for truth. I thought it most impressive when these older ones stood and gave their ages: eighty, eighty-five and ninety. They evidenced by their presence here that they do not feel they have yet "arrived." I think we need to keep alive that spirit which is so obvious during these Leadership Weeks, viz., the spirit of inquiry, of seeking more knowledge, more understanding, greater wisdom. Christ said, "I am come that they might have life and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) Someone has said that the purpose of life is more life. One's awareness is, I think, the measure of one's "aliveness"; and as we become more aware of our surroundings, more aware of the things we see about us, our worship of God is more meaningful and devout. And really what we see as we go about depends, in large measure, upon our attitude toward religion and education. What we see depends on what we are and what we are looking for. It depends upon where our interests lie. For instance, some time ago a couple of artists were on the brink of Bryce Canyon. They were in ecstasy over the beauty and the majesty of what lay before them. Just then a cowboy rode up and one of them turned to him and said, "Isn't this marvelous? Isn't it grand?" The cowboy said, "Yes, but it would be an awful place to lose a cow." Yes, what we see depends upon our interests, depends upon ourselves and what we think is most worthwhile.

Another brief illustration: Two men were going through the Sequoias. One was a great lumber baron, the other was a journalist and a poet. They stopped amidst the giant trees in the forest and got out of the car. The driver of the car followed them later and found the lumber baron, with notebook and pencil in hand, standing before one of these giant trees. The lumber man said, "You know, I'm just figuring out how many board feet there would be in this tree, and what it would be worth as lumber." The driver moved on to where the poet stood, and found him also looking at a tree; but he held his cap in his hand and with bowed head repeated Kilmer's lines:

I think that I shall never see A poem as lovely as a tree, A tree which looks at God all day And lifts its leafy arms to pray. Which of them, think you, got most out of the majestic Sequoias? And why did each see what he saw? Was it not because of what he was?

So, my brethren and sisters, I bring to you this morning the thought that we in the Church, and of course, many others, are becoming increasingly aware of our universe and the goodness of the God whom we worship as its Creator. As we stand in the presence of all that is, whether we are gazing into the starry heavens, or looking at the trees and the mountains and the rivers, or learning of the minute solar system with its revolution round the nucleus of the atom, everywhere there is order, law, plan and purpose.

And as we stand in awe and reverence, we wonder, "Who was at the controls when all this came into being?" Then, perchance, we shall ask ourselves, "What is man?" I think a recent writer put it very well, when he said, "God is known best not by separation from common things, but by such identification with them that we find the divine meaning latent in them." He went on to call attention to the fact that the deepest spiritual truths were expressed by Jesus the Christ through common things, through seeds and soil, through birds and stones and lambs.

When we look about us, we discover that this world of ours, looked at philosophically, is really a series of levels or stratifications of reality. The lowest level is matter with its mechanical basis. Above that is life, which, in its characteristic form, grows and reproduces itself in one way or another. The third level is animal mind, striving constantly to satisfy nature's demand in appetite. Above that is the spirit. And man is a combination of all: He is matter, he is life, he is mind, and he is spirit. And his spirit gives meaning to all the rest. Each of the higher three of these four stratifications gives meaning to the one below it, and is dependent, in a measure, upon that which is below. As I read these thoughts recently, I was reminded of what the Lord said in Section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation.

For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple.

—Doctrine and Covenants 93:29, 32-35

You have come here from many parts of the Church and are taking courses in various subjects according to your special interests. You are trying to push back your horizons and increase your knowledge. DeNouy said:

The goal of man should be the attainment of human dignity, with all its implications. In other words, all of his intellectual acquisitions, all of the facilities which society puts at his disposal, schools, universities, libraries, laboratories, all those offered by religion, all the occasions given him to develop his own aptitudes, his work his leisure, must be considered by him as tools, to improve his personality, his moral self, and to make progress.

The restored gospel challenges us with the declaration that man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge, and that "the glory of God is intelligence." What then shall be our glory? I think the obvious answer is that the degree of our intelligence will be the measure of our glory.

If we are to get into the highest degree of the celestial kingdom, it will be because our actions have been such that we can feel at home there. And if we do not feel at home, I am of the opinion that we shall probably ask for a transfer, or we may get it without asking.

DeNouy continues:

"No matter how considerable it is, the accumulation of knowledge does not confer any superiority on man, if he utilizes it only outwardly, and if he reaches the end of his life without having deeply evolved as a responsible element of humanity."

Sometimes it seems to me that some men, by their attitudes and lethargy, imply that they have arrived. They are not like these older folks who have responded to the roll call according to ages-some still gaining knowledge at ninety, while some who are much younger and not so wise say, "We have arrived." Since I was a boy, the prayer of my heart has been: "Help me, Oh God, that I may never arrive, that I may have hope, and expectation, and desire, and may realize that there is something ever more about to be." And so I congratulate you on the thought that you are here seeking knowledge, wisdom, and intelligence. God has commanded us that we should seek knowledge in various fields. Let me read another passage from the Doctrine and Covenants. Speaking of teaching, and promising that His grace shall attend us, He said: . . . (It is) expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven (astronomy) and in the earth (agriculture) and under the earth (geology); things which have been (history), things which are current events), things which must shortly come to pass (prophecy); things which are at home, things which are abroad (international affairs); the wars and perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms (or of geography and of history).

—Doctrine and Covenants 88:78, 79

(The words in parentheses are my own.) Here we have an outline, from God himself, of what is expected of Latter-day Saints in their search for knowledge.

May I refer again to an author:

He commits an error, who sees in education and instruction a means of increasing the field of his intellectual activity, his power or his prestige or a means to enrich himself materially. He must use his science and his culture to better himself morally, and to make others progress. Instruction is sterile if it is considered as a goal in itself; dangerous if it is subordinated to selfish sentiments or to the interests of one group alone. So I say, sometimes it seems that some of us, having been baptized and having received the Holy Ghost and having complied with prerequisites thereto-such as faith and repentance-and having gone to Church and said our prayers, and the men having received the priesthood, mistakenly believe that we have done all we ever need to do, that we have arrived. The Apostle Paul advised the Saints of his day to "go on unto perfection." Jesus admonished, "Be ye perfect."

The attitude of having arrived is something like a man who learned there was such a thing as electricity. He paid the necessary price and made the preparations and had a conduit wire connected to his house. He bought himself a little 10-watt bulb and installed it in the back room of his house; and then he sat down and put on his slippers, took his pipe, reclined in the rocking chair and said, "I have electricity. I am the happiest man in the world. Nobody else can boast of more than I, because I have electricity;" not realizing that what he had was only a little 10-watt bulb, and that he was still in semi-darkness, not realizing that if he would he could have had a thousand times that illumination. He could have had many bulbs in every room and could have been utilizing the power of electricity by installing modern equipment and machinery, making available to himself the equivalent of 10,000 servants. But there he sits placidly rocking and dreaming of the electricity which he thinks he has when, in reality, he does not even have enough to shock him into wakefulness.

Sometimes Latter-day Saints say, "Thank God I have the gospel. I have joined the Church. I am going to heaven as soon as I die." There is an awful shock coming to some when they realize that the glory of God is intelligence. There are some Latter-day Saints who have only a 10-watt bulb of spiritual insight and knowledge. They would be unable to enjoy the glory of anything brighter because their souls are inured to semi-darkness; and unless they repent, wake up and live, they can never know the glory of the celestial kingdom.

I pray that we might prepare ourselves, as you here are attempting to do, to become more like that from which we came, being ever conscious of our divine heritage, being ever aware of our royal birth. Let us be loyal to the Royal that is in us.

Life is a beautiful symphony. It offers such marvelous opportunities. Life is calling to all of us, "Be more alive, be more aware." This Leadership Week is an opportunity for awareness. Some of us walk through the woods and see nothing. And others behold the beauty of nature. Some men are like a cow on the hillside who chews her cud, blissfully unaware of the beautiful sunset in the west.

I think the object behind this great movement of Leadership Week when it was originated was to make available to those farther removed from headquarters, and those getting a little older, opportunities to come in contact with men and women whose lives are given to education, and who have so much to offer us. The poet has written:

In a world, wistful with past revelations, we keep vigil in our hearts. Often disappointed, but never losing hope, we are sure of one thing, That the curtain has not yet run up on the last of this world drama. There is more; and more may come at any moment and it will come with surprising suddenness. Yes, human life is a symphony, but it is an unfinished symphony, We are waiting for the last movement. The last or undiscovered chord, which will give Meaning to the discord at the very moment when it is resolved.

I like that thought, "Give meaning to the discord." I see before me older men and women who have gained strength through struggle. I see on their faces, as on a parchment, many lines written by the pen of experience; and between those lines I read a story of heroic struggle, of ambitions never quite satisfied, but of determination never dampened. These people will tell you that some of the things which have taught them the most valuable lessons have been the things they would have avoided if they could. Sometimes we have to learn that way. Sometimes we come to realize that "defeat may serve as well as victory to shake the soul and let the glory out." It is the beauty that we frame from within us that is going to qualify us for the glories that are ahead. No, Latter-day Saints, there is no one thing, no dozen things, nor group of things which will put us in a position where we no longer need to struggle, to look up, to aspire, to push back horizons, to seek for answers, and to search for God. Then, when the change called death shall come, we shall find that we must take up the quest where we left it off. Awareness, like creation and salvation, is an on-going process and the quest for truth is eternal.

I cannot be convinced that a man having lived a worthless life is going suddenly into the presence of God because of some parroted mental concept, because of some confession at the last minute. That is contrary to everything we know of growth and of education. I am persuaded that I shall gradually enjoy the presence and glory of the great world beyond as I am inspired by God to push back the horizons and to behold the glory of God in that which is around us.

God bless us that as individual members of the Church, we may catch the vision of the restored gospel and realize that education is part of religion and that, therefore, a man cannot be saved in ignorance any more than he can be saved in sin. He must be saved from them, not in them. There is only one way that I can think of whereby a man can be saved from ignorance, and that is by gaining knowledge; whereby he can be saved from sin, and that is by overcoming sin. Ignorance and sin are in many ways synonymous.

God help us to catch that vision, and to go from this meeting and from this Leadership Week with new hope, new aspiration, new determination. May he help us to realize, each and every one of us, that we are children of God, that he is our Father, that Christ, our older brother, is the Son of God. No matter that the distance between us and Him is indescribably great, he is still our brother, and we are sons of the same Father. God help us that we may never be satisfied, may never "arrive." Let us show the extent of our aliveness by an ever-widening circle of awareness. That is no doubt what the Master meant when he gave us the Beatitudes, when he marked as blessed the poor in spirit and the meek, because they were teachable. He showed that they mourned because they became aware of their weaknesses and ignorance, and then they began to hunger and thirst after righteousness.

May he bless us that we may achieve our potential godlike status, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Address at BYU Leadership Week, June 20, 1956
