Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Almost a Millionaire

From the bottom of my heart, I thank God for the experiences that have come into my life in which I have been brought closer to Him, for the opportunities I have had to walk where Jesus walked, and for the conviction that has come into my soul that my Redeemer lives and because He lives, I too shall live. I am more grateful for that than anything else in the world.

When President McKay threw his lasso from Salt Lake up to Edmonton, Canada, and put it around my neck and led me in, I was engaged in a great enterprise. I had my heart set on big things and I had my fingers almost on big things. Some of those who were associated with me are now multi-millionaires. At that time I thought I was going to be one. By all the rules of the game I would have been, and should have been, and might have been.

I want to say this to the young people. Shortly before the call came, I was way up in the Canadian Rockies, west of Edmonton, drilling an oil well, sleeping in a bunk cabin. I went way back in the hills early in the morning, found a place where I was entirely alone, and looked at those glorious Canadian Rockies. I was looking at the mountain sides and the grandeur. I went there in the hope that I might get close to Him. I remember that the outstanding things in the life of the Master were His speech on the mountain peak, the peak of His baptism, the peak of His temptation, the peak of His transfiguration. He loved the mountains.

While I was up there that morning I was thinking of how I would spend that million dollars I was about to make. With my face turned toward heaven, I said-and I meant it-"Heavenly Father, if this isn't the thing for me, don't let me have it." Before I offered that prayer I thought I had arranged my affairs so that my Heavenly Father couldn't do otherwise than let me have the money. I thought I already did have it, but I said, "If it isn't right that I should have it, if it would rob me of the spirit of the Gospel or of my family, don't let it happen." I want to say to you young folks, don't ever talk to the Lord that way unless you really mean it, because He is likely to take you up on it. That was just a day before President McKay called me.

That is a little personal sidelight, but I want to tell you that Sister Brown and I have never been so happy in all our lives as we have been in the year and month that has followed President McKay's call.

When we hear from our friends in Canada and here in the United States who are multi-millionaires, we are just simple enough to not be a bit envious. If we had millions, we would try to spend the money in finding happiness for ourselves and for those we love. But now we have a happiness that millions could not buy. Money would never be effective to secure the happiness that we have. And so, aren't we really richer than if we had the money, especially when we take into consideration what some people will do with money and what money will do to some people. Now I'm not one who would say that we shouldn't strive to succeed financially. I'm not one to depreciate the value of material possessions, but we should not set our hearts on them.

Christ said that gaining material wealth is not the purpose of life. We need faith. I am reminded of a poem that was read in a hospital room where a man over eighty was about to die. He was a multi-millionaire. His parents were Mormon people. One of his brothers was a member of the Mormon Battalion.

This man had made millions out of horse racing, gambling and bootlegging. He had real estate in southern California, some in Cuba; horse stables around San Francisco; property in New York, probably millions. He had lost his wife, not in death, but in divorce, and he was on his death bed.

A young man who visited him said, "Tell me, you're an old man about to die and I'm a young man about to live; what would you do, if you had it to do over again? What would I do in the light of your experience?"

The old man said, "If you will open the dresser drawer and take out a book and turn to a certain page and read what the poet said, you will have my answer in better words than I can say. While you are reading, imagine I am speaking, because the poem says exactly what is in my heart in answer to your question." The young man read these words:

I AM AN ALIEN I am an alien to the faith my mother taught me, I'm a stranger to the God who heard my mother when she cried. I'm an alien to the comfort that "Now I lay me," brought me, To the everlasting arms that held my father as he died. I spent a life time seeking things that I spurned when I found them, But I'd give them all, fame and fortune, and the pleasures that surround them, If I only had the faith that made my mother what she was. I was bred where God was closer to His people, And addressed them in the tenderest messages, of bird, tree, and bloom; I was bred where people stretch upon the velvet sod to rest them, Where the twilight's benediction robs the coming night of gloom. When this big world came and called me I deserted all to follow, Never noting, in my blindness, that I'd slipped my hand from His, Never dreaming in my dazedness, that the bubble fame was hollow, That the wealth of gold is tinsel as I since have learned it is. No, I spent a life-time seeking things I spurned when I had found them, I have fought and been rewarded in many a winning cause. But I'd give them all, fame and fortune, and the pleasures that surround them, For a little of the faith that made my mother what she was.

That was the old man's answer. Christ said, "Man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth." (Luke 12:15.)

Now, young men and women, brothers and sisters, you are here to preach the gospel and you are here to learn the gospel for yourselves. You are here to get the correct understanding of values and I know of no better place in the world than the mission field for people to get an understanding of true values. Remain humble. I pray that God will help every man and woman here and in all the missions of the Church to understand the real meaning of missionary service and couple it with understanding of the meaning of life. I hope that every man and woman, especially you younger men and women, will remember that your lives are in your own hands and that we are all in a large measure the architects of your own fate. What happens to you here in this mission field will be the deciding factor in determining where you will be throughout all eternity. What you make of your lives will be determined by your faith. Seek for real values rather than material wealth.

I would like to say to you brethren and sisters, keep close to God. The poet said, "Never noting in my blindness that I had slipped my hand from His." Keep close to Him. Come to know Him. I have said to my missionaries when I was presiding over the British Mission, "The greatest opportunity that is now before you and the one that can bring the greatest blessing to you throughout time and all eternity is the opportunity to know God." When you come to know God, you learn to worship Him, and if you worship Him and adore Him, you tend to become more like Him. Knowing God will save men. It is the adulation coupled with emulation, worshiping Him and then trying to be like Him.

I think it is good for each of us once in a while to stand ourselves up against a wall and then look ourselves over. When you do that, you can look right inside yourself. It is a mighty good thing to look and then think about what you see and do something about it. If there is something there that you don't like, change it.

I think it is good to occasionally stand yourself against the wall and imagine that Christ is standing there beside you. I have tried to do that in my life many times. I have tried to imagine myself standing up side by side with Him. I want to tell you very humbly that I don't even come up to His ankles. Missionaries, He is your Brother, His Father is your Father. There is in you something that is in Him and with His help you will become like Him.

Now if in looking at yourself you find characteristics that you don't like, do something about it. There is not a man or woman here tonight who has not been marked by the finger of God. Everyone of you has been assigned a job to do and if you don't do that job, it won't be done. You alone can do that particular work. God has placed within you the power to do it. He expects you to make a report.

I should be telling you missionaries how to teach the Gospel. I would rather tell you how to live it and the teachings will take care of themselves.

It is good to be cheerful, happy and gay. My heart sings with joy as I think of the gospel and what it has done for me and mine, for my friends and for you. Why shouldn't we be happy? But brethren and sisters, leave the final decision with God. Do everything you can to get what you want to have and be what you want to be, but always keep in mind, "Thy will, not mine, be done." If you can do that and try to walk by His will, you will find joy in this life and eternal increase in the world to come.

Young men and women, this is the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Prophet Joseph Smith saw what he said he saw. He heard what he said he heard. I know this and I bear witness of it to you tonight.

I pray that God will help everyone here to remember as long as he lives, what we feel here tonight, not what I have said, not what anyone else has said, but what we have heard from our innerselves. It is the voice of God calling to us, pleading with us, asking us to be our best, to live as we know we should live and weed out our failings that could hold us back and pull us down.

Keep your eye on the Savior of the world. Make him your example. Remember that He is your brother and make him your ideal and you will know He is reaching down to help you. He is with you and if you have made mistakes and have truly repented, He will forgive you. Don't be deceived by the wiles of the adversary and think because you may have made mistakes that you have committed the unpardonable sin. This gospel is primarily the gospel of second chance, the gospel of repentance. Don't forget that young folks. Do not insist upon remembering what God is willing to forget. Everyone of us have made mistakes, but though we must pay the full price, our mistakes should be remembered only as guides to better lives in the future.

—Dedicatory Service, California Mission,

January 2, 1955
