Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

I Know That My Redeemer Lives

Since very early this morning I have been reading the four Gospels and communing with God, and from the depth of my heart I have been saying what the hymn we have just sung leads us to say, "I know that my Redeemer lives." I like the last verse particularly:

He lives, all glory to His name! He lives, my Jesus, still the same; Oh sweet the joy this sentence gives, "I know that my Redeemer lives."

It is our duty to bear that witness. It is our privilege to have that knowledge. So this morning I come to you without a written speech, preferring to, through the help of the Lord, take my sermon from my heart rather than from my pocket.

As I have thought of saying something here that would be in harmony with the occasion, I have been subdued and humbled because of the solemnity of the occasion we celebrate, and because of the glory and majesty of the One who occupies the center of the stage for the drama which was enacted nearly 2,000 years ago. To speak of Him, and reverently for Him, is not only a privilege but a tremendous responsibility.

Christmas we celebrate as a promise of what was to be. Easter is a fulfilment, a message of victory, a message of hope and of peace. We do not celebrate Easter only as an accomplished fact. We celebrate it because of what it promises, what it portends, and we celebrate it at a time when hundreds of millions of people of the world are being systematically indoctrinated with the abominable idea that Christ is a myth and that faith in Him is an opiate, and that men need not search for or worship God.

That may sound like a negative approach to a glorious subject, but it is negative only in the sense that it would be negative to stand before an army who were facing a great battle and tell him something of the strength and disposition of the enemy by way of warning and preparation. And so, I pray for your assistance and that the Holy Spirit may make our hearts attuned that what is said and what is heard may bring satisfaction.

Who was this man, Jesus? Why His crucifixion and alleged resurrection? Whence came He, and for what purpose? I think perhaps the first reference to Jesus as the Son of God is found in the Book of Moses: "But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning" (Moses 4:2)-this is following a statement of the fall of Lucifer and the rejection of his plan. Jesus is referred to also in the Book of John. Some people have not yet been willing to admit that this refers to the Christ; but Bible students everywhere are coming to recognize the fact that what is here recorded is a valid and well attested statement of fact.

In the beginning . . . and that beginning that antedates the beginning of which we read in the book of Genesis. In Genesis we read of the beginning of the organization of the world, but this beginning was before that.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.

In him was life; and the life was the light of men.

—John 1:1-4

And Paul emphasizes what John said in his letter to the Colossians:

[He] is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: (This is the One of whom we speak when we commemorate Easter-the firstborn of every creature:)

For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him and for him:

And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

And he is the head of the body, the church:

(Col. 1:15-18.)

Again, in the book of Moses we are told that God created many worlds:

. . . worlds without number (He said) have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.

—Moses 1:33

So when we speak of Him we are thinking not only of this world, but of the innumerable worlds which were created by God the Father through Jesus the Christ.

We are thinking then of more than a Nazarene, a carpenter, a man among men who died on the cross. When I say we are thinking of more than that, we are thinking of Him and the background that goes to make up the glorious story of Christ. The written story of Christ began in that primeval council in the heavens, His part in the great work of creation is beautifully referred to in Jesus the Christ, by Dr. Talmage. I should like to read you a paragraph:

We claim scriptural authority for the assertion that Jesus Christ was and is God the Creator, the God who revealed Himself to Adam, Enoch, and all the antedeluvial patriarchs and prophets down to Noah; the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; the God of Israel as a united people, and the God of Ephraim and Judah after the disruption of the Hebrew nation; the God who made Himself known to the prophets from Moses to Malachi; the God of the Old Testament record; and the God of the Nephites. We affirm that Jesus Christ was and is Jehovah, the Eternal One.

And now referring again for just a moment to that council in heaven, that we may get perspective and find why the council was held, let us turn to Isaiah. Isaiah had through vision and revelation been instructed as to what took place at that eventful time when you and I were there, and, according to the book of Job, shouted for joy at the prospect of earth life. There was one there who was in opposition, and later there followed him a third of the hosts of heaven. And Isaiah laments in these words:

How art thou fallen from heaven, oh Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High."

—Isaiah 14:12-14

And Isaiah adds:

. . . thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

—Isaiah 14:15

In Moses' record it says:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying-Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

—Moses 4:1

And then that verse that I read before:

But, behold, my Beloved Son, who was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me-Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

—Moses 4:2

And it goes on:

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of my Only Begotten I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men and to lead them captive at his will. .

—Moses 4:3-4

There was a great council, and that is understandable, is it not? When we undertake any project, we sit down and work out the details, anticipate the future, provide the means in a business sense. Some may say: Well, God did not need to make any plans. He could run things as He would and as He chose. That would be true if He chose to do as Satan wanted Him to do, give the power to him so that he could dominate and rob men of their freedom.

May I pause just long enough to remind you again that never since that time, so far as we know, have the emissaries of Satan been so thoroughly organized or so numerous or so active as they are now. There are hundreds of millions of them, and they are being arrayed for battle by the very one who wanted to be in charge of all things and still intends to do it if he can. I want to pause here to predict their downfall.

He whose resurrection we celebrate therefore this morning was the Jehovah of the Old Testament. He it was who appeared to Adam; He appeared to Abraham and told him to go into a strange country; He appeared to Jacob who became the father of twelve sons, the tribes of Israel; He accompanied Joseph who was sold by his brethren into Egypt, and protected him against the wiles of Satan; He it was who called Moses. (This was Jesus, who afterwards was known as Jesus of Nazareth.) And he accompanied Moses into Egypt and enabled him to perform those miracles. He it was who divided the Red Sea and let the Israelites through, this same Jesus, Jehovah. All through time from the beginning down to Malachi, according to the record of the Old Testament, Jesus, Jehovah, operated under the direction of God the Father, and was known as His Only Begotten Son, the first begotten in the spirit, the Only Begotten in the flesh. This same Jesus created all that is and had the power, of earth and heaven.

As we start the record of the New Testament, we find Him in a manger, a little child, as helpless as any other little child at that age, for He had chosen to come that way. His coming was not only heralded by the angels, but there is a beautiful story in the New Testament about the annunciation, when Gabriel came to Mary and told her that she was favored of the Lord. She conceived of the Holy Ghost, and hastened to her cousin to tell her what had happened; and her cousin because of a miraculous event in which the father of John the Baptist had been told that he would have a son, even though his wife was an old lady. Elizabeth understood Mary, and Mary began to understand that the holy babe which was to be born of her was, in fact, the Son of God.

And then the angels announced it, and wise men of the world came and paid Him homage, and the leaders of the world were afraid of His power and began relentless persecution. Thousands of young infants were slaughtered because that awful tyrant Herod feared that Jesus would be what His followers claimed He was to be-the King of Israel.

We do not hear much of Him from the time of His birth until the occasion when in the temple He astonished the wise men. He lived as a boy, He worked with His hands, He played and He ran; but He had in Him that which no man before or since has had-the power of God and the power of manhood, combined in one individual, and because of that power and the instruction of the Father, He was able to talk to those wise men and to astonish them.

We do not hear much again from Him until we find him on the banks of the Jordan, and His cousin, John, having been instructed, was there to baptize Him. Here this personage, the Jehovah of the Old Testament and the Messiah of the New, the Creator of all that is, came humbly and submitted Himself to the hands of John, and John said,

. . . I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?

And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. . .

—Matthew 3:14-15

Then John baptized Him; and not only the event, but also the portent was made visible to John, for the Holy Ghost descended like a dove, and the voice of the Father said, . . . This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

—Matthew 3:17

From there he went into the wilderness, where for forty days He fasted, and during much of that time this same individual who in the council of heaven had challenged Him, and had been cast out because of his rebellion, found Jesus in the wilderness and undertook to destroy Him before His mission was started in His mortal life. Jesus said: ". . . Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. . . . Get thee hence Satan." (Matthew 4:7, 10; Luke 4:8.)

I wish all of us could do what Jesus did. Some of us say, "Get thee behind me, Satan," but when we are struggling with some weakness, we turn right around and face him and expect him to stay behind us. By that I mean that we tempt ourselves by overestimating our strength. Jesus, all the way through His life, said such things as "I do what my Father tells me to do." "Thy will be done." "I came down from heaven, not to do my will, but the will of Him that sent me."

And so He went through that crisis-for it was a crisis-and came out victorious; and then He went about Judea, into Galilee, in and about Jerusalem, the greatest teacher the world has ever known. Unfortunately some people stop there, and say Jesus of Nazareth was the greatest teacher the world has ever known. If that is all He was, then there could be no Easter. It was the something else that enabled Him to come out of the tomb. He was more than a great teacher, a great exemplar; He was the Son of God, come to live among men in order to teach them of God and teach them how to live.

We follow Him up onto another mountain, and we hear the greatest sermon that was ever preached, known as the Sermon on the Mount. Here He gave to us the Beatitudes; revolutionary were His words on that occasion. He did not say what men had been wont to say through the years and through time-blessed are the rich and the powerful and the mighty. He started with the bottom and said: Blessed are the meek, blessed are the merciful, blessed are the poor in spirit. Blessed are they that mourn; blessed are the pure in heart.

And so He taught among His followers. Unfortunately His followers, even the apostles, did not understand fully what He taught them by both precept and example. It always seems strange to me how those apostles who had been with Him for nearly three years, close to Him, seen His miracles, felt of His spirit, declared their faith in Him, could have doubted, but they did.

He took three of them to another mountain top-and (you will notice that His life is punctuated by mountain peaks: the mount of the temptation, the mount of the beatitudes, the mount of the transfiguration, the mount of Golgotha. Moses too knew something about mountain peaks, for it was there that he talked with Jesus who was the God of Israel) to the mount of transfiguration, and there three personages appeared. Peter, James and John were not able to endure the glory of the occasion, and they fell to the earth, apparently paralyzed with fear. Moses and Elias appeared with Jesus, and they conversed and communed. Peter wanted to build some tabernacles or some memorable buildings there. He said, ". . . It is good for us to be here. . ." (Matthew 17:4.)

From the mount of transfiguration He went onto proclaim the gospel, heal the sick, bless those who mourned, heal those who could not see or hear or walk. His was a mission of mercy and love. Then the time drew near which He had known must come and which He had predicted repeatedly to His disciples would come. They had not believed it or understood it.

On that first Palm Sunday, He came up from Jericho. He came into Jerusalem riding on a donkey, accompanied by a large crowd. There were palms, flowers, branches and the cloaks of people laid on the road in front of him as He rode into Jerusalem. And they were shouting, "Hosannah!" It was a triumphal entry, they thought, but He was not shouting "Hosannah!" for He knew what the end of the week would bring.

Shortly after He entered the city He went to the temple, and there He found that men were making of the House of God a den of thieves, and He drove them out of the temple, infuriating the self-styled priests.

He healed one who had been crippled from infancy, and knew that this very act would be heralded among His enemies and they would thirst for His blood. But He did not hesitate.

It was customary in those times for people who had been on a long journey to have their feet washed by servants, and on the occasion of the last supper He and they who had come with Him were weary, but there was no servant there to wash their feet. This Man, Jehovah, the Creator of the world, the God of the world, Jesus the Christ, threw off His outer garment, and girded His loins with a towel, and filled a basin with water, and went among His disciples and washed their feet. And then they sat around the table at that last supper.

I think one of the greatest pictures ever painted is by Da Vinci, "The Last Supper." I was studying, this morning, the expressions on the faces of those twelve men. Sometimes that occasion is called, "the picture of the hands," for as Christ announced, ". . . One of you shall betray me," every man moved forward, and each man gestured "Is it I?" "Who is it?" And if you look at the picture carefully you see the hands in the forefront all the way. Then Jesus said, ". . . He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it. . ." (John 13:26.) And Judas was there. Can you imagine the pathos, the heartache, the heartbreak, to know that Judas had been with Him, had partaken of His spirit to a degree, had seen His miracles, had testified of Him, and then was about to betray Him?

There is little more poignant in the suffering of life than that which comes from betrayal, when our friends turn against us. We can fight our enemies on the outside, but there is nothing we look upon with such distaste as a traitor, a traitor to our country, a traitor to the truth, a traitor to the Church. So Christ at this crucial hour said, "One of you will betray me." And He knew that during that very night He would be betrayed into the hands of His enemies, go through a mock trial, be condemned without any evidence against Him, and crucified. He knew all that.

The apostles did not understand. His heart was heavy, and He said, "Will you come with me?" and walked away. They walked to a garden called Gethsemane. Some of them He asked to wait by the wayside, but three He took close to the garden and said to them, "Wait here while I pray. He went on into the garden and had the courage and the fortitude and the faith; though His heart was breaking and though He was sweating blood, to say, "Not my will, but thine."

When He came out of the garden and He found that the three apostles whom He trusted and on whom He wanted to lean, were sleeping, He said, "Can't you walt with me for an hour?" Then He went back and prayed again, and again they slept.

I cite that, not in condemnation of them, but in explanation that they did not get the full purport of His mission. They must have believed right up to the last that He would confound His enemies, and that it would be impossible for them to put Him to death. I say that in mitigation, as I think of those men who went to sleep.

Then Judas came, followed by those from whom He had received his pay. He betrayed the Christ with a kiss. The only rebuke Jesus gave was: "Betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?" And then they took Him.

Peter, that stalwart, that impetuous man, had said that he would never forsake Jesus, and Christ had said,

. . . before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.

—Mark 14:30

And when they had Him within the walls and in the judgment chamber and were seeking for His followers who had disappeared, they came to this man, and a woman said,

. . . And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.

But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest.

—Mark 14:67, 68.

Shortly after Peter said that, Christ came out of that chamber. Peter, crouching in a corner, saw Christ go by, and Christ looked at Peter. I hope none of us will ever have to endure that look because of faithlessness. But Christ loved Peter, and He knew his weakness, and the beauty of it is, my brethren and sisters, He forgave him. He did not condemn him. What a great character Peter became afterwards.

They took Him first to one and then to another. I do not have time to go into detail and need not because you are familiar with it. They condemned him to die. Pilate offered to release either Jesus or Barabbas, a murderer, and the crowd yelled for Barabbas. "What shall I do then with Jesus?" said Pilate, and the cry came back, Crucify Him!" The weak monarch washed his hands, but not his soul. Christ was led to Golgotha.

As I stood there a few years ago, upon that hill called the Hill of Skull, and as I looked from there down the hill to the tomb which the best authorities believe to be the tomb in which Christ's body was placed, I thought: What a tragedy occurred here, and yet, what a blessing.

If Christ had yielded in Gethsemane, there would have been no Easter, and if there had been no Easter morn, there would have been no hope; but He had the courage and the fortitude to say, "Thy will, not mine." He went to the cross, and there, suspended between heaven and earth and looking down on His persecutors, His murderers, He looked again up to His Father:

"Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. . .

—Luke 23:34

One of the thieves nailed there beside him said,

. . . If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

—Luke 23:39

But the other thief, being of a different character, no doubt, rebuked his fellow thief, and then he turned to Christ and said,

. . . Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy Kingdom.

And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise.

—Luke 23:42, 43

We will all go to paradise, but the kind of place it is will depend on the kind of people we are. To some it will be awful, to others it will be glorious. So He said,

. . . (This day) shalt thou be with me in paradise.

— Luke 23:43

And He said, "I thirst." I am told there is no agony comparable to the agony of crucifixion. In many cases the executioners tied the criminals by the hands and by the wrists. But in His case they nailed Him to the cross, driving the nails through His hands and through His feet. And He said, "I thirst," and one of the soldiers handed up on a spear a sponge saturated with vinegar. That was usual, because in the vinegar or whatever else was in the sponge there sometimes was an opiate to lessen the pain. Whether that was true or not He did not take it. Finally, out of the agony He suffered, He said, "My God, why has thou forsaken me?"

He looked again, and His mother was standing there, with John at her side. One of the last thoughts of Jesus the Christ, as He suffered that agony, was for others. He said:

. . . Woman, behold thy son!

Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

—John 19:26, 27

Then an agonized cry escaped Him and He said, "It is finished." And His limp body was taken from the cross. There was no place for it to be laid, for in death as in life He had no place to lay His head. A friend loaned Him a tomb and they took Him there, and part of the preparatory services were given, and His body was laid in that tomb; and His disciples and those who knew Him best at that time thought it was finished, that Christ had been defeated. They thought that He whom they had believed to be the Messiah and the King of the Jews and the Israelites had been defeated and killed and crucified and they were about to go back, each to his own work. They were doubting.

The Romans, hearing that there was likelihood that the disciples would try to steal away His body, put a big stone in front of the tomb, and sealed it with their own seal, and put a guard on it. But on that first Easter morning the whole earth trembled, and an angel appeared and rolled away that stone, and Jesus the Christ, the Crucified One, walked forth triumphant.

It is remarkable that the last ones at the cross and the first ones at the tomb were women. Someone has said, "God couldn't be everywhere, so He gave us our mothers." Early in the morning, some of the women were at the tomb. They looked in and discovered that the body was missing, and some of them ran to the apostles. But one of them waited, and as she peered in, she saw two men, one at the head and one at the foot of where He had lain, and they said,

. . . why weepest thou? . . .

—John 20:13

And it is recorded that they said to her,

. . . Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen: . . .

—Luke 24:5-6

These three words, "He . . . is risen," will be repeated today in millions of congregations all over the world.

And then that soul-searching salutation, as she looked up at Him, the first time looking into the face of the resurrected Lord: "Mary."

Think of what happened, as He called her by name, and adoringly she approached Him and said, "Rabboni."

Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.

—John 20:17

Jesus appeared on eleven different occasions that are recorded in the Testament, and doubtless on others. He appeared to Mary at the sepulchre, to other women between the sepulchre and Jerusalem, to the two disciples on the way to Emmaus, to Peter near Jerusalem, and Peter does not make any mention of that but the other apostles do; to the ten apostles in Jerusalem and later the eleven in Jerusalem; again to the eleven at the Sea of Tiberius in Galilee; and again on the mount in Galilee to the eleven; and perhaps in the same location to 500 of the brethren referred to by the apostle Paul; and later to James, and then to the eleven at the time of the ascension; and of course after that, to Paul.

I shall take but a minute to refer to that last journey of the apostles with the Savior. He walked out with them near Bethany and from the hill where we stood a year ago, in their presence He was caught up in a cloud and taken into heaven. Two men in white stood by who were described as angels. Seeing the consternation on the faces of the apostles who even yet seemingly were not fully informed and converted, the angels said,

. . . Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

—Acts 1:11

That was the testimony of the angels, and, mind you, angels announced His birth, angels were present at His temptation, angels were there when He was baptized, and angels were there at the crucifixion. Christ associated with heavenly beings from the time of the primeval council in heaven until the time of the ascension; and, brethren and sisters, He still lives.

There are those who say it was but a spirit who came out of that tomb. I refute that with His own words. When He came among the apostles and they were affrighted and thought they had seen a spirit, He said,

. . . Peace be unto you.

Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

—Luke 24:36, 39

Let that be the answer to all the world who say that God has no body. For Christ is God, and His resurrected body came out of the tomb, and that same body went into heaven, and He will appear again on that same Mount of Olives. The Doctrine and Covenants (Section 45) tells us that there He will stand and extend His wounded hands. They will not be the hands of a mere spirit. And they who see Him will believe, and they will ask where He received those wounds, and He will tell them-in the house of My friends.

That is what Easter means-not only that Christ lives, but that we shall live, that life is immortal, and because He broke the bands of death, resurrection is guaranteed to all men everywhere. This is the most hopeful message in all the world, for every man shrinks at the thought of extinction. We all hope for immortality, and Christ has guaranteed it to us. The degree, the status, the position will depend in large measure upon ourselves, but the resurrection is an accomplished fact.

Let those of you who mourn your lost ones, or who may mourn them before another Easter-time, reflect, as we have been reflecting this morning, on that first Easter morn. Let us follow Him out to the mountain in Galilee and see Him turn to His little band of followers, and for the first time in recorded history hear Him say, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." (Matthew 28:18.) Christ had earned His place, and He sat down on the right hand of the Father.

May I read you just a word here:

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness; . . .

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.

—Doctrine and Covenants 76:20, 22-24

He not only appeared on those eleven occasions to which we have referred and on the twelfth to Paul on his way to Damascus; He came to America and appeared to a multitude of people who were bemoaning the awful things that had happened here in America when Christ was crucified. A voice called to them three times. They did not understand it the first two times. The third time they heard the voice, which came from heaven, saying,

Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name-hear ye him.

—3 Nephi 11:7

And looking up, they beheld a man coming out of heaven clothed in a white robe, and He said,

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world;

—3 Nephi 11:10, 11

I ask you to go home and read the eleventh chapter of Third Nephi again. The people fell to the earth; and He said,

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that we may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, . . .

—3 Nephi 11:14

Brethren and sisters, the best attested fact in all history is the fact of the resurrection of Christ. Humbly, but pursuant to my duty, and by the same authority which Peter held when he replied to Christ's question, "Whom say ye that I am?" I want to say to you, my brothers and sisters, I know that He is the Christ, the Son of God, and that He was resurrected from the dead, and that He lives, and that all the powers of Satan, of men and hell combined, cannot conquer. I hesitate to hold you longer, but I should like to read you this, by way of encouragement. John told of his vision:

And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,

And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, . .

—Revelation 20:1-3

That is a promise, given by the same person of whom we have been speaking this morning, even Jesus the Christ, for it was He who gave John his revelation.

And in the next chapter John says:

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.

And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

—Revelation 21:1-3

This is a glorious subject for contemplation, and I leave with you a blessing in His name. Those of you who mourn, shall be comforted; those of you who are poor in spirit and meek shall inherit the earth and the heaven. I bless you as parents that you may rear your children in the fear and admonition of the Lord. I bless you young people that you may come to know Jesus the Christ and be worthy of Him. Let there be a response in your heart as you worship Christ the Lord.

I leave this testimony and this blessing, and I ask His Spirit to be with you, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Bonneville Stake Conference, April 22, 1962
