Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Analysis of L.D.S. Teachings

The Church which I represent today on "Covenant" is The Church of Jesus Christ. It was organized in the state of New York in 1830 and is distinguished from its prototype of former days by the qualifying words "of Latter-day Saints."

Any exposition or analysis of the teachings of the Mormon Church must necessarily begin with some reference to its founder and early history. We respond to the nickname "Mormon," because it identifies the Church more quickly in the minds of many listeners. The word "Mormon," like the word "Christian" in former times, was first applied as an epithet of derision. It was first used after the announcement of the intended publication of the Book of Mormon, which is a sacred record of some of the ancient inhabitants of America, some of whose descendants greeted Columbus when he arrived. This book was not written by Joseph Smith or by any of his contemporaries but was written by various authors who lived at the time when the recorded events transpired. To us it is a sacred record because its authors were prophets of God who were instructed by Him to preserve the records for future use. The location of the plates was revealed by the one who, under divine mandate, deposited them in a hillside about 400 A.D., and the record was later delivered to the Prophet Joseph Smith and by him translated by the gift and power of God.

This record covers a period of history from approximately 600 years B.C. to 400 A.D., although there is reference to other migrations and peoples preceding that time. The record states that the people who became the early Americans were led to this country under divine behest and guidance and that they brought with them certain records from Jerusalem, including parts of the Old Testament from which the authors frequently quote.

The Church had its inception in a revelation from God to the modern prophet, Joseph Smith. He, responsive to the promise and admonition of the Apostle James, prayed for wisdom and guidance. The promise of James was that any man lacking wisdom would receive it if he would ask God. The admonition was that his prayer should be one of unwavering faith.

Joseph Smith, in his fifteenth year, put that promise to the test and it was fulfilled in a glorious vision and revelation. Although some of his relatives and friends believed him, his announcement was generally met with ridicule and scoffing. He, insisting that he had actually been visited by heavenly beings, became the object of the bitterest and most relentless persecution of modern times. This continued during the remaining twenty-four years of his turbulent life, which ended in martyrdom in Carthage, Illinois, in 1844.

Of the man, Joseph Smith, one non-Mormon historian wrote, ". . . The man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today accepted by hundreds of thousands as a direct emissary from the Most High-such a rare human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. . . . Joseph Smith, claiming to be an inspired teacher, faced adversity such as few men have been called to meet, enjoyed a brief season of prosperity such as few men have ever attained, and finally, forty-three days after I saw him, went cheerfully to a martyr's death. . ."

The first vision of the Prophet Joseph Smith constitutes the groundwork of the Church which was later organized. If this first vision was but a figment of Joseph Smith's imagination, then the Mormon Church is what its detractors declare it to be-a wicked and deliberate imposture. If this vision was a reality, then this Church is exclusively The Church of Jesus Christ for the simple reason that He, the Savior, personally restored what in the meridian of time He had personally established. This, then, was the beginning of a powerful, vital, and progressive religion, one which is distinctly American and definitely Christian. Emerson said, "Mormonism is the only religion of power and vitality that has made its appearance for the past twelve hundred years."

We shall not take time to discuss the early history of the Church, but it includes some very dramatic and heart-warming episodes.

Many of you have read of the expulsion in mid-winter of twenty thousand American citizens from their newly built city of Nauvoo, of a modern Moses leading a covered-wagon trek across the American plains, where these exiles courageously sang "Come, Come Ye Saints" with the poignant refrain, "All is well."

These outcasts entered a sagebrush wilderness where, despite the lure of gold in California, they stayed on and transformed the rugged valleys of the Rocky Mountains into a promised land, of which Salt Lake City became the capital.

We accept the King James version of the Holy Bible and believe it to be the word of God. We affirm the existence of the true and living God. He is the Supreme Being in whose image and likeness man was created. We accept the scriptural account of the Creation and the Fall of man. Through the fall physical degeneration and death entered into the world. Our earth life is but one stage of a continuing and eternal journey. The birth of the mortal body does not mark man's beginning nor will physical death mark the end of his conscious existence.

All things, including man, were created spiritually before they were created temporally. We lived in the spirit world as intelligent beings and as the spirit children of God had free agency, were endowed with the capacity to choose, but we were and are now warned, as was Adam, that we must take the consequences of our choice.

Our coming into mortality was part of a divine plan for man's continuous development throughout eternity. While the earth phase of man's education toward immortality and eternal life was foreordained, it was not predestined; it was voluntary. God will never trammel or hamper man's free agency. Mortal life affords an opportunity for embodied spirits to prove themselves by solving problems, overcoming difficulties, resisting temptations, and striving to achieve that perfection which Christ enjoined in his Sermon on the Mount.

In our Articles of Faith we declare our belief in God the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost-in other words, the Trinity. We accept the scriptural doctrine that they are separate and distinct personages. This is one distinguishing and, to some, disturbing doctrine of the Church. We do not believe that He is incomprehensible, immaterial, and without body or parts. While we agree that finite man cannot fully comprehend God, there is ample support in the Bible for our faith that we may progressively increase our knowledge and understanding of Him. In fact, our eternal life is dependent upon our knowing Him. Note the words of Jesus:

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.

—John 17:3

If it is life eternal to know Him and if He is incomprehensible and cannot be known, what hope is there for eternal life? Certainly our faith in Him, our reverence and worship, will be more meaningful as we gain more knowledge of the object of our worship. Comprehension and understanding are essential to intelligent worship. The light of revealed truth dispels the darkness of ignorance and superstition.

That the three members of the Godhead are separate individuals, physically distinct from one another, is proven by the sacred records of God's dealings with man. One example was when the Savior was baptized. John recognized the Holy Ghost in the sign of a dove while Christ stood before him in the tabernacle of flesh, and they heard the voice of the Father acknowledging the son:

. . . This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

—Matthew 3:17

Surely this was not ventriloquism where Christ was speaking to and of himself. It was the Father introducing His Son. In this case, the members of the Holy Trinity manifested themselves, each in a different way, and each was distinct from the others. A similar event occurred on the Mount of Transfiguration when members of the Godhead were distinguished in the presence of Moses and Elias, and Peter, James, and John.

To the question, "Did Christ have a body?" most men will agree that the answer must be, "Yes, while he lived on the earth." While many deny the actuality of His bodily resurrection, we call attention to His appearance before the apostles in an upper room:

And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.

But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.

And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?

Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

—Luke 24:36-39

Combining this unequivocal statement of the resurrected Lord with Paul's testimony that Christ was in the express image of the Father, we must conclude that both the Father and the Son are personal as we are personal. Each of them possesses a tangible body, infinitely pure and perfect and attended by transcendent glory, nevertheless a body of flesh and bones. They are in perfection what we are in embryo. As God is our Father, there is a spark of divinity, something of Himself, in us.

We accept the New Testament story that Jesus of Nazareth was born into mortality of the virgin Mary, that He lived approximately thirty-three years in and around Judea. After three years of transcendent ministry He was crucified and His body was placed in a borrowed tomb. The miraculous resurrection of His glorified body broke the bonds of death and made resurrection possible for all men. As Paul said:

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

—1 Corinthians 15:22

We believe in the literal resurrection of the bodies of all men.

After His resurrection from the dead, He appeared to many before ascending into heaven:

And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures:

And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve:

After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.

And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.

—1 Corinthians 15:4-8

We agree with the Apostle Peter, who, speaking of Christ, said:

Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

—Acts 4:12

He was and is both Jehovah and Messiah, God the Son, the Creator and Savior of the world, working at all times in complete harmony and oneness with Elohim, God the Father, in whose likeness man was created.

On the subject of the atonement, the late Dr. Talmage wrote:

The atonement accomplished by the Savior was a vicarious service for mankind, all of whom had become estranged from God through sin; and through that sacrifice of propitiation, a way has been opened for reconciliation whereby man may be brought again into communion with God, and be made able to live and advance as a resurrected being in the eternal worlds. . . .

The assured resurrection of all who have lived and died on earth is a foundation stone in the structure of (Mormon) philosophy.

The indispensable conditions of individual salvation are:

We believe that the doctrine of death-bed repentance or instantaneous salvation is unscriptural, unreasonable, and unjust. Salvation, like education, is an ongoing process, a lifetime endeavor, an eternal quest. We believe in the efficacy of the atonement of Christ, that He did for us what we could not do for ourselves; that through His atoning blood all men will be raised from the dead, but our individual exaltation will, through the atonement of Christ, be achieved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel. A man cannot be saved in his sins. He may be saved from them.

Christ was the only sinless man who ever walked the earth; He was the first begotten in the spirit world and the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh and therefore the only one who possessed the full powers of Godhood and manhood. He was chosen and foreordained in the primeval council before the earth was formed. To this He testified in His prayer:

And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.

—John 17:5

We testify that He was and is the second member of the Godhead, the Son of God, that He became the Savior and Redeemer of the world, that He is the one to whom Isaiah prophetically referred:

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.

—Isaiah 9:6

Christ was the only one wholly free from the dominion of Satan, the only one who possessed the power to hold death in abeyance and to die only as He willed to do so. He said:

For as the Father hath life in himself: so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself:

—John 5:26

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.

No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.

—John 10:17, 18

We believe that salvation cannot be achieved by mere intellectual assent or acquiescence, nor by professing some creed, nor yet by the administration of sacraments alone. The atoning blood of Jesus Christ becomes effective for the individual if and when he puts himself in a position to receive the benefits of His atonement. Redemption from sin is obtainable only through the atonement of Jesus Christ and by obedience to His commandments.

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.

—Matthew 7:21

While the door to the kingdom of God was opened by the sacrificial death and resurrection of our Lord, Jesus Christ, no man may enter that kingdom unless and until he obeys the prescribed laws and ordinances of the gospel.

Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

—John 3:5

To Latter-day Saints the marriage covenant is sacred and when solemnized by proper authority is known as celestial or eternal marriage. As God is love and as God is eternal, so love must be eternal. Parenthood is next to Godhood, and the family relationship is intended to be a continuing association throughout eternity.

We insist upon a single standard of morality. Both men and women are required to observe strictly the law of chastity. The commandment, "Thou shalt not commit adultery," applies to all. Promiscuity and all extra-marital relationships are grievous sins in the sight of God and are punishable by excommunication from the Church.

Believing as we do that the Church is built upon the same foundation as existed in the primitive Church, viz. apostles and prophets, with Jesus Christ as the chief cornerstone, it inevitably follows-and this constitutes another basic difference between us and other churches-that we believe in continued revelation from God through living prophets.

It seems somewhat paradoxical that this fundamental doctrine of the Church should seem to be unique or should distinguish it from others, especially in the Judeo-Christian world. In all dispensations of the gospel, current revelation has been standard procedure, it was and is the sustaining power, the vivifying spirit of the divine Church.

All who are familiar with the scriptures know that through all the dispensations of the gospel referred to in the Old and New Testaments, the leaders of the Church, being prophets of God, were in contact with and were led by Him, either by dreams, visions, revelations, or face-to-face communication as with Moses.

Is it possible that religion is the one department of human inquiry, investigation, and research where progress is impossible? Would any professor say to his class in chemistry, astronomy, physics, or geology, that no further discovery or revelation of scientific truth is possible? Is religion the only human interest which is static or quiescent? Is it the only dead-end street to be encountered on the many branches of life's highway? Or is it rather an open thoroughfare made safe by the divine light of revelation?

For ourselves because of our faith in the universal and unchangeable love and justice of God, we cannot believe that in some dispensations His Church was blessed and led by what in television parlance might be termed `live' revelation and that in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times, our distraught and imperiled world is left with only the recorded messages of ancient prophets, some of which were given for specific purposes or to meet special conditions. We believe that revelation, both live and recorded, is now and will continue to be available to men.

When we say that we believe all that God has revealed, we declare our faith in the scriptures. We believe the Bible to be a repository of divine truth and that it is authoritative. When we declare that we believe that God does now reveal, that He still speaks through His prophets, and that His word is scripture whenever and wherever given, we are simply affirming our faith in the religion of the Holy Bible.

The Church of Jesus Christ was established and is now directed by revelation, and that fact is largely responsible for its appeal to nonmembers. There were approximately 100,000 new converts in 1962.

The Church is not committed to any formal, inflexible creed, but its members are taught to believe in and live by the revelations of the past as recorded in holy scripture, in the revelations of the present as given through living prophets, and thus prepare themselves for revelations yet to come. Our concepts and even our faith must be held subject to new light and knowledge. The present and urgent need for continued revelation in this age of Communism, atheism, godlessness, and the spirit of the anti-Christ becomes more apparent when we realize that through revelation only do we get conclusive proof that there is a divine Being, which fact is being savagely denied and challenged by the Communistic world.

We accept the New Testament doctrine concerning the second coming of Christ, that He will reign personally upon the earth during a thousand years of peace known as the millennium. His second coming was predicted by the apostles and prophets of old, and He himself promised to return. John the beloved declared:

Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

—Revelation 20:6

Peter also predicted His second coming:

And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.

—Acts 3:20, 21

In carrying out the work committed to it, the Church is tolerant of other sects and churches. It claims for itself no right or privilege which it would deny to individuals or other organizations. It affirms itself to be the Church of old established anew. Its message to the world is that of peace and good will-an invitation to come and partake of the blessings incident to the new and everlasting covenant between God and His children. Its warning voice is heard in all lands and climes: Repent ye! for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

Humbly, and from the very center of my heart, I say to you, our friends, and to you members of the Church, God has restored the gospel of Jesus Christ through some of the greatest revelations of all time; the Father and the Son, anticipating our very day and the events of these times, revealed themselves to a man. They were personal Beings; they were separate and distinct; they were in form like man, thus proving the declaration in Genesis,

So God created man in his own image,.

—Genesis 1:27

The whole message of Mormonism centers around the life and mission of Jesus the Christ. We fearlessly proclaim to the world that God does live, and this is a direct contradiction of the atheistic doctrines of Communism. He still speaks to His prophets on the earth. Religion is not an opiate as the godless have declared, but is a vital, inspiring, and indestructible force which will save the world.

If this statement of the restoration is true, it is the greatest message that has come to this earth since the angels announced the birth of Christ and it is therefore a message which all men should hear and heed.

In my heart I have a conviction that this is the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, that it has been restored in our day. I know that God is a reality and that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. Knowing that I shall soon have to give an account for what I say, I repeat reverently in His holy name, that I know that the Lord God omnipotent reigneth, and I humbly thank Him for that knowledge.

—NBC "Covenant" Program, March 10, 1963
