Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Building Mansions

The gospel is a constant reminder that we are building for eternity, that the eternal things with which we build will stand some day to judge us if we ourselves are to endure. Someone has said, "All that we think, say and do will go on forever." If this is true, then we should strive to indulge only thoughts, use only words and do only deeds which we are content to have go on forever.

With these eternal materials and in this realm of eternal things we are building mansions for ourselves. Whether we are to enjoy them or be made miserable by their reminders of what might have been, depends upon eternal vigilance and divine guidance.

The story is told of a rich man who, before leaving on a long journey, instructed a contractor to build a house for him. He left with him a large sum of money and said, "Because I trust you, I shall give you full charge of the selection of the building materials and the construction of the house. I want it built of the best materials, deep and broad foundations, heavy joists, strong beams, hardwood floors, substantial walls, enduring roof-build it only of the best, and have it ready for me upon my return."

As the rich man went away the builder, being tempted by the money entrusted to him, began to think of ways by which he could cheat his employer and thereby have for himself part of the building fund. He thereupon purchased poorer materials for those parts of the house which would not be seen. The foundation was narrow and shallow, the joists and beams inferior, the inner walls of poor materials, the supports for the roof inadequate in size and quality. He employed second and third class laborers, and thus he saved a large percentage of the money and boasted of his "business ability."

The builder was careful to see that there was proper veneer wherever the eye of the owner might appraise the worth of the building from outer appearance. While the building was according to plan it would not have stood a careful inspection, but the painting and the camouflage were so expertly done that upon his return the owner expressed great delight at the excellence of the work of his trusted friend.

The owner, during his absence, had decided to take up his residence in a foreign land. Therefore, after commending the builder for his honesty and the quality of his work, he said to him, "As a reward for your faithful service, I give this house to you, on condition that you live in it. It shall be a faithful reminder that honesty pays, that integrity is a real asset, that a trust faithfully discharged brings satisfaction and peace of mind."

When the rich man had gone away, the builder said to himself, "Oh, fool that I am! If I had only known that I was building for myself, that I must inhabit this house, how different it would have been! The foundation, joists, and beams must soon give way; the walls will crumble and the roof cave in; the gift is a liability rather than an asset-I have cheated myself. My house built upon the sand must fall."

Our Heavenly Father has entrusted to each of us the building of a house and has advised-not by "commandment or constraint but by revelation and the word of wisdom,"-that it should be built of the best materials and by honest and efficient craftsmen. He furthermore requires that the unseen parts shall be even better than the seen, for upon them the superstructure must rest. The outward appearance is of minor importance. He leaves the job to us, but someday we must report to Him upon our stewardship. In this case, however, we cannot deceive, for He, to whom we must report, has a power by which He will inspect our house from center to circumference; the hidden secrets shall be made known. But, in this case, we know beforehand that we are building for ourselves and not another. Regardless of the excellence or the inferiority of our work He will say to us, "This is your house; you built it and now throughout the ages you shall inhabit it." "He who sins against men may fear discovery; but he who sins against God is sure of it."

Let us build, then, as though we expect to be the tenants and the owners. Let us keep in mind the fact that we are building for eternity. The gospel of Jesus Christ as restored in our time gives all the plans and specifications for the building. It tells how the timbers may be properly seasoned; warns against corroding agencies, termites of sin; stresses quality rather than appearance; urges broad and deep foundations; and reminds us that time will remove veneer, expose all make believe, and that real work alone will stand.

Let us do our work so well, "both the unseen and the seen," that the house where Gods may dwell shall be "beautiful, entire, and clean."

—Millennial Star, October 5, 1939
