Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Our Pioneer Legacy

During the past one hundred years, the people in these valleys have assembled annually in their towns and villages to celebrate the 24th of July. We have parades and fireworks, music and drama, and inevitably someone has been selected to discourse on the achievements of the pioneers. They used to call it an oration, but having lost that art we must be content with a reiterated narration. It is obvious, therefore, that it would be impossible to say anything this morning that has not been said before, and yet it seems appropriate that we should again consider the achievements of our ancestors, thank God for what they did, and again resolve to build on the foundations they laid so firmly.

Scholars and historians refer to the invasion and conquest of this arid section of the United States as the American classic.

Tourists who come among us are inclined to ask, "Who were these people, these intrepid Mormon pioneers, who dared to turn their backs on all they loved and enter this unsettled wilderness to make their homes?" The answer is, they were mostly Americans, many of them of New England stock, but added to them were many from other states of the Union, and later members came from European countries. They came to join the main body of the Church. These pioneers, then, were a mixture of many nationalities.

These people were of the stout middle class in the 19th century society. They were farmers, tradesmen, small merchants, with a few school teachers and professional people thrown in. The ne'er-do-wells were weeded out by the sheer ruggedness of the life which pioneering entailed. The pioneers were people with a common purpose, with a deep conviction and unfaltering trust in God. They had the vision and the valor to project a great city in the Salt Lake Valley, to lay the foundations of a three-million-dollar temple before the sagebrush was cleared from the streets. They were the kind of people who could move a whole city and encourage innumerable other people to brave the desert and the mountains under heartbreaking conditions because they believed they had been commissioned to build the Kingdom of God on earth.

Their land was not flowing with milk and honey as was the promised land of Israel. They saw only the parched earth with the salt sea in the background, but with determination they dug their plows into the baked soil, planted wheat and potatoes to insure food for the coming winter, and introduced irrigation to supplement the sparse rainfall and make survival possible.

They not only fought wind and weather, battled diseases and the insects and braved the terrors of the savage Indians, but later on they faced again their enemies from the East who pursued them even beyond the then confines of the United States.

But rather than recount again the familiar story as it has been related so frequently each year on the 24th of July, I would like for a moment to call your attention to what students say who see this epic objectively, some of whom came to criticize and remained to praise. From the American Journal of Sociology, I take some excerpts from a study made by Dr. Thomas F. O'Dea, from Harvard, Stanford and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He wrote, "Of the many churches founded in the region south of the Great Lakes in the first half of the 19th century, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or the Mormon Church, alone avoided the stagnant backwaters of sectarianism." He tells of the persecution and migrations, of their expulsion from the cities which they built and then says, "Finally, in 1847, the Mormons, harrassed and persecuted, dispossessed of all but faith, leadership and superb organization, crossed the plains and settled in the Utah desert. There, relying on their spiritual and sociological assets, they established a regional culture area bearing the pronounced imprint of their peculiar values and outlook."

Dr. O'Dea points out that these people preferred isolation to compromise. They had the courage of their convictions and, while they relied on divine guidance, they knew they had to rely on themselves as well and therefore work and recreation were accepted and sanctified. He draws attention to their claim of contemporary converse with God, to their frugality and industry and consequent prosperity, to their in-group cohesion and to the fact that they were required to start over again four times in sixteen years.

Their leadership deliberately chose an unattractive region to gain the necessary respite that isolation would give, and they with resolution resisted the seductions of more pleasant prospects. This arid region seemed to be prerequisite for the future form of this community.

Again quoting Dr. O'Dea, "Their size, the extent and duration of their suffering and the way in which defeat several times crowned the most palpable successes, combined to transform the bread and water of sectarian affliction into the real presence of national potentiality. Common effort in success and in failure, common suffering from elemental and human adversaries, common struggle with arms against common enemies, all these lent to the symbolic emulation of ancient Israel. Mormonism lived its Exodus and Chronicles not once but many times. It had its Moses and its Joshua. Circumstances had given it a stage upon which its reenactment of the Biblical history was neither farce nor symbolic pageant.

"With these early pioneers, American patriotism was an Article of Faith and they therefore made no move toward national independence. They desired to become an American state rather than an independent nation. They emerged as a distinct people, but any effort toward independent nationhood was inhibited by their patriotic conviction and their belief that the Constitution of the United States was inspired of God.

"With their deep religious convictions and their unwavering faith in God, they resisted the lure of gold fields and rich agricultural areas to the west and northwest, where rainfall was abundant and where prosperity seemed assured, and in these dry, forbidden valleys they achieved territorial solidarity, established schools and the press, and put the impress of a new culture on the civil and political institutions of the area."

One hundred and forty-eight men, women and children arrived with the first party on July 24, 1847, but approximately 86,000 followed them before 1869, when the transcontinental railway became an accomplished fact.

Of this great, unparalleled migration, men, women and children, with handcarts and ox carts, trudged their way and pressed on, though 6,000 of their number died en route and were buried either in the ocean or in lonely graves by the side of the pioneer trail.

After settling here they immediately began to spread into other areas and establish settlements, villages, towns, and cities, and finally many states were established along the pioneer trail and admitted to the Union.

But within their own area they moved north and south and east and west. They established Ogden and Logan on the north and moved on into Idaho and later into Canada. Towns, villages and later cities grew up to the south and southwest. Provo, Nephi, Manti, St. George, and on into Arizona and Mexico. They went west into Tooele and Garfield and on into California, east into Colorado, Wyoming and New Mexico and now their descendants are found in all states of the Union and these descendants are establishing stakes of Zion, building temples and tabernacles, not only here but in foreign lands and in the islands of the sea.

And so we hold our big celebrations, our parades, display our floats and wave our flags in memory of these pioneers. We have built monuments of masonry, stone and bronze to their memory-The Mormon Battalion Monument on Capitol Hill, the monument at the mouth of Emigration Canyon, known as "This Is The Place," and recently the Ft. Moore Memorial in Los Angeles, with its pylon and flagpole. In these and other ways we seek to commemorate the great work performed by these intrepid pioneers.

We pay tribute today to the sons and daughters of the Utah pioneers who have done so much to preserve their memory and keep alive their spirit. These loyal descendants have organized into groups and displayed from time to time the same characteristics which made their fathers great.

But we must not honor the pioneers alone in parades and celebrations, in monuments and books, we must join with these sons and daughters of the pioneers and, realizing that we are the trustees to whom their heritage shall pass, we must undertake to maintain their ideals, to continue their loyalty and frugality, and to preserve that which they pass to us or those who are to follow us. We must pass it on, not only unimpaired but improved upon. We should strive to establish in the minds and the hearts of their descendants who are following us the rugged virtues which were so characteristic of these outcast but outstanding Americans, who maintained the love of their country even when that country, because of misunderstanding and misrepresentation, no longer welcomed them.

We must keep alive such virtues as courage, honesty, integrity, frugality, stamina, initiative and self-confidence. We must teach them to have consideration for the rights of others and to recognize the universal brotherhood of man and the omnipotence and omniscience of God.

In this atomic age, when international affairs are in a state of chaos, we must preserve and conserve the priceless heritage which is ours. We must keep alive the things of the spirit which made the pioneers willing to risk their lives and happiness in this great venture. The lessons taught by the pioneers were not for their day alone, nor for ours. These lessons are for the tomorrows that lie ahead.

Kipling describes a man, and these people had the qualities of which he speaks. To adapt the poet's words slightly:

They heard the truth they'd spoken Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools. They saw the things they gave their lives to broken And stooped and built `em up with worn out tools. They forced their hearts and nerves and sinews To serve their turn long after they were gone, And they held on when there was nothing in them Except the will which said to them, "Hold on."

This is their legacy-our inheritance.

—Address to Daughters of Utah Pioneers,

Salt Lake City, July 24, 1958
