Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

The Prophet Joseph Smith

My dear fellow workers and brothers and sisters. I feel very humble as I stand before you this morning. I have been asked to speak on a subject that is very near to my heart, and I know that no man could do justice to that subject, and yet I am glad to respond to the invitation. It is not my intention to preach a sermon on the Prophet Joseph Smith. I should like for just a few moments to have a sort of fireside chat with you. All of you know of him, believe in him, are grateful for his work, and the most that I could hope to do would be to direct our thinking for a little while to his accomplishments, the purpose of his life, the great mission he performed, the certainty of his present status.

Somehow, I am persuaded that we knew him before we came here. He died, of course, before any of us were born, but I have felt a nearness to him which I have been unable to explain in any other way than that it must have been my privilege to meet him before I came. There has never been the slightest shadow of doubt in my mind as to the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith. There has never been a doubt in my mind that he saw what he claims to have seen, that he heard the voice of God the Father and Jesus the Son, that he had the other manifestations and visions and revelations with which you are all familiar.

I was in Vermont not long ago. It was my privilege to dedicate the new buildings there, where we have a wonderful monument in his memory. And while there I took occasion to go off alone and thank God for Joseph Smith, and for what his life has meant to my life. None of us would be here today had it not been for him. Many of us might have been in foreign lands-lands from which our ancestors came.

But as I think of him and of his work, as I think of the challenge represented by the knowledge that the Lord has given us as to his divine calling, I am impressed to urge every one of us to indicate by the way we live that we mean what we say when we bear witness of him and of Jesus the Christ.

Someone asked some time ago, "What is prophecy?" Of course we have the scriptural definitions and explanations, but someone (not a member of the Church) recently wrote-not with reference to any particular prophet, but attempting to define prophecy, "Prophecy is a miracle of knowledge, a declaration or representation of something in the future beyond the power of human sagacity to discern or to calculate, and it is the highest evidence that can be given of supernatural communion with Deity, and the truth of Revelation from God. The man who reads prophecy and perceives the corresponding events is witness to a miracle."

We have all read the prophecies of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and we have witnessed the events concerning which he spoke, and, therefore, we have witnessed a miracle. That the Prophet Joseph Smith was inspired of God is evidenced by everything he did and said. When one asks what is a prophet, we, I think, would immediately revert in our minds at least back to some of the men who lived in ancient times, who were generally accepted, especially since their time, as prophets. According to the Jewish reckoning, there were forty-eight prophets between Adam and Malachi. There are some distinguishing features which set them apart as prophets, and one of the things that has impressed me as I studied their lives is the fact that each one of them said without any hesitation or equivocation. "God has spoken to me!" None of them said it with arrogance or pride, all of them with humility, but with conviction, and all through their ministry they said again and again, "Thus saith the Lord." And each of them had a specific message, a message which none of them ever watered down, or concerning which they had any doubt. Always their message ran contrary to the thinking of the day in many respects. Furthermore, the prophets were always despised by their contemporaries, and in many instances, murdered by them. When the prophets have said, "Thus saith the Lord," their words became scripture. If contemporaries would not receive them, the prophets were received by those who lived afterwards, who honored them, and built monuments to them. It has been said, "How is it that you build monuments to the dead prophets and crucify the living?"

I could go on and name the characteristics of a prophet and refer to the lives of the great prophets of old-Abraham, Moses, Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, the various prophets. I could refer to Peter, James, and John and Paul the apostle and the marvelous experiences they had. I have done this and I have been gratified, though not surprised, to find that the prophet Joseph Smith measures up to every requirement of a prophet. There is nothing that Moses had, or Isaiah, or Jeremiah, Peter, James, and John-there is nothing that any of them had in the way of qualification for being a prophet, that the Prophet Joseph Smith did not have. As a matter of fact I think we are justified in saying that no greater prophet has arisen in any dispensation than this young man who was born in Sharon, Vermont, 156 years ago tomorrow. Some day the people will recognize that generally. They are coming to recognize it now, in a very remarkable way. Our missionary work is almost startling in its progress.

Yes, the Prophet measures up in every respect, even to giving his life and sealing his testimony with his blood as most of the ancient prophets did. John the apostle said, "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." If any man in all history had a testimony of Jesus, it was Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. He saw Him, talked with Him, was led and guided by Him, and the testimony that he had of Him was burned into his soul. He said on many occasions, "If I wanted to, I would not dare to deny it." Think of his testimony of Jesus. Where is there a greater collection of evidences and testimonies concerning Jesus the Christ than we have in Mormon literature in the works of the Prophet Joseph-in the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price? So he had the testimony of Jesus and, therefore, he had the spirit of prophecy, and was therefore a prophet.

As I have studied the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith-and I have been studying it for more than fifty years, for the sheer joy of knowing him better-as I have thought about it and prayed about it, and as I have testified on street corners when mobs were threatening us, no more joy has come into my soul than when I have linked with my testimony of Jesus the Christ, the testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.

Whatever the vicissitudes of life, whatever the trials, temptations or problems you may have to face, I hope you younger folk will remember that Joseph Smith was sent to God, was commissioned by Jesus the Christ, was ordained to the apostleship and the Melchizedek Priesthood by Peter, James, and John, and was the favored of God our Father; that his work in the earth was of such a character and such magnitude that the whole earth is going to be affected by it; and that your job and mine is to help to prepare this world for the second coming of Christ. In my opinion, when the Christ comes the prophets will be with him, and the man who was chosen to be the head of the greatest of all dispensations will be at his side. What a glorious privilege it will be if we can meet him, be with him, come to know him!

I am greatly impressed by the courage of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Dr. Heidenreich, a former minister from New York who joined the Church came to see me yesterday for a few moments. He said, "The thing that I am grateful for is that the Prophet Joseph Smith had the courage to finish his job in the face of the most difficult situations and circumstances." I have thought of this often and have tried to put myself in his place. He was a young man full of life and hope and expectations, hounded and persecuted and driven, beaten, mobbed, imprisoned, murdered, when at any time he could have said, "It is a hoax, it is not true, I am sorry I said it, I withdraw what I said." If he had said those things, the persecution would have stopped, he would have been turned loose to do as he pleased and would have had no more notice from the public, and he would have not died as he did.

One of the incidents by which I have always been stirred, and which I would like to bring to you this morning is when the Prophet was in Richmond Jail. General Clark was in charge, and the record says he was determined that his prisoner should die. He made preparations for the commission of that murder before he had even decided the charge that he was to bring against his prisoners. And while the matter was pending Brother Jedediah M. Grant-the father of Heber J. Grant, our president-who was then a young man, put up at the same tavern with the general in Richmond. He saw Clark select the men to shoot Joseph Smith and his fellow prisoners, and he heard that the day of the execution was fixed-Monday, November 12, 1838. He saw the men who were selected. He saw them load their rifles with two bullets each, and after this was done he heard Clark say to them, "Gentlemen, you shall have the honor of shooting the Mormon leaders on Monday morning at eight o'clock." Others were in the jail with the Prophet, and among them was Parley P. Pratt. Here briefly is his account of that memorable night:

In one of those tedious nights we had lain as if asleep until the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and our hearts had been pained while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the "Mormons" while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives daughters and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women, and children.

I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice, that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering as near as I can recollect the following words: "Silence ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant."

He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained and without a weapon; calm, unruffled, and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together and who, shrinking into a corner or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

I have seen ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the Courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri.

Thank God for the spirit of his chosen servant. Thank God for sustaining him by His Holy Spirit.

I would not dwell too much upon the unhappy events, except to bring to us the realization of our responsibility. He paid so much to establish the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that anything you and I, or any of us, can do will be a pittance by comparison.

Personally, I would like to be able to so live as to be partially worthy to shake his hand when he comes again.

Humbly I bear you my testimony, not only that Jesus is the Christ but that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of the living God, one of the most highly favored of all men of all times, and one of the most successful. What he said and wrote has become scripture to millions.

I leave this testimony with you and my blessings that this may be a joyous Christmas season and a prosperous New Year for you all, and that every one of us as we leave today, after hearing from our beloved President, will thank God for the privilege of being associated with this group. I leave this blessing and this testimony with you humbly, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

—Address at the Church Employees Christmas Program,

December 22, 1961
