Hugh B. Brown, Abundant Life ( 1965)

Christ will Conquer

The Young Marrieds, the M Men and Gleaners, Explorers and Scouts, MIA Maids, Laurels and Beehive girls, together with all of their leaders, are entering the greatest competition of all, the serious pursuit of life itself, the abundant life, eternal life. In this competition you must cultivate a sensitivity to the things of mind and spirit, for our minds, unlike our bodies, may continue to grow while life lasts, but minds, like bodies, must have sustenance and exercise. The food of yesterday or last year will not suffice the body nor can the mind continue strong and active unless it is constantly fed. Without exercise and sustenance it will atrophy, even as the muscles of the body.

In the struggle which lies ahead of you, you will need the kind of faith and courage which inspired Columbus as he sailed into unknown and uncharted seas-faith which Santayana called "The Invincible Surmise," when he said:

341O world, thou choosest not the better part! It is not wisdom to be only wise, And on the inward vision close the eyes, But it is wisdom to believe the heart. Columbus found a world, and had no chart Save that which faith deciphered in the skies. To trust the soul's invincible surmise Was all his science and his only art. Our knowledge is but a torch of smoky pine Which lights our pathway but one step ahead Across a void of mystery and dread. Bid then the eternal light of faith to shine By which alone a human heart is led Unto the thinking of a thought divine.

You will need the kind of faith that sustained the Pilgrims when they came to our eastern shore, the faith that sustained our Founding Fathers as they prepared the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States. You will need the kind of faith which David had when he went out to meet Goliath. He had faith in God and in himself because he had prepared himself. He met Goliath with a sling and stone, and giant though Goliath was, David said, "I come to you in the name of the Lord of Hosts." When he threw the stone it sunk into the giant's head and he fell on his face. I suspect he was the most surprised man in all the world because nothing like that had ever entered his head before.

You will need the faith which preserved Daniel in the lions' den, the kind of faith that preserved the Hebrews in the fiery furnace. You will need the faith that sustained the Prophet Joseph and his successors. You will need to understand that prophecy and prophetic admonition are contemporaneous, for in our day as in the days of Paul and the Apostles, we fight not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, against rulers of darkness in this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.

You will need to take upon you the whole armour of God and exercise the faith which was planted in your hearts by your pioneer ancestors who crossed the plains against overwhelming odds. The influence of the home and the faith that comes from the home was well illustrated in a letter written by an army nurse in the last World War from Africa to her parents. She said:

"It is Sunday morning, and I know you are in church. That fact, almost as sure as sunrise and springtime, is one of the chief sources of whatever courage I may have. It is not just that I know you are sitting in a certain building at a certain hour of the week, but that from my earliest childhood everything you did and encouraged me to do harmonized with, and somehow stood behind, your going to church.

"Your church attendance was not just a gesture lightly made, nor duty grimly performed. It was vital and real, the open avowal of your most cherished convictions, backed up by your daily conduct-family worship, grace at meals, individual prayers which you taught us children to say, the unfailing sympathy and courtesy which you showed to us and to each other all summed up when we sat together there as a unit in church on Sunday morning.

"I can see the picture now-you two and us children, the light coming in through the windows, the music, the quiet peace, that is what I mean when I say it is the source of whatever courage I find at my command now under these conditions. That courage you built up within me because I learned from you and your daily experience that God is good; that right prevails even in present circumstances, even though present circumstances indicate the opposite. And oh, how I need that courage."

I shall not read the rest of her letter, but in closing she said: "I have found that thousands of the men with whom I have come in contact are sustained and helped and fortified by the faith they were taught in their homes."

Such faith will enable you to maintain your virtue as did Joseph in Egypt. He endured calumny and imprisonment, but because of his faith and virtue he became the virtual ruler of Egypt and the savior of his father's household.

That is the kind of faith you will need. To your faith you will need to have added virtue. Remember that faith without works is dead, and therefore buttressing it with virtue you must require knowledge-knowledge of yourselves, of your world, of God and your relationship to him; knowledge of things in the earth, above the earth and beneath the earth.

You will add to your knowledge temperance. It must accompany knowledge because all excesses are corroding, debasing, debilitating. For this reason the Lord God gave us the Word of Wisdom. Be temperate.

The next essential part of the armour with which you are to be girded is patience. As impetuous Peter learned, one must have patience to keep on keeping on and endure to the end. With your faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, you may achieve godliness, for you are His children, and are therefore heirs to all that He is and has. With godliness you will receive a better understanding of your relationship to your fellowmen. You will see in them your brothers and you will be imbued with brotherly kindness.

All this will lead you to charity, or love, without which, even "though you speak with the tongues of men and of angels," all else will become as sounding brass and tinkling cymbal. Charity vaunteth not itself, is not easily provoked. Thinketh no evil, charity will enable you to bear all things, believe all things, hope all things and endure all things. (1 Corinthians 13.)

Now we, your elders, offer you the encouragement of our own testimony, a testimony gained and strengthened in the front lines of life's battle. We, who have been called as witnesses of Christ, come to you now humbly, but with the same authority with which Peter spoke, and we say to you from the very center of our hearts, He is the Christ, the Son of the Living God. We know it as Peter knew it. It was revealed to him. The Savior said, not by flesh and blood "but my Father, which is in heaven." (Matthew 16:17.)

We speak of Him as a personal God, and declare that Jesus the Christ is His only begotten Son, our Redeemer, the Savior of the world. There is being amassed the greatest army in all history, and it is under the leadership of the anti-Christ. We humble servants of Christ boldly announce to you young people whom God is preparing to meet the future that the machinations of that Adversary, though his followers are numbered in hundreds of millions, will be thwarted and defeated for the simple reason that God still rules in the affairs of men. Christ will conquer the anti-Christ. Satan will be bound and cast into the bottomless pit. This I testify humbly in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

—MIA Conference, June 11, 1961
