How do you feel when you see the beauty of the temple? Do these words come to your mind: “I love to see the temple. I’m going there someday”?

Sometimes when children sing the song “I Love to See the Temple,” they desire to go to the temple someday, but they do not understand why there are temples, what happens in the temple, or what they must do to be able to go inside. Let’s find out more about the temple.

The Lord said, “Build a house to my name, for the Most High to dwell therein” (D&C 124:27). The Lord’s Spirit dwells in His temples. The temple is a house of God. It is a place where we make covenants (or promises) with Heavenly Father. If we keep our covenants, we will be able to live with Him again.

Everyone must be baptized to return to Heavenly Father. Many of Heavenly Father’s children died without being baptized. After you turn 12, you can be baptized in the temple for those people so they can have the same blessings.

In the temple we also receive an endowment, or gift. This gift is the promise that if we keep the commandments, we can have eternal life.

In the temple a husband and wife can be sealed as a family for time and eternity. That means if they stay worthy, they will be married forever and be with their children as an eternal family.

Everything done in the temple is done by the priesthood, or authority, of God.

To go inside the temple, you must be at least 12 years old. You must be baptized and confirmed. You must believe in Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ. You must believe in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. You must live Heavenly Father’s commandments. Your bishop or branch president will interview you to make sure you are worthy to enter the temple, and you will receive a temple recommend to show at the temple. Having a recommend means that you are living the way you should to go inside.

When you stay on the path that takes you to the temple, you will be prepared to go there “to feel the Holy Spirit, to listen and to pray. For the temple is a house of God, a place of love and beauty.”

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="127192735" id="aside1_p1"><span class="page-break" data-page="65"></span>Look at both pictures. Which family is ready to go to a temple open house? (1) In the first picture, circle the things that are helping the family prepare to visit the temple. (2) In the other picture, circle things the family needs to change to get ready to go. (3) Think of two things you can do to prepare to go to the temple when you are older. Write those things beneath the pictures.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
