“I have seen the fervent spiritual power of young adults in this Church,” Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said in a Church Educational System fireside broadcast for young adults on March 6, 2011. “I know your capacity.”

He taught four things that will help young adults fulfill their potential and help others regain their faith in Christ: daily prayer, daily scripture study, temple worthiness, and daily acts of service.

“You are the generation the Lord has saved for this day. … I challenge you to become ‘the greatest generation,’” Elder Perry said.

Read, listen to, or watch the address in multiple languages at institute.lds.org. Click on CES Firesides, then choose a language.

From February 12 to 20, 2011, Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles visited the Saints in Korea and Japan.

He taught Church members in Seoul, Korea, that we should be grateful for what we have rather than focusing on what we don’t have. He reminded them that the gospel provides the joy, happiness, and peace we all seek.

Elder Cook also met with journalists from several newspapers for a question-and-answer session.

Elder Cook spent time teaching, advising, and answering questions from missionaries in the Korea Daejeon Mission and participated in a priesthood leadership conference for the Korea Daejeon Mission area.

The visit ended with Elder Cook’s participation in a stake conference held by the Cheongju Korea Stake, the stake’s first visit from an Apostle.

Elder Cook also participated in a priesthood leadership conference in Kobe, Japan, and the Okayama Japan Stake conference; visited with representatives from Meiji Shrine in Tokyo, Japan; and made a brief visit to Vietnam.

“God delegates to us, His children, the opportunity and responsibility to establish laws and legal systems to govern human relations and conduct,” Elder D. Todd Christofferson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said in an address to members of the J. Reuben Clark Law Society on February 4. He spoke on the role that law plays in allowing individuals to reach their full potential in this life and the next.

Elder Christofferson reminded the audience that “we cannot achieve ultimate justice apart from Jesus Christ,” and that “the greatest good we can do in helping others become what they can become will be to lead them to the Savior.” He bore testimony of the Savior’s power to right wrongs and to “compensate for our inadequacy and justify us before that law which enables us to become joint heirs of eternal life with Him.” He ended with his witness that Christ lives.

Also during the fireside, Elder Christofferson was awarded the J. Reuben Clark Law Society Distinguished Service Award for his contributions to the field of law.

Relief Society general president Julie B. Beck met with nearly 10,000 Relief Society sisters and leaders on the BYU-Idaho campus on February 26, 2011, to strengthen their faith and to encourage them in their roles in Relief Society and in the plan of salvation.

In a general session and a leadership training session, Sister Beck fielded questions from women and priesthood leaders from more than 40 southeastern Idaho, USA, stakes.

Sister Beck testified that as those involved in the work of Relief Society keep the Lord’s purposes in their heads and in their hearts and fulfill His purposes here on earth, they will be blessed, strengthened, cleansed, and healed.

“We have an organization established by the Lord to bless His daughters,” she said. “The Lord knows who you are because it is His work. He will strengthen and magnify you.”

Read more on what Sister Beck taught and watch an accompanying feature video at news.lds.org. (Both video and text are available only in English.)
