WhEN DID JOhN WrITE rEvElaTION?

Who wrote Revelation is relatively certain. Although not everyone agrees, the most ancient

evidence points to the apostle John. When the apostle John wrote Revelation is far less

certain. Unlike books today, no one placed copyright dates in copies of biblical texts! To

decide the approximate date when this biblical text was written, scholars compare what’s

inside the book with what was happening in the world outside the book. In the case of

Revelation, that process results in two primary possibilities:

Evidence that Revelation may have Evidence that Revelation may have

been written during the reign of been written during the reign of

Emperor Nero (54–68) Emperor Domitian (81–96)

An ancient ascription: A fifth-century version The testimony of Irenaeus: The second-

of Revelation in the Syriac language refers century writer Irenaeus of Lyons—a student

to the book as “the Revelation given by God of Polycarp, who knew the apostle John—

to John the Gospel-writer, on the island of reported that John wrote Revelation while in

Patmos where he was banished by Emperor exile during Domitian’s reign.14

Nero.” It is possible that this ascription

preserves an earlier tradition.

Persecution of Christians: It seems that Worship of the Roman emperor: Hints can be

Christians may have been in the early stages found throughout Revelation that Christians

of a time of persecution when John wrote may have been coerced to worship the

Revelation (1:9; 2:2–3, 9–10, 13; 3:8–10). emperor (13:4, 14–17; 14:9; 15:2; 16:2;

Nero instigated the first imperial persecution 19:20; 20:4). Nero was never worshiped as

of Christians in ad 64; this persecution lasted divine in his lifetime. Worship of the emperor

until Nero’s death in 68.

does seem to have occurred during Domitian’s

reign, in the ad 80s and 90s. Coins from

Domitian’s reign refer to Domitian as “father

of the gods.” An idol of Domitian may have

been constructed in the city of Ephesus.

The temple in Jerusalem: If Revelation had The church of Laodicea: The description of

been written in the ad 90s, it seems that Laodicea’s self-sufficiency may reflect a time

John might have mentioned the fall of the in the ad 80s when the Laodiceans rebuilt

Jewish temple that occurred in ad 70. The their city with no outside assistance after an

wording of Revelation 11:1–2 suggests to earthquake (Revelation 3:17).

some scholars that the temple in Jerusalem

was still standing when John wrote this book.

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Guide to End-Times Prophecy ISBN © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 225

each key Bible prophecy from several biblically-based viewpoints. Save $5 on your $25 order. friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Four Views of the End Times

DVD Series

This six-week study shows four different Revelation

time lines and tackles Dispensational Premillennialism,

Postmillennialism, Historic Premillennialism, and

Amillennialism. For each view, Four Views of the End Times

includes a definition, supporting Scriptures, a time line of

the view’s popularity, and a sampling of Christian leaders

supporting that view.

Book 9781596364127

Temple

Pamphlet

The full-color, glossy 12-panel pamphlet covers the

Tabernacle in the wilderness to the Temple. built by King

Solomon, Zerubbabel, and Herod’s Temple, the one Jesus

knew so well. Each of the Temple furnishings are explained

in detail, as well as their functions, purposes, and the

meanings they have for believers today.

End-Times Prophecy

Pamphlet 9781596360013

Jesus talked a lot about the end of time and his second

coming. These are key teachings that every Christian

Rose Guide to The Temple

should know. So why don’t they? is an easy-to-

Book

Rose Guide to the Temple is a full-color overview of the

understand overview. It helps you go through the key

Temple, with more than 100 images, charts, diagrams,

portions of Scripture and explains different ways that

photos, and illustrations, many of which have never published

Christians have interpreted them. Simple charts and

before. Rose Guide to The Temple is a clear and easy-to-

understand examination at the temple and contains clear

illustrations help you see the whole picture.

plastic overlays and stunning posters that no other Temple

guide has. It covers the span of time from Abraham to

Book 9781596364196

modern day.

Book 9781596364684

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
