# Introduction to Doctrinal Mastery

In the Book of Mormon, the prophet Helaman taught his sons, “It is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation” (Helaman 5:12). Building a foundation upon Jesus Christ—which includes coming to understand, believe, and live according to His doctrine—will deepen our conversion and commitment as His disciples, protect us against the influences of the adversary, and help us bless the lives of others.

One of the ways we accomplish this is by studying the scriptures sequentially together in class. Another way we build our foundation upon Jesus Christ and His doctrine is through an effort called Doctrinal Mastery.

Doctrinal Mastery focuses on two outcomes:

1.  Learn and apply divine principles for acquiring spiritual knowledge. Heavenly Father has revealed principles for acquiring spiritual knowledge. These principles include acting in faith, examining concepts and questions with an eternal perspective, and seeking further understanding through divinely appointed sources. We develop doctrinal mastery as we apply these principles during and outside of class and seek answers to doctrinal, personal, social, and historical questions in a way that invites the Holy Ghost to strengthen our faith in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.

2.  Master the doctrinal mastery scripture passages and the doctrine of the gospel of Jesus Christ that they teach. This outcome is achieved by:

    a.  Knowing the doctrine taught in the doctrinal mastery scripture passages.

    b.  Explaining the doctrine clearly using the associated doctrinal mastery scripture passages.

    c.  Being able to remember and locate the doctrinal mastery scripture passages and memorize the key scripture phrases.

    d.  Applying the doctrine of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the principles of acquiring spiritual knowledge in our daily choices and in our responses to doctrinal, personal, social, and historical issues and questions.
