Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Prologue

And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

Genesis 2:23-24

August 29, 1982

The telephone rang at a quarter to six that Sunday morning. I was sleeping very soundly, which was unusual. I generally experienced a certain restless insomnia whenever Carmon was away on a hunting trip, as he had been since Thursday. It took several rings before the sound pierced my deep slumber. I reached for the phone beside my bed. "Hello?" My speech sounded thick and groggy to me.

"Mrs. Buntin?" It was a woman's voice that I did not recognize. "This is the Gilbert Police Department. A sheriff's deputy is on his way to talk to you. I don't know what it's about, but we need directions to your house. All we have is a rural route number."

I gave the directions calmly, then hung up the phone and swung my feet out of bed. I started to reach for my robe. All the while my brain was mentally shaking itself awake, trying to decide how much alarm to register. "No," I thought, "I'd better get dressed." I left the robe lying on the foot of my bed. "If Carm's been hurt or had a heart attack (he had worn a pacemaker for over a year), I'll want to go to him quickly."

I reached instead for the skirt and blouse I had worn the day before. I didn't bother with hose, but slipped my bare feet into my shoes. Then I headed for the bathroom to brush my teeth and wash my face. I used the company bathroom rather than the one off our bedroom so as not to awaken my eight-year-old son, who was sleeping beside me. "Time enough for that when I leave for the hospital," I thought.

I was just combing my hair when the front doorbell rang. "The deputy must have been close by. He sure got here quickly," I said to myself.

I opened the door. There on the front porch stood two men, one a uniformed officer, the other wearing jeans and a shirt. "Mrs. Buntin? I have some very bad news for you. Your husband, Carmon, has been killed in an automobile accident."

Just like that. No buildup, no beating around the bush, no softening of the blow. Just the facts, ma'am.

Time slipped out of sync . . .

" . . . and they twain shall be one flesh." (Matthew 19:5.) One flesh . . . two parts making one whole . . . and now, I was all alone.
