Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter One

Why?

Oh that my grief were throughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together!

Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived.

Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the thing that I long for! Even that it would please God to destroy me.

Job 6:2; 3:3; 6:8-9

We are a death-denying society. We put our sick people into hospitals and our aged into "homes." Americans are more comfortable discussing sex explicitly than talking about death. Until it hits close to home, death is one of those things we hope will go away if we keep our heads in the sand long enough. That is understandable, for to contemplate the reality of anyone's death is to come face-to-face with our own finiteness and mortality. John Donne said it well when he wrote, "Never send to know for whom the bell tolls; / It tolls for thee."

Death is a fact of life as surely as is birth. When we find ourselves in the valley of its shadow, we can no longer avoid that ultimate taboo. No matter what euphemisms are employed—"passed away," "asleep," "gone on to his reward"—sooner or later, the hard reality hits us all that he (or she) is gone forever from this life and is not coming back.

In the Church we receive a lot of comfort in knowing where the dead person is. There is anticipation and joy in the knowledge that families are truly forever. But to the living spouse, forever is a long way off! Who helps the living understand where they are? Who helps them to cope with their grief during those endless, empty nights when they ask, "Why?" and pray to die? Who helps them literally to endure to the end?

To those unacquainted with grief, it seems that a testimony of the plan of eternal salvation should be enough to get us through the process relatively unscathed. It does help, of course, to have that firm, abiding conviction of a life after death. (Losing a loved one is very hard on those who see this life as the total picture, and not as a small part of a larger whole without beginning or end.) But even with a testimony, we feel the immensity of our loss and we grieve for that loss, often not understanding why.

Unfortunately, others, unless they have experienced such a loss themselves, do not understand either. Altogether too often, well-meaning family and friends will say and do all the wrong things. As one woman put it, "It's like being cut off at the knees and then being told to get up and run the race anyway." In my personal experience, it was more like being wrenched completely in half and then being told how strong I was and what a good example I was and how I had to "buck up" and "hang in there" and "be patient." When times came (and they did come) when I wasn't strong or patient, when things seemed more than I could bear, and when I fell apart emotionally, I felt like a total failure—a self-indulgent weakling not fit for God or man.

But grief is not a luxury. It is not a self-indulgence. It is not a sign of weakness. Grief is a psychological necessity. It is making "real" inside of ourselves an event that has already occurred outside of ourselves. It is teaching the heart what the head already knows. It cannot be forced or consciously controlled or scheduled to a timetable. It is a pain that must be felt and processed. Grief is work.

Those who deny or hide their grief, whether for noble or selfish reasons, are merely postponing the inevitable. The longer the postponement, the worse the ultimate pain.

There are basically five stages of the grieving process through which survivors pass; all people experience them at their own speed and in their own way.

The first stage of grieving is shock and denial. It can last for twenty-four hours or as long as several weeks. It is followed by guilt, anger, and depression. These stages are not on a clearly defined continuum through which we move at a predictable pace. They fluctuate and overlap; they disappear, only to reappear again when triggered by some memory. They don't happen in the same order or degree for all people, and each person experiences them in his or her own way and time. But each grieving person does experience them, and knowing that they are normal and will pass can help us to understand and to endure.

The final stage in the grieving process is resolution and acceptance. This stage occurs when the mourner can focus his or her energy on the future and not on the past. It is a gradual process, not a one-time miracle. Like the other stages of grieving, it can be reached, only to slip later from our grasp at the sound of a song or the rush of feelings associated with a special day. In many ways, the resolution of grief is like repentance: not something we achieve once and for all but something we seek and reexperience often.

I've seen grief graphically represented as waves washing over the shore, flowing and ebbing like the tides. I've seen it drawn like a loop, constantly recircling upon itself in ever-decreasing spirals. I've heard it described as an emotional roller-coaster ride with high peaks plummeting to low valleys. But whatever picture is most meaningful for each of us, we can rest in the assurance that things do level out and that slowly, almost imperceptibly, the highs last longer and the lows come less frequently.

We can rest also in the knowledge that although letting go and moving forward are the ultimate goals in resolving our grief, those never mean forgetting the one we love.
