Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Three

If Only . . .

I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long.

For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me.

Deliver me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach of the foolish. . . .

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears. . . . O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more.

Psalms 38:6, 4; 39:8, 12-13

August 29, 1982

I called sub service and got the recording. "My husband has been killed," I heard myself saying. "I'll need a sub at least until Wednesday."

Where was Carmon's sister? Why wasn't she here yet? Why wouldn't the clock move faster? Why couldn't my mom get here? Why couldn't Carm come home? I read the note on the refrigerator again and again: "Dear Kathy, Call the doctor Friday about my blood tests. See you Sunday. I love you, Carmy." It was Sunday. Where was he?

I forgot to call the doctor. I was so relieved when the doctor called me. I thought, "How lucky I am. I'll never have to tell Carmon that I got busy and forgot him." Now it doesn't much matter, but I still know: I got busy and forgot him.

Thursday when I left for work, I was in such a hurry that I didn't take time to kiss him good-bye. Then I went to lunch with Bonnie and Lisa, and I didn't even call home at noon to say good-bye.

And now he's never coming home again.

Guilt is very much a part of the grieving process. It's all of those terribly sad "if only's," "I should haves," and "Why didn't I's." The poet Whittier said, "Of all sad words of tongue or pen, / The saddest are these: 'It might have been.'"

There are times in every relationship when we are ill or tired or busy or just plain selfish, and we act less thoughtfully than we know we should. But what monumental proportions such small things assume when death intervenes with its great sense of finality and removes for us the opportunity to tell our loved one that we are truly sorry. Somehow death seems to negate for us the right to be human.

A story was told to me of an elderly widow who had spent the last years of her husband's life literally waiting on his every need. She had been an active woman in her community, sung in the choir at church, attended the Wednesday evening potlucks, lived a full and busy life. Then her beloved husband—let's call him Tom—fell ill and became almost bedridden. This lovely woman put her whole energy into caring for him while her own life went willingly onto the back burner.

On one such day, Tom had been particularly peevish and restless. She found herself going up and down the stairs, running countless errands, until by bedtime she was totally exhausted, both mentally and physically. She had just collapsed into her bed when she heard Tom calling, "I'm thirsty. Get me a drink of water."

She thought about those awful stairs and about her tired body, and she answered back, "Oh, go to sleep, Tom! I'll get you a drink in the morning."

Tom died that night.

What do you think this woman remembers? Does she take comfort in the memory of her two years of selfless service? Does she recall nearly sixty years of devotion in her marriage? No. What glares out of her memory are only those last few words, "Oh, go to sleep, Tom! I'll get you a drink in the morning."

So many things make us feel guilty. Often, people who are in the numb state of shock and denial feel guilty because they "feel nothing" or because they cannot cry. Such people need to know that the numbness is part of the grieving process and is normal. Dry eyes or wet eyes are not the mark of the degree of love one feels for the deceased. Mourners may feel guilty for the anger they feel—anger at the deceased and anger at God.

Sometimes we feel guilty for the small things: the unspoken "I love you" or "I'm sorry"; the little kiss not given, the little service not performed. Other times the guilts are big—harsh, angry words or pain purposely inflicted—and the weight of the guilt seems a burden too heavy to bear. We become angry at ourselves and go over and over in our own mind what we did or did not do in relation to our loved one.

Guilt takes on a particularly somber tone when it relates—or seems to relate—to the circumstances surrounding the actual death. Tom's life would not have been extended by his having had that last drink of water, but it would be hard to convince his widow of that. And what of the husband who was driving the car when his wife was killed? Or the wife who waited too long to call the paramedics? Guilt can be:

"I should have taken him to another doctor."

"Why did I let her go alone?"

"I should never have left his bedside."

"Where was I when she needed me?"

"If only I'd insisted that he wear his seat belt."

"If I hadn't called her, she wouldn't have been out in the car."

"I was angry, sure, but I never wanted this to happen!"

Guilt. We rehearse it in our minds. We wear it as a mental hair shirt. We beat ourselves about the head with it. Seemingly there is nothing culturally acceptable we can do with this anger turned inward. We have no recourse to donning sackcloth and ashes as in biblical times. Yet we must do something. How, then, do we cope with such guilt?

First we need to know that guilt is to the spirit what pain is to the body. It is a signal to us that something is wrong, and it must signal to us strongly enough to motivate us to do something about it so that we can help ourselves begin to heal. Guilt lets us know that our real self is out of line with our ideal self. This lack of harmony needs to be rectified in order for healing to take place. But all too often we allow our guilt to go beyond what is necessary, beyond that signaling function.

When you were a child, did you ever have a sore on your body that you just couldn't leave alone? You picked and you scratched until the scab came off and the sore began bleeding and maybe even became infected. We do the same thing with our guilt, mistakenly telling ourselves that in doing so, we are keeping ourselves humble. In reality, though, what we accomplish is keeping our souls open and bleeding, in which condition they cannot heal or grow.

It seems easy to say, "Don't listen to the 'If only's'—they are irrational." But when we grieve, we are seldom rational. In fact, it isn't important whether our feelings of guilt seem rational or irrational to anyone else. If concerns or guilt are causing us pain, then they need to be dealt with following the same steps one would use in dealing with any other guilty feeling. I might know that my husband's death was not a result of my eight-year-old son's falling asleep in front of the TV that Saturday night and forgetting to say his prayers and ask for Heavenly Father to watch over his dad. I might even tell my son that a kind Heavenly Father wouldn't punish a sleepy little boy by taking his daddy away. But until that little boy poured out his heart to his Heavenly Father and felt that peaceful assurance for himself, it didn't matter much what I knew to be reasonable; it did matter what my child knew to be reasonable. His fears were a worry to him; they were important whether they were rational or not.

The first step in handling guilt is to recognize the problem realistically. Did we or did we not do something wrong? When a thought begins with "If only," we need to ask ourselves if we did the best we could have done, given the knowledge we had at that particular moment. If we did, then we may never need to go beyond this step. We may decide that we did not do anything wrong, and we can let the guilt go. If we decide we did do something we feel was wrong and we feel remorseful about it, we can move to the next step.

After recognition comes confession. Many mourners have found that talking to the deceased is very therapeutic. My eldest son spent many hours at his father's grave talking through some of their differences—differences that had been a part of the normal quest for independence of a young man growing up, but differences that caused my son concern nonetheless.

We don't need to go to the cemetery. We can put an empty chair in front of us and talk to the person, or talk to him or her while driving in our car, or anywhere that we are alone.

When we've talked to the deceased, we have, in essence, already confessed and expressed sorrow to him or her. But it's important for most of us to go beyond that. I love the twelve steps of sobriety espoused by members of Alcoholics Anonymous and find in them a practical guide for self-improvement that is applicable to many of life's situations when we find ourselves truly out of control. Since there are few, if any, situations more out of our control than the death of a loved one, I'd like to paraphrase a few of those steps as they can apply to grief.

One is to recognize that there are some aspects of our life that are beyond our control. We must be willing to turn those problems over to the Lord. We must make a restitution, whenever possible, to those whom we have hurt—when such restitution will not cause them further hurt. We must be willing to make amends to everyone involved, even though we might not be in a position to actually make such amends. We must confess our shortcomings to ourselves, to God, and to one other living person; we then can move forward with our lives, taking frequent inventory of our progress and seeking only to know God's will for us and praying for strength to do His will.

So after we've talked to the deceased, we can talk to our Heavenly Father. We have nothing to hide from Him anyway. Then we need to talk to "one other living person" in whom we have confidence. This may be a spiritual leader or simply a very close and trusted friend. We decide who it needs to be and choose someone who will listen empathetically in a way that will help us to grow.

After recognizing and confessing our shortcomings comes the step of making restitution. Here's where the bereaved hit a very big snag. How do we make restitution to a person who is dead and gone?

A therapeutic choice is to try to make a difference in someone else's life. If we're concerned because we didn't do something for the deceased that we feel we should have done, we must know that even if that person is beyond needing it, others are not; we can do it for someone else. One of my favorite stories of repentance is that of Ebenezer Scrooge. He couldn't repay old Fezziwig's kindness, but he could recompense by showing increased kindness to Bob Cratchit. He couldn't undo his selfishness to his young sweetheart, but he could be generous to Tiny Tim.

I think it helps to remember that the growth that will come through this process is for us, not for the deceased. If we have increased in spiritual stature and have overcome some weakness as a result, then we have a repentant heart. A truly repentant heart is known to the Lord—and, I am confident, to our loved one who is gone. If we can forsake the shortcoming, we can let go of the "if only."
