Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Four

Why Me?

My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me. Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?

If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity. If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine affliction; for it increaseth.

Job 10:1-3, 14-16

November 16, 1982

Yesterday would have been Carmon's forty-third birthday. Needless to say, it was a very difficult day for me. I awoke with the same empty pit of loneliness inside that I feel most mornings. It would be nice to wake up full of joy and anticipation. It's been so long that I've forgotten what joy feels like. Sometimes the pain is almost more than I can bear.

Why did God let this happen to us? It took us seventeen of our twenty years of marriage to get to that beautiful oneness. Just when we felt that comfortable "best friend" closeness, it was snatched away from me!

Tonight I went with Christy to a "Know Your Religion" lecture. It was really a beautiful meeting. I wish I could maintain such a spiritual level of feeling. I especially liked a quote from Boyd K. Packer when he said, "I'm delighted to hear that the adversary is upset. Monumental things must be about to happen." Well, monumental things must be about to happen for me and my family, for the adversary has been on my coattails ever since Carmon died. Everything that can break has: the washer, the dryer, both cars, the dishwasher, the sump pump; the septic tank backed up and the water lines broke, and I have to replace the kitchen floor where the washer leaked, and clean the carpets where the sump pump backed up.

Sometimes I get so mad at Carmon for leaving me with all this mess. Then I find myself pounding my fists on the wall again and again and demanding of the Lord, "How could you do this to me?!!" Some days I literally scream it.

I wonder if He will ever forgive me?

Feelings of anger were the hardest of all the emotions of grief for me to cope with. Because we are so emotionally vulnerable, it seems as though everything and everyone makes us angry when we mourn. I think it is because we feel so helpless. It's frustrating to have no control over such a major part of our life, and frustration is the close sibling of anger. Once hurt, our emotions are so tender that it's easy to keep bruising them on everything—like a sore thumb that keeps getting in the way. Every teeny bump registers major pain.

We can be mad at anyone even remotely connected with the death—the hospital, the doctors, nurses, policemen, morticians, anyone. We're angry with our family and our friends because they don't know what we're feeling and they don't know how to help us to stop the pain. We bump our fury on the bureaucracy of death certificates and funerals, social security and wills, banks and taxes. People can't even die without mountains of red tape!

Anyone who still has a living spouse is likely to upset us at the most unexpected moments. We find ourselves resenting couples who are close friends because they are still a whole unit. Gray-haired people growing old together upset us because we will never have that opportunity. Total strangers can trigger that angry tension as we ask, "How dare that person be alive when my best friend is dead!"

We are angry even with our mate for leaving us. One widow I heard of went to the cemetery and screamed at her husband for "slipping his skin" and leaving her with six small children.

Hardest to handle of all is the anger with God for sending us a pain so indescribably awful and—at least in our eyes—so undeserved.

If you were reared, as I was, to perceive anger as "bad," you likely will feel very guilty about your anger and yet be unable to control it. Just like so many things in our lives these days, our emotions are out of whack, out of proportion, and out of our control.

Rest assured, this is normal.

One of the most helpful lessons I have learned as I've processed my own grief is that emotions are intrinsically neither good nor bad; they just are. It is utter foolishness to suppose we can go through life without ever feeling anger or any of the more unpleasant emotions. It's what we do with those emotions that determines whether they will have negative or positive effects. Somewhere along the line, we assume—erroneously so—that what happens to us causes our happiness or unhappiness. This is not true. It is how we perceive what has happened to us and how we act upon that perception that results in the emotional reaction we feel. We cannot always control what happens to us, but we can most certainly control the way we react to what has happened.

I personally find that concept a very powerful and optimistic one. If we can apply it at its highest levels, we can actually short-circuit the anger before it gets started. As time goes on and our grief-coping skills improve, we may choose to aim for that level of control.

But unless and until that improvement in coping with grief occurs, what do we do? How do we cope when anger rises up and almost blinds us? Again, it's what we do with the emotion, not the emotion itself, that will determine our ability to move forward.

First, we need to let ourselves own our feelings. We must not pretend that we're not angry when we are. Next, we must decide what to do with the anger once we have admitted to owning it. Anger shouldn't be directed against others, of course. Those who seek revenge, who nurse old wounds, or who speak or act cruelly toward their neighbors are "in danger of the judgment" (see Matthew 5:22), for they risk harming not only their neighbor but also themselves.

Anger shouldn't be directed inward, either. Suppressed anger is damaging to us emotionally, physically, and spiritually. It can surface in the form of ulcers, high blood pressure, migraine headaches, or any number of other disorders.

I found some ways to vent anger that remove the immediate stress and at the same time are not harmful to me or to others.

Vigorous physical activity is a tremendous reducer of stress. We can run, walk briskly, jump rope, swim, play tennis or racquetball, punch a speed bag, or do calisthenics. My personal choice was an aerobics dance class twice a week and early morning walks before work. Fringe benefits include better digestion, less insomnia, and improved cardiovascular functioning, in addition to a trimmer, firmer figure.

Working with our hands also helps. A good, hard housecleaning session cleans my mental house as well as my physical house. So do yard work and marathon cooking sessions. One woman I know takes out her anger on bread dough and then takes a fresh, hot loaf of that well-kneaded bread to whoever it was that made her angry in the first place.

Some days you may feel like screaming. Do it. Go into your room, shut the door so you won't scare kids, neighbors, or pets, and really yell. Pound your pillow if you have to. Cry. Act out your anger without hurting others or yourself. Vent some steam. Then wash your face, stand up tall, and go out to face the world again.

A really effective coping mechanism is simply to tell someone we are angry and why, to talk out our feelings with someone we can trust to listen quietly without lecturing us about the goodness or badness of what we are experiencing. We can talk to our dead spouse, talk to our spiritual leader, talk to our Heavenly Father. If someone has made us angry, we can talk to that person about it. I found that my feelings were so touchy that most people who hurt them were not aware they had done so. One friend in particular had really rubbed me the wrong way on several occasions. When I finally got the courage to go to her about it, it was a beautiful spiritual experience for both of us.

Creative expression often helps. We might draw or paint a picture of our anger, compose a song, write a poem or a story, or record it in our journal. Putting a label on an emotion helps us to cope with it.

Because a lot of the anger related to bereavement comes from frustrating situations beyond our control, we can take another page from Alcoholics Anonymous: "Let go. Let God." We can't control the fact that our spouse is dead, but we can control how we react to that fact.

A dying person once moaned, "Why me?" Elizabeth Kubler-Ross, who was listening, answered, "Why not you?" I've often thought of that when tempted to ask, "Why me, Lord?" Why not me? Why should I be spared the pain—or the opportunity for growth? Life isn't always fair in the mortal sense, and if we seek for it to be, we will be discouraged. But it is always fair in an eternal sense.
