Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Five

I Just Want to Die

If thou art called to pass through tribulation; . . . if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?

Doctrine and Covenants 122:5, 7-8

November 16, 1982

Sometimes it still feels so unreal to me. It just isn't possible that half of me could really be dead. It's like some horrible, monstrous joke someone is playing on me.

December 5, 1982

I'm sitting here by the fire, wrapped in a quilt, watching the lights twinkle on the Christmas tree. The calendar says that it is December, less than three weeks until Christmas. It is cold and hazy out today. We've had a night or two of freezing weather. The world rolls on, the seasons change from summer to autumn and now winter. I watch it all with a certain amazement, for in my heart it is still August 29. It should be hot outside. It's Sunday again, and he's still not home. He left me a note. He said, "I'll see you Sunday," but he never came. He never came!

December 11, 1982

Some days I'm almost angry that God has given me so much knowledge of the plan of salvation that I can't ever cheer myself up with thoughts of suicide. There is something very depressing in the knowledge that the only future joy you see for yourself is in your own death.

The most devastating of all the stages of the grieving process is depression. It totally immobilizes the mourner. Small daily tasks of living become seemingly insurmountable obstacles. Everything seems to be without hope. A sense of fatalism sets in. There is no desire to live.

I used to think that depression was the opposite of anger, the one being so passive, the other so active. I have since learned that depression is simply farther down on the same negative continuum. When our guilt or our anger becomes despair, when our life is seemingly way out of our control, when we feel frustrated and helpless and hopeless, we are depressed.

Depression is the most dangerous of the stages of grief. When we are depressed and we don't care whether we live or die, we often actually endanger ourselves because we fail to take otherwise normal precautions with our physical well-being.

Death rates for widowed people are significantly higher than for the nonwidowed. For widowers the most dangerous time is during the first six months alone; widows are most vulnerable during the second year of widowhood.

One widow came home from the mortuary viewing of her husband's body, told her sister that she was tired, went to bed, and never woke up.

Another very young widow was killed in an automobile accident just three months after her husband, a police officer, had been killed in the line of duty.

An elderly widower, despondent over the loss of his wife, sought to take his own life.

Fortunately, most widowed people are not among those grim statistics. Most of us not only survive our depression but grow as a result of having experienced it. But the growth does not come without a price.

Physical symptoms of depression include loss of appetite, extreme and chronic fatigue, lethargy, insomnia, change in bowel and bladder habits and other bodily functions, nightmares, weight loss, lowered resistance to illness and infection, frequent physical illnesses, shaking and trembling, inability to focus thought, lack of direction, inability to relax or to sit still, inability to move, nausea, light-headedness, inability to focus eyes, greater frequency of accidental injury, body aches, lack of concern for physical appearance . . . I could go on and on.

Most depressing of all is that we can look into the past or at the present or toward the future and see absolutely nothing positive anywhere. A feeling of total hopelessness settles in.

I often envisioned myself as a drowning person in the middle of a lake of despair. All of my friends and family were standing around on the shore watching me with pain and pity in their eyes, but no one threw me a lifeline. It wasn't until much later that I understood why: no one knew how. But at the time it made me angry, and that was good. The anger got me moving again. It brought me up out of the depression. I realized that there wasn't a soul who could truly help me but me.

In my case, the pain of depression was so great that it sought its own resolution as a matter of my survival. Here are some mental gymnastics I learned to perform in the process.

One problem-solving technique of mine is that when I don't understand something, I take a class about it. I did just that. Six months after my husband's death, I enrolled in a class called "Death, Dying, and Bereavement" at a local community college. Not only did I learn a lot about what was happening to me, but I also began to emerge from the lethargic routine into which I had fallen. It wasn't easy for me, and many times I had to act as if I were enthusiastic when I really was not. On one occasion, a field trip to a mortuary, I was unable to force myself to attend. But that was all right, and for the most part, I soon found that acting "as if" was giving way to actual enthusiasm—a tentative and embryonic enthusiasm, but enthusiasm nonetheless.

When I would, by some serendipitous occurrence, find something even minutely positive in the future, I would cling to it as a drowning person clings to a life preserver. It didn't matter that it wasn't some massive, exuberant contemplation. Bereavement isn't a time for exuberance. If I found one tiny glimmer, I'd cling to it. People told me to live one day at a time. I'm here to tell you that in the beginning I lived one hour at a time. I felt I'd reached a peak experience when I could plan one whole day. We must all learn to live our lives in tiny bites and cling to the small things.

We need to take care of our physical health, even when we don't want to do so. Because depression numbs our concern for ourselves and because it brings with it so many physical symptoms, being depressed tends to become a vicious and self-perpetuating cycle. Because we feel depressed, we don't eat properly and we don't sleep well. We become run-down and tired, which depresses us further. So it goes, in a downward spiral. We can break the physical aspect of the cycle by establishing as regular a routine of meals, sleep, and exercise as we can muster. We can take our vitamins, get out in the fresh air, see the doctor about flu shots, and do whatever we have to do to take care of our physical health even when we don't want to. If we'll start taking care of our physical needs out of duty, soon we'll want to care for those needs again out of desire.

Along that same line, we can get ourselves going on our physical appearance again. In the beginning it may take more energy than we've got just to get out of bed and get our teeth brushed, but we must do it. I was fortunate in that I had to go right back to work just a few days after the funeral. I had to get dressed and fix my hair and put on a little makeup. At first it was a chore, but after a while I found that I did care about how I looked and how I felt.

Finding others who had trod this same path helped me considerably. It was good to talk to other people who knew how I felt. It was helpful also to read the experiences of others. I found myself reading a lot. It helped to read back through my journal to see that I was indeed moving forward, even though on a day-to-day basis I couldn't feel the progress.

As I began to develop some strengths, it was a marvelous experience to be able to reach out to help other people who were not as far along in the grief process as I was. Many times, when I'd find myself slipping back into the depression cycle, I'd pray to the Lord to be rescued, and he would send me someone else with problems greater than my own.

Finally, it has helped me enormously to allow myself to be human. In the beginning I felt that I had to put up this brave front, to be the tower of strength for everyone. I pictured myself in a display case with the whole world looking to me as the perfect example of Mormon widowhood. To tell you the truth, I resented it. When I did get angry, I'd feel guilty, then depressed, then angry again. When did I get to be less than perfect? When did I get to scream and cry without shame? The answer was simple: when I allowed myself to do so; when I learned to accept myself as a person in process and not a finished product.

I remember several years ago listening to our stake patriarch speak on perfection. As I recalled his words, I began to see perfection in a new light—as a star by which to navigate the seas of our mortal existence, realizing full well that we'll never reach that star in this life. That wise man compared these two scriptures, words of the Savior: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48), and "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Nephi 12:48; italics added).

The first was spoken to the Jews, the second to the Nephites following Christ's resurrection. The patriarch told us that the difference in wording was not an error in translation; it was, in fact, a lesson to us that even the Savior, the world's most perfect person, did not call himself perfect until He had passed through all things, including temptation, despair, pain, death, and resurrection. As He told the Prophet Joseph Smith, "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.)
