Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Six

Tomorrow I Will . . .

Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.

For thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called. For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment: but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. . . .

O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires. And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.

Isaiah 54:4-8, 11-13

March 27, 1983

Next week is Easter. Shawn is in the Mesa Temple pageant this year, playing the part of a Roman soldier. It has kept him extra busy and I have missed his comfort and companionship. I've also missed his help with errands. I give him a lot of responsibility, and I rely on him heavily.

You know, it's interesting when I look at the kids. They've grown so much these past months. It is especially noticeable with Shawn. If his physical stature matched his spiritual stature we'd have to knock out our ceilings because he'd be ten feet tall.

I've been reading a book by Catherine Marshall called Meeting God at Every Turn in which she points out chapter 54 of Isaiah as "must" reading for widows. I read it and found great comfort there, even though I know he was talking to Israel and not to an individual. I especially like the part that promises that "all thy children shall be taught of the Lord." I can look at mine and see that that is true. Some days when I feel as though I'm going nowhere with my grief, I'll look at them and know in my heart that I am.

Oh, I had an interesting experience last week. I had to pick up a little girl from my class at school, so I was driving a different route to work. I was passing the orange groves on North Higley Road, lost as usual in my gloom, when I suddenly became aware of the sweetest fragrance. It startled me as it dawned on me that I was smelling orange blossoms. As I slowed down to drink it in, I noticed how green the leaves were and how I could hear birds singing in the trees. A roadrunner skirted the edge of the grove and disappeared in the soft grass. The most peaceful feeling settled in my breast, and my eyes welled up with tears. The trees had been blossoming for many days; I'd just never noticed them before.

I remember the indescribable pain the first time I went to the temple alone just a few weeks after my husband's death. There are no words to convey the emptiness I felt as I entered the celestial room and he was not there. Waves of grief washed over my soul until I thought I could bear it no longer. I sat with tears streaming down my face and pleaded with the Lord to take away my pain, even if to do so meant taking my life. Then the Spirit whispered to me in quiet but unmistakable tones, "Not yet, my daughter. This is something you must bear for a small season."

When we grieve, it is so painful that we invest every ounce of our emotional energy in coping with that pain. We live an absolutely survival level of existence. That is why grief is so exhausting—emotionally, mentally, spiritually, and physically. Grief truly drains all of our reserves.

Our focus is on the past, on real memories and on fantasies of "what might have been." We go over and over in our minds what has happened. We "rewrite" the ending more to our liking. Even our dreams have a haunted quality as they replay the circumstances surrounding the death. We feel deserted and betrayed.

We begin to reckon time as "before the death" and "after the death." Things become marked for their antiquity when they are labeled as having occurred "when Daddy was still alive." It seems as if the death was only yesterday and a million years ago, all at the same time. It's hard to remember not being alone.

As we work through the anger and the guilt and the depression, some days it seems as if we're spinning our emotional wheels and going nowhere. Life becomes a manic-depressive roller-coaster ride; we're afraid to allow ourselves to feel good, because we know that feeling good is always followed by a plunge into the pit of despair.

People tell us that time heals all wounds; but as the months pass by, we begin to wonder when? How much time does it take for the healing to begin?

One mistake I made was in looking for things to be normal again, and I equated normal with same. Things can never be the same again, nor would we want them to be. Waters that never move become stagnant, and so do people. But things can be normal again if we can grow to the point where we redefine normal to mean "normal under new circumstances."

Another mistake I made was in expecting it would happen in one fell swoop. After all, the pain came in an instant; why couldn't it go away in an instant? It was that kind of expectation that left me devastated every time I'd get a small glimmer of happiness only to find that it didn't last forever.

Like all of the truly meaningful experiences in life, grief is resolved in the small moments, the tiny touches of revealed truth, the almost imperceptible lifts of emotions.

For weeks and months we've been investing all of our energy in dealing with the pain of grieving and in coming to terms with the past. We can't put all of that away in one moment and force ourselves to look only toward the future. Resolution of grief is not something that can be overtly controlled; rather, it must be dealt with on a feeling level as well as a thinking level over an extended period of time.

Resolving grief is more than just accepting the death. It involves gradually reinvesting that emotional energy, not in the past, but in the future; not in pain, but in growth.

In the beginning, it's very tentative. I like to picture it as a small child dipping one toe into the cold water of a pool. It may take many gradual dips before he risks getting all wet. Some people may be able to plunge in head first, but the shock to the system is such that, with grief at least, dipping is better.

As we begin to shift all that tremendous energy from the past, we must refocus our sights and place that energy into something in our new and future life. Resolving grief, in fact, involves the almost total restructuring of one's life.

Resolution comes in the tiny moments: the first time we realize that we've done a whole week's marketing all alone; the first time we hear "that song" and know that the tears are sweet and not bitter; the first time we smell a flower again or see sunshine and color and are truly aware of those sensations. Resolution is the first Sunday that passes and we're suddenly aware that it has passed without significance. Resolution is when our picky, foot-in-her-mouth friend says something personal and we're not offended. Resolution is when we reread the obituary and realize that "survivor" really means us. Resolution is when we find ourselves thinking about tomorrow.

How long does it take? That depends on each of us and our individual makeup. We can't force it, but we can understand the process. Knowing what to expect, knowing that we are normal, makes it easier to bear. We can give ourselves permission to grieve and not try to fight it; that in itself will expedite the process. I learned through painful experience that every time I tried to force the process or to deny it, I was devastated. I've always been one to say, "Give me patience, Lord, and hurry!" But grief has taught me to go with the flow and to say, "Not my will, but thine."

Experts say that the first six to eighteen months are the hardest. There is a desperate yearning for the loved one and a search for some meaning. It helped me to know that in this life, at least, there are some questions for which there are no answers. I like this line from Maria Von Trapp's book The Trapp Family Singers: "God's will hath no why." It helped me to wait out the healing time.

Although there are no magical numbers, most widowed people I've talked to feel that the first year is the significant time. During that year we so often find ourselves saying or thinking, "Last year at this time we were . . . " After the first anniversary of the death, we no longer need to do that. All those difficult firsts are past: the first Christmas alone, the first birthday, the first anniversary. I remember looking forward to that milestone with a mixture of anticipation and anxiety. It was like contemplating the birth of a child. There was anxiety in the knowledge that there would be pain but anticipation in knowing that following the pain would come a new and beautiful life. It was like a new birth to me. I felt that the burden of centuries was lifted from my shoulders, that I could take my life off "hold" and move forward again.

A short time later I was in the temple again. This time I found myself drinking in the peace and beauty that was there. Again I sat in the celestial room, and the Spirit whispered to my soul, "The season is passing."
