Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Seven

A Time to Mourn

To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up; a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance.

Ecclesiastes 3:1-4

January 15, 1983

Lynne called today. She thinks I've been mourning long enough, so she's coming to pick me up tonight and we're going to a dance.

January 16, 1983

Never again! I've never had such a degrading experience. I felt like a piece of meat on the butcher's shelf. Men were talking to me in such a condescending manner, treating me like I was thirteen years old and without a brain in my head!

I went to a fireside tonight and it wasn't any better. The speaker was good, but afterward, during the refreshments, it was ridiculous. Everyone was milling around like some kind of lonely hearts club. The women looked desperate and frustrated, and the men acted like kids in a candy store. One man came up to me and told me that if I'd start coming to the singles' dances he'd save a dance or two. To top it off, it looked like he hadn't shaved since work on Friday.

I told my kids that if the Lord wants me to marry again, He's going to have to bring someone to my doorstep. I'm one of the great women of the world! I don't have to put up with that!

In Ecclesiastes we read that there is a time to mourn and a time to dance. When we let others decide our time frame for us, we may be setting ourselves up for being pushed into something for which we are not ready. That particular January I was still in mourning; I was angry and depressed; I was months away from resolution. If I had listened to my own feelings, I would have known that it wasn't my time to dance.

Knowing our own heart and following it is one of the practical coping skills we develop as grieving progresses. To truly resolve our grief over the loss, we must learn to stand alone and to make our own decisions—and to accept totally the consequences for those choices.

People grieve for many things besides the loss of a loved one. They grieve for the loss of a lifestyle or personal identity; loss of home, employment, or financial status; loss of health or sexual function. When we suddenly find ourselves single persons in a married world, we grieve for most of those things all at once. Even after we've said good-bye and finally buried our dead, we still cope with the gamut of adjustments involved in sudden singleness.

Part of the enormous anger I had to overcome was due to that adjustment from being married to being single. I felt that I had worked very hard at my marriage. Of course I loved my husband, but I also had hung in there through all the tough times because I never wanted to be alone; I never wanted to be a single parent; I never wanted to raise my children in what I considered to be half a home. So I took my marriage covenants very literally and worked hard during those years of adjustment. Then, just when life was getting comfortable, just when the children were beyond the diapers and bottles stage, just when things were coming together financially, just when we finally achieved that best-friend, one-flesh relationship—bam! He was dead, and in an instant I was alone anyway. I was a single parent, and my children were in a fatherless home. I could scarcely contain my fury for months. Even when I had quite resolved my grief over Carmon's death, I was dealing daily with the trial of singleness, a type of grief all its own.

Now, I wouldn't be presumptuous enough to propose that only single people have problems. Having been both married and single, I know that marriage can be the best of times or the worst of times. I also know that in a nurturing marriage the problems seem half as bad and the happiness twice as good. Single people don't have that one intimate other to share both joy and pain. They must develop other support systems. Those who become "suddenly single" of necessity face a total restructuring of their lives.

I also wouldn't be presumptuous enough to suppose that I have any definitive answers to that quest for a new structure. All I can offer are some admittedly personal insights that I have gleaned during my struggles—with the confession that I am still struggling.

One thing I have learned through my mistakes is to get to know myself, to know who, what, and where I am. I have had to discover my own time frame for adjustment and to refuse to allow others, no matter how well-meaning they may be, to push me into situations for which I am not ready. We all have to mourn when we should mourn, and dance when we should dance.

Another thing I have had to learn and relearn is that attitude is the deciding factor in any aspect of life. When I first became single, I was horrified at the frustration and desperation I saw all around me. I saw single people buying the stigma that they were somehow second-class citizens because they had failed, for whatever reason, to measure up to some narrowly defined, stereotypical image of what people should be. In the beginning I clung to my "great woman of the world" self-image fairly well; but in so doing, I failed to appreciate many of my new single associates. Then I began to feel rejected; I began to notice married friends dropping away because I no longer belonged. Pretty soon I began to feel frustrated and desperate. My self-image was shattered, and I began to feel that I deserved to be pitied or degraded.

Then one day, as I was preparing to speak to a group of single people about grief, I took a good look at myself and said, "Hey, wait a minute! I am a child of God, and I have value just because I exist. It doesn't matter what my marital status is—I have a lot to offer this world. My children are fed and clothed and housed; they are taught honesty and integrity, and above all else, they are loved dearly. There is nothing 'broken' about our home just because circumstance has decreed that a father's physical presence is no longer there. I am not a second-class anybody, and neither are any of my single brothers and sisters. We are all children of God!"

In that moment, I realized that I had been buying into the stereotype, too, by pigeonholing both myself and other single people. When I changed my attitude, I came to appreciate myself again and to appreciate many new and wonderful friends. A few months ago I saw the man from my first fireside singing in a church choir of singles. As I watched the emotion with which he poured his heart into that hymn, I realized that it didn't matter how often he shaved.

If we have a stigma of "single is second best," it's not because someone has put it there but because we have taken it upon ourselves. Others may try to thrust it on us with their poor attitudes, but we don't have to buy it.

A final thing that I have learned is so plain that it sounds simplistic. In fact, I hesitate to mention it for fear of sounding like Pollyanna, but it works for me, so I will. There is a line in one of our hymns that reads, "By strict obedience Jesus won . . . " How startled I was when it hit me one day that nothing in this life is "won" by any other means. If we are having a problem and we need help, then we need to obey the law upon which that help is predicated. (See D&C 130:20-21.) In other words, we must live as closely as we possibly can to what we know to be right. It's when our behavior gets out of line with our ideals that we get into emotional deep water.

To give you some practical examples of what I mean, let's other experiences, I came to regard tithing not as a demand but as a privilege.

Another law that should be approached as a "thou shalt" instead of as a "thou shalt not" is the law of chastity. It was very difficult for me, having been married for twenty years, to suddenly find myself in a position of no longer having that special intimacy with a person I loved. I knew that I wanted to stay chaste, but as long as I looked at the law with an attitude of self-denial, it made me angry. I obeyed, but out of a sense of duty. It all seemed so unfair.

Then, almost imperceptibly, my attitude began to change. As I continued to apply God's laws in my relationships with other people, I began to sense a tremendous strength and power in chastity. I became fascinated with the idea that the Lord's rules for physical intimacy are given to us not to deny us pleasures of the flesh but to protect us. We have the assurance that if we follow his guidelines, we will experience physical intimacy only where there is an equally strong emotional intimacy and under the protection of a long-term commitment. Understanding chastity as a positive force, as a gift from God, and not as a "No," dissolved a lot of anger for me.

It is still difficult to deal with the temptations. The feelings and desires are there. In the beginning there were no feelings because, like other physical appetites, they were silenced by the intensity of the grief. But rest assured, they do return, and I have come to realize that it is a positive and healthy sign when they do. They indicate that we are healing and looking forward again. We just have to make sure that we recognize in those desires the righteous goals for which our Heavenly Father gave them to us.

Yes, I want to love again. I think most of us do. The need to love and to be loved in return is basic to all of us. That is a righteous goal that fuels our desires. It's a shame that in English we have only one word for love; it's a bigger shame that we often misuse that one. The Greeks have several words for love. One of those is eros, from which comes our English word erotic. I've felt great sorrow that we so often narrowly define love only as eros. The love that we need to truly fill those desires we feel is agape, the love that is defined in First Corinthians, chapter 13: love that is kind, patient, not envious, not self-seeking, but giving and sharing, and most of all, unconditional. Eros is part of that love between a man and a woman, but only a part. In the gestalt of love, the whole is much greater than the sum of its parts.

I said earlier that we grieve for many things. As we adjust to our situation, we move from an attitude of loss to an attitude of growth. One of the many things that helped me to move in that direction was a widow's support group called THEOS. With their permission, I'd like to share their "Challenges to the Widowed":
