Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Eight

Suffer the Little Children

Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them. But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

Matthew 19:13-14

Fall 1982

Terri was really gloomy today. She just sat on the couch and stared off into space. When I asked her what was wrong, at first she wouldn't answer. So I sat quietly and listened. Finally she said she was thinking of her dad and of the last time we went camping. "I was mad at him, Mom, and I told him that I hated him."

"And that makes you feel guilty?" I said it so quietly that I wasn't sure she'd heard me until I saw the tears well up in her eyes and her head slowly nodding. "Yes."

Spring 1983

Shawn came into my bedroom last night after his date. He always checks in when he gets home. He seemed really pensive, though, last night. He said to me, "Mom, sometimes I almost wish you had died and not Dad."

"Why?" I asked.

"Because if you had died, your folks would have said, 'With Kath gone, the kids will need us more than ever.' We never see Dad's family. Sometimes I think they don't think we belong to them anymore."

Winter 1983

I had a big hassle with Terri the other day, and Shane started to cry. I tried to send him from the room—told him it wasn't his problem—but he wouldn't go. He just stuck out that defiant little chin of his and said, "No, I'm not leaving you, Mom."

When Terri finally went into the other room, Shane ran into my arms and dissolved in tears. "Why, what on earth is the matter?" I asked him.

Through his heaving sobs he finally whispered, "I was so scared, Mom. I'm afraid sometimes. I'm afraid I'm going to lose you too."

Children are the forgotten mourners. Like us, they go through shock, anger, guilt, and depression. Like us, given time, they work through their grief to resolution. Unfortunately, we often don't allow children to own their feelings. We send all sorts of verbal and nonverbal messages that "big boys mustn't cry" or "good little girls shouldn't get angry." That makes the whole grieving process frightening and confusing to them.

When a parent dies, a child's worst nightmares become reality. We, the surviving parent, have to help our children make that nightmare bearable at a time when we are ill-equipped to handle our own pain.

Fortunately, society is starting to move away from the idea that we need to protect children from death. We just need to work through our own feelings about it so that we can handle grief realistically and honestly with our children.

I was glad that in our home we had been working for a long time to establish an open sharing of feelings. The atmosphere we had been able to achieve helped immensely as the children and I gingerly picked our way through our own grief. My children felt safe in sharing their feelings; that, I am sure, accounts for the outstanding job they have done with their grief work.

There are certain responses to death that, if not unique to children, are at least more obvious in children. I noticed them in my own three, who were eight, twelve, and sixteen at the time of their father's death. I even noticed them to a certain extent in my oldest son, who at nineteen was married and no longer living at home.

Children worry about what happens to the physical body. They need to have explained to them simply and plainly what is to be done with the remains. My eldest, Brian, even went so far as to work as an apprentice in a mortuary for almost a year following his father's death. It was part of the processing he felt he had to do. It gave him a sense of control over the physical aspect of death.

Young people also worry when the memories begin to fade. I remember Shawn's consternation the first time he realized he could no longer remember the sound of his dad's voice. Children need to be reassured that fading memory is normal and healthy and that it in no way means they didn't love the parent enough.

Children have a lot of fear relating to the death. If some well-meaning person tells a small child that the dead person "was so good that God took him up to heaven," then the child may be afraid to be good. If a person tells the child, "He just got sick and died," the child may be terrified by illness. I remember my husband telling me how he was afraid he'd die when he had his appendix removed as a youngster. His father had died of appendicitis.

A child may feel afraid to love because "I loved Daddy and he died. If I love Mommy, will she die too?" A few weeks after Carmon's death, someone poisoned Shane's dog. I'll never forget his bitter tears as he said over and over again, "Everything I love dies; everything I love dies."

The child may be afraid to be alone. He may be afraid to ride in a car if the parent died in an accident. He may be afraid to go to the doctor or to a hospital if the parent died of an illness.

The child may fear that the remaining parent will die, leaving the child all alone. In the early days of my grief, the pressure of rearing three children by myself was about to drive me crazy. My mother, thinking to secure the children's cooperation for me, told my daughter that she'd better be good because if I had a nervous breakdown, Grandma was not going to take care of her (although I know she would have). It was quite a while before it dawned on me what Terri's problem was. When I finally realized the burden she was carrying, I reassured her and her brothers that I probably would not have a nervous breakdown or die; but even if I did, I had made legal provisions for their grandparents to care for them. They all needed to know that they would not be left alone.

Children often get very angry with the living parent. After all, that parent is going through a rough time himself or herself and is no peach to live with. Also, with only one parent calling the shots, there is no court of appeals or mediation within the family to which the child can turn. A child can feel very helpless in that situation.

The child may wish the living parent had died instead and may even say so. Both parent and child need to know that such feelings are normal. When we remember the dead person, we tend to remember only the good things, especially at first. We forget that he or she was cranky and unreasonable at times too. The flesh-and-blood survivor who is still blundering through this existence might come up awfully short by comparison.

Children are very upset by the way we grown-ups behave. They need to be told honestly that we too are grieving, that right now we're angry and upset and confused, but that it won't last forever. They need important grown-ups in their lives. They need strong reassurances of a sense of family and belonging. It was hard for my children to understand that their father's relatives were grieving too and that to be around our home was difficult for them. How wonderful it was when those sweet sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law would call or come, thus reassuring my children that they were still a part of the clan.

The child might feel guilty and think that he or she caused the death. All children at one time or another experience anger with a parent. They may say "I hate you." They may even wish that the offending parent would, in fact, die. When that parent does die, the burden of guilt on the child can be tremendous. I have always appreciated Fred Rogers of "Mr. Rogers' Neighborhood," who tells children that "angry, mad wishes don't make things come true." It is a concept I borrow and use when I work with children in this situation.

Children feel confused because grown-ups tell them how they should feel and what they should do. They may even get mixed messages, with one person telling them, "Now, I want you to be brave and not cry," while another adult counsels, "Cry, you'll feel better." I tried to be open with my kids about my feelings and their feelings. It helped me to clarify some of the mixed messages they were receiving elsewhere.

Children, like a lot of grown-ups, want things to change quickly. When a parent dies, they may want the remaining parent to remarry right away. It may even confuse them that they want that to happen while at the same time they are missing the deceased parent. It helps to tell them that they are normal. A lot of grown-ups feel the same mixture of feelings when they have been widowed. We were all happy once, and we want to be happy again. There is nothing wrong with that. I'll never forget Shane's coming home from school one day, just a few weeks after Carmon's death. He was mad at the world. When I asked him what was wrong, he said, "I'm only eight years old, and I need a dad! Would you please hurry up and get married again and get me one?"

Other children may pull away from the grieving child, just as adults pull away from one another. They may even treat the death lightly or ridicule the child for having only one parent. Although that is unfortunate, it is not as cruel as it sounds. Children do that because they are afraid that they, too, might lose a parent. I had the feeling of people treating me as though I had a contagious disease. In reality, that is just what it feels like. Children especially are afraid they'll "catch it." Explaining that to the hurt child may not take away the pain, but it will help to put the behavior into perspective.
