Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Nine

I'd Rather Have Him Dead

They say, if a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord.

And I said after she had done all these things, Turn thou unto me. But she returned not.

Jeremiah 3:1, 7

I think it is interesting how the Lord often draws analogies between his relationship with Israel and common human relationships with which people can identify. Though he speaks of Israel "as a wife [who] treacherously departeth from her husband" (Jeremiah 3:20), the analogy could exchange the pronouns he and she and be equally applicable.

In my dealings with divorced people, both professionally and personally, I have heard time and time again, "I would rather have him (or her) dead than with someone else."

Do the divorced grieve? Yes, they certainly do. In fact, because of the stigma of divorce that still exists in our culture, they often have a particularly difficult time dealing with grief because they lack the socially acceptable outlets of the widowed. In addition, the divorced often do not understand that grieving is, in fact, what they are experiencing. There is a certain amount of sympathy automatically built into the widowing process, but who holds a funeral service for a dead marriage?

Drs. Thomas H. Holmes and Monoru Masuda, writing in Psychology Today (1972), tell us that life changes produce stress. On a scale of 1 to 100, the death of a spouse is rated 100. The only event even close to that is divorce at 73. To give you some idea of the effect of those numbers, compare them to the 63 rating of a jail term, the 47 of being fired, and the 30 of foreclosure of a mortgage. Being suddenly single after having once been married is a traumatic and overpowering event. Such losses trigger grief.

Let's look at the grieving process as it relates to divorced people. I've never experienced divorce, but I have come to know many who have. Listening to them share their divorce experiences, I have seen that the stages of grief in the handling of pain associated with divorce closely parallels the grieving of bereavement.

Hanging on to guilt and anger and even depression is self-defeating in the extreme. These emotions, nourished and embraced, will grow like a cancer until they consume their host. The treatment for any cancer is painful and debilitating, but the alternative is worse.

To those who are going through this experience, I would say: Let it go. Forgive those who have harmed you, and forgive yourself. Look carefully at the process through which you are going. If you find yourself stuck in one of the stages, then get yourself unstuck. Talk to others who have successfully gone through what you are experiencing. (The key word here is successfully. Not every person who has known grief has been successful in resolving it. The number of years a person has been alone is irrelevant if he or she is still emotionally crippled by the loss.)

Take a class. Read a book. Participate in activities with others who have a value system similar to your own; you can help and support one another. Seek counsel through the priesthood channels of the Church. The bishop, as a judge in Israel, holds the keys to your healing spiritually and also emotionally, should you need counseling through the Church's social services agency. If you do seek professional help on your own, choose your counselor wisely. Make sure he or she is a person who will understand and respect your values. You're already trying to cope with a life that is as unbalanced as a mobile with one component missing. You don't want someone to guide you down a path even more out of line with where you feel you should be going. Each of us must rebalance our own life in harmony with our own values. We should not attempt to homogeneously blend with someone else's ideal.

Seek outside help quickly if you feel suicidal, unable to cope, stuck and unable to move, or have physical symptoms, such as extreme weight loss, that do not abate with time.

I think Shakespeare said it nicely when, through the character of Polonius in Hamlet, he counseled, "This above all, to thine own self be true. And it must follow as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man." Be honest with yourself. Grief is hard work. Get at it. Do it. Move. Heal. Grow.
