Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Chapter Ten

I Don't Know What to Say

Ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort.

Mosiah 18:8-9

October 3, 1982

A really special thing happened the other day. I got a card in the mail from Joanne. It said, "I've been wanting to write or to call, but I just didn't know what to say. I guess I just want you to know that I'm thinking about you and I love you."

I wrote back to her that very day and said, "Joanne, you said exactly the right thing. Thank you."

It's a helpless feeling. Someone you love is hurting. You want to help, you really do; but you don't know what to say or to do. Everything that comes to your mind somehow seems trite and inadequate. So you either stumble around and say all those trite, empty, worse-than-useless words, or you don't say anything at all.

I watched the helplessness of my friends in those early days. I think that a major part of the problem lies in a lack of understanding of the grief process. They didn't know what I was going through, so they couldn't relate to my pain. I didn't know what was happening either, except that it hurt worse than any physical or mental pain that I had ever experienced before. When I'd try to explain what I was feeling, it frightened people. They couldn't handle it emotionally and so they would back away from me, which left me feeling isolated, angry, and hurt.

If you know someone who is bereaved and you want to know what to say and do, here are some suggestions gleaned from many different sources, including personal experience.

The first, and hardest, step is to confront your own feelings about death. We truly are a death-denying society, and most of us have little direct experience with dying. We know it only in the abstract and at a distance. But if you want to help a grieving person, you cannot do it from an emotional distance or in the abstract. You have to get up close. That will be difficult if you are not in touch with your own feelings. Intense emotional pain is involved in grief, and if you do get close enough to help, you will be close enough to feel part of that pain. Allow yourself to be human and to feel.

It's not wrong to express your own grief while comforting the bereaved. Some of the people who had been closest to me before the death avoided me after the death because they would not risk the pain. "If we come," they'd say, "we'll be no help to you. We'd just bawl right along with you." But that would have been just the help I needed! Some of the kindest expressions of condolence I received were from people who did nothing more than put their arms around me and cry with me. So let yourself feel, and don't be afraid of death's shadow.

Learn what you can about the grieving process. Do not learn about grieving so that you can be cold and clinical and have your head filled with a lot of facts and statistics; rather, do it so that when you see a bereaved person exhibiting anger or guilt or shock, you will understand that these things are a normal part of the grieving process.

For me, the hardest part of grieving was dealing with the anger. Many people shut me out because they overreacted to my feelings and emotions during this stage of grieving. They were expecting me to handle my anger from the same position of strength and self-control that I had been able to cultivate in other parts of my life. But I was not operating from a position of strength.

My whole world was rocking on its foundations, and I was angry about that. It would have been so helpful to have had friends, family, and church leaders who understood and gave me their permission to own my anger, as well as some realistic help on what to do with my anger. When I came to know myself, I did those things for myself. But even then, when I tried to explain that to others, they did not understand.

Just a few weeks ago, my ward Relief Society president attended a workshop on bereavement. She told me later how she sat, with tears in her eyes, thinking of all the things my ward had done that were well-intentioned but counterproductive because they had not understood what was happening to me and had not really listened when I tried to tell them.

Be physically present. A lot of support systems are in operation for the bereaved prior to and immediately following the funeral, but they tend to drop off after a few weeks. Just about the time the mourner's protective cocoon of shock is fading and the real pain is beginning, the support evaporates. Because we are in shock during those early days before and after the funeral, we may appear to be a lot stronger than we really are. Don't be deceived and walk away from the bereaved too early. It got very lonely for me to receive, in lieu of comfort, pats on the back and reminders of how strong I was. One young widow with several small children became very tired of hearing how well she was taking her husband's death. She said she wanted to tell everybody to call her up at midnight and listen to her scream.

Don't worry that you don't have the answers when the bereaved ask you, "Why?" I think one reason people avoid mourners is that they think they have to give some sort of explanation: "It's God's will." "She's so much better off now." "At least he's not suffering anymore." Believe it or not, these things offer very little comfort to the grieving person. Be honest. Admit that you don't know why, that you don't have the answers.

Elizabeth Kubler-Ross, in dealing with the terminally ill, used to tell her patients that she felt helpless or at a loss for words. Then she listened quietly and waited for a cue from the patient. That same process works with the mourner. Share and feel together.

Sometimes all you have to do is just be there and let people know that they are safe with you, that they can say anything they need to say, that they can cry in your presence, without fear of ridicule or judgment.

Learn the difference between sympathy and empathy and be empathic. Sympathy says, "You poor thing. Isn't life the pits? And there you are, so helpless and unable to get out of it." Nobody wants to be pitied. Empathy says, "I love you. I care. I'm with you." Empathy is encouraging. It is recognizing that grief is a natural process of confronting and adjusting to death and that each person holds the keys to his or her own healing. Empathy is walking a moon in someone else's moccasins. Sympathy wallows. Empathy lifts.

Listen empathically. Hear the unspoken as well as the spoken word. Observe the body language. Don't block the emotion being expressed by pulling away either verbally or with your own body language. Allow the person to own his or her sorrow, anger, despair, or guilt. If a person is raging at you with anger, don't take it personally. Make it clear that you've heard the message. You might say, "I can see that you're really angry. I'd probably be angry too." Don't say, "I know how you feel," unless you honestly do. Let the person know it's okay to feel angry or guilty or upset in your presence.

Don't be frightened by silences. A lot of processing goes on in the mind. Watch the eyes and the hands. You can see that something is happening. Just be there.

Don't be afraid to touch if it seems appropriate. Take your cue from the mourner. If you touch and the person pulls away from you, he or she doesn't want to be touched. If the person responds, then continue. Many times I felt so starved for physical contact that a warm hug was exactly what I needed. But don't force yourself to touch if you don't feel a desire to. It will come across as stiff and artificial, worse than no contact at all.

Don't be afraid of questions and doubts. Sometimes we feel that if a person has enough faith or a strong enough testi-mony, he or she won't feel doubts. Nonsense! Someone's whole world has been torn apart: that's a faith-shaking experience. Now, the person usually puts his or her world (and testimony) back together much stronger than it was before, but the process is not without its moments of doubt and fear. Don't be deceived by the public face of the bereaved. Accept the questioning and don't expect the person to be coming from the stance of assurance from which you are operating. Have a little faith in yourself. The outpourings of the Spirit are tremendously strong during bereavement. The moments of doubt are countered by dramatic flashes of pure knowledge. Keep the Spirit with you and follow its counsel; the mourner will feel it too.

Don't try to force the person to talk or to cry. Some people have trouble getting in touch with their emotions. Letting them know that they can do so in your presence is more a condition of who you are to them rather than what you say to them. Such things should never, never be forced.

Don't avoid the subject of the deceased. The mourner may get a little misty, but he or she will know you care. You don't have to dredge up the memory whenever you're with the person but don't walk around on eggs to avoid it, either. Bring up pleasant, good memories of the deceased.

Don't avoid the mourning person. Bereavement is a lonely and painful time. The living one has lost his or her intimate other half and needs human contact. Some people think that love and hate are opposites. I guess that from a strictly semantic point of view, they are. But from an emotional point of view, people would rather be loved or hated than ignored. That's the true dichotomy. To avoid the mourner just because you might share some pain together is a gross injustice.

Remember that the grieving process is a lengthy one. There are no pills for instant adjustment. The funeral is the beginning of grief, not the ending. The worst anger, guilt, and depression may come months after the death. Take time for a personal visit. Make a quick phone call. Send a little note. You don't have to say anything profound. Just say, "I'm thinking about you. I care. I love you." My Relief Society visiting teacher did not miss a single week in many months following my husband's death. She called at least once a week just to say, "Hi, how are you?" Be particularly sensitive to the special days: holidays, birthdays, wedding anniversaries, and the anniversary of death. Be there and follow the lead of the bereaved person.

My parents drove all the way from Nevada to be with me on the first anniversary of Carmon's death. On several occasions, while I was talking with friends on the phone, those friends could sense that I was upset and would say, "Do you need me? I'll be right there!"

Be aware that grieving consumes immense emotional energy. Psychologists tell us that one hour of emotional stress is as draining as three hours of hard physical labor. The mourner's only reality is that world of pain inside. He or she will live only for and through that pain for a long while. Anything you can do to help ease the load will be helpful. Recognize that people in mourning are preoccupied with their grief and won't be up to their usual level of performance professionally, personally, or spiritually. Sometimes we tend to want to get them out or "keep them busy so they won't think so much." But they need to think, and all of the emotional energy going into the introspection will lead to the eventual resolution of grief. It is counterproductive to load someone up with dozens of projects at a time when just washing the face seems a monumental achievement.

Help with the practical things. A recent issue of Reader's Digest featured an article about a neighbor who appeared on the doorstep of a bereaved family prepared to shine their shoes. I remember a friend showing up with her apron on. "I'm not much on words," she explained, "but I can clean."

Another example of help with practical needs occurred on the anniversary of my husband's death, which coincided with the first week of school. When the teacher in the next room looked in and found me at my desk staring into space, she came over with cutouts for my bulletin boards and some first-of-the-year activities that had been photocopied and were ready for me to use. Practical help doesn't have to be enormously time-consuming, monumental, or accompanied by fanfare. The little things will be most appreciated and remembered.

Don't take it upon yourself to "get rid of the memories." The mourner will know when he or she can put away clothing or pictures. It took me more than a year before I had the strength to sort through my husband's clothing, but I would have resented someone else's doing it for me.

Do not judge in the case of a death by suicide. I admit that suicide is an area of which I have little knowledge or experience. The only practical suggestion I offer is to refrain from judging. Only the Lord can judge what is in a person's heart. The surviving family of a suicide victim need, if anything, even more comfort and support. They experience the shock, anger, guilt, and depression in monumental proportions. All of the other suggestions made thus far also apply: be present, be real, care, listen, and don't judge.

Be cognizant that outside help may be needed. If, after learning about the grieving process, you sense that the bereaved person is stuck in the grief; if a lot of time has passed without resolution; if there are some serious physical symptoms, such as an extreme weight loss or talk of suicide, consider recommending outside help. In addition to one-on-one professional counseling, classes in bereavement are taught at many universities and colleges; support groups are another valuable resource available in many cities. If you cannot locate one in your area, write for information about starting one. For the widowed, write to THEOS Foundation, 1301 Clark Building, 717 Liberty Avenue, Penn Hills Mall, Pittsburgh, PA 15222, phone (412) 471-7779. For bereaved parents, write to The Compassionate Friends, Inc., P.O. Box 3696, Oak Brook, IL 60522-3696, phone (708) 990-0010, and fax (708) 990-0246.

If you are in a position that puts you in frequent contact with bereaved persons, whether in a professional or a spiritual capacity, consider taking a course or workshop on death and dying. It may be the beginning of the greatest journey you'll ever make, a journey of understanding and peace within yourself.
