Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, All Alone: Surviving the Loss of Your Spouse ( 1995)

Epilogue

Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope.

Romans 5:1-4

December 1, 1983

I can't believe I've been keeping this journal for over a year!

Today is my thirty-ninth birthday. I'm finally Jack Benny's age!

I spent the day in Tucson with our fifth-graders from school. I wasn't looking forward to it, but it was much nicer than last year's trip. I remember being an emotional wreck by the time I got home last year. In fact, I cried all the way home on the bus, feigning sleep so as not to upset the children. You see, I bore the weight of knowing that Carm had planned to go on that trip, and his not being there reinforced for me that he was dead. I hadn't realized how much it had weighed on me until today, when I took the same trip without that burden. I feel so alive and whole and healed. What a joy to my spirit!

Mom came down a few weeks ago and helped me to clean house. It took a full year to get there, but I finally went through all of Carmon's clothes and personal belongings. I selected carefully the memories I wanted to keep for myself, and the children chose theirs. Then Carm's brother came and took what clothing, tools, and such that he wanted. The rest went to Deseret Industries or the dump. These past months I've felt impressed to strip down to traveling weight. I don't know why; I just know that I need to obey that impression. It may be that the only traveling I'll be doing is to go forward within myself.

I think I am going forward too. The past is a nice place to visit; but after all this time, I no longer want to live there. I don't know what is in the future for me, and I'm a little bit frightened of it. But I do know I'm going toward it, whatever it is. Opening my heart to new experiences means risking further pain; but without risk, there is no growth, and without growth, there is no faith nor hope nor love nor joy.

It was funny the other night; I was driving to the singles conference and talking to the Lord as I sometimes do. Suddenly I found myself thanking Him for the pain and for His "tough love" that shook me from my complacency and made me grow. I thanked Him for the tough laws, too, the ones that are so hard to live sometimes—tithing, which allows me to earn such blessings from heaven that my children, though fatherless, have never had to want; chastity, which has schooled me in a power and strength I cannot even describe, and which secures for me relationships with close friends that are uplifting because they don't mistake thrills for joy or tinsel for treasure; prayer, which can be a thirty-second spot-check or an intense two-way dialogue, depending on my effort; fasting, through which come answers beyond my mortal ken; scriptures, which quiet my troubled heart; journal writing, which clarifies my confused soul.

Yes, I do feel whole again. I have learned that in resolution of grief the goal is to be whole again, to look forward and not backward, to reinvest emotional energy in growth and not in memories. But it never means to forget, and it never means no longer to love, for the love and the memory are always there to keep and to ponder in my heart. To take grief out of death is to take love out of life.
