Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

Preface

When we thought of writing a book on the general presidents of the Relief Society, we did not even know who all the presidents were. Emma Smith and Eliza R. Snow were firm in our minds as the first two presidents, Zina Young seemed a hazy third, and Emmeline B. Wells and Amy Brown Lyman fit in somewhere down the line. The later presidents, Belle Spafford, Barbara Smith, Barbara Winder, and Elaine L. Jack, we knew from our own experiences in Relief Society, but the middle group of presidents were names we had little acquaintance with. We felt we were in company with many women in the Church.

As we researched the lives of the twelve women who have served as general presidents from the Relief Society's beginnings in 1842 to the present, we came to know twelve completely different personalities, but whose commonality involved many threads of likeness—faith, service, compassion, trials, heartaches, endurance. Emma, Eliza, Zina, Bathsheba, Emmeline, Clarissa, Louise, Amy, Belle, Barbara, Barbara, and Elaine are elect ladies—women we now admire greatly, love deeply, and regard as cherished friends. We feel they all need to be known by every Latter-day Saint woman.

Sarah M. Kimball, who originated the sewing circle that eventually became the circle of Relief Society sisters, served as general secretary in 1881. She prepared a jubilee box of photographs, documents, and memorabilia to be opened fifty years later. In 1930, not only a jubilee year but also the centennial of the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Louise Y. Robison, then general president, opened the box.

Sarah wrote to her successor:

Hon. Secretary: This is dedicated to you with the fond hope and firm belief that you are enjoying many advantages and blessings that were not enjoyed by your predecessors.

May God abundantly bless you and your labors.

(Signed) Sarah M. Kimball

Sec. Relief Society

Salt Lake City

April 1st, 1881

As the sesquicentennial of the founding of the Relief Society approaches, we are indeed "enjoying many advantages and blessings that were not enjoyed by [our] predecessors" in 1930, 1881, or 1842. We have received a rich heritage of sisterhood from thousands of Relief Society sisters who, often under difficult conditions, have served each other and the Lord faithfully, building the organization of Relief Society as we now know it. To these pioneering sisters and, particularly, to the elect ladies, the twelve Relief Society presidents, who shaped and led the Relief Society, we owe an immense debt of gratitude.

We wish to thank our editor at Deseret Book, Eleanor Knowles, for encouraging us and overseeing publication of the book; Brent T. Christison for designing the cover; Lane Johnson for polishing the manuscript; the staff of the Church Historical Library and the Church Archives for helping with our research; and Evelyn Marshall, former chairman of the Relief Society curriculum committee, for giving us a clearer vision of Relief Society.

Families of the Relief Society presidents, counselors in the general presidencies, secretaries, and general board members have generously shared their materials and offered valuable insights and suggestions. We especially thank Gracia N. Jones, Mary Firmage Woodward, Evalyn D. Bennett, Richard W. James, Marge Swainston, Amy Lyman Engar, Janet Spafford Nimer, Douglas H. Smith, Lillian Smith Alldredge, Sherilynn Smith Alba, Richard W. Winder, Richard W. Winder, Jr., and Susan Winder Tanner.

Finally, this book could not have been written without the patience and support of our families. To our husbands, David Gaunt and Larry Peterson, and to our children, Angela, Dennis, and Lisa Gaunt, and Scott, Stephanie, Tom, Gregory, Jeffrey, and Brent Peterson, we express our deep appreciation and love.
