Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

1

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma Hale Smith

Smith, Emma HalePP1842 - 1844

Smith, Emma HalePPOn March 17, 1842, in the Masonic Hall in Nauvoo, Illinois, twenty women and two men listened as Joseph Smith, Jr., Prophet and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, organized the women of the Church and read a revelation he had received twelve years earlier, in 1830. "Thou art an elect lady, whom I [the Lord] have called," Joseph quoted. Emma Hale Smith, the elect lady referred to, was "an elect lady," the Prophet explained, because she was "elected to preside." [^1]

Smith, Emma HalePPJust moments before, thirty-seven-year-old Emma had been unanimously elected by her peers as the first president of the new women's organization. Hers was not a token presidency because she was the wife of the Prophet; she was a strong, independent woman in her own right. Her peers chose her to lead the Relief Society, a society dedicated to ministering relief to others, not only because they loved her and respected her intellect, but also because they knew well her compassion for human suffering.

Smith, Emma HalePPThe Relief Society had its beginnings in the 1830s in Kirtland, Ohio, during construction of the Kirtland Temple. There was much to be done, and as the temple was raised stone by stone, sisters from Kirtland and surrounding areas joined in the work. Some churned butter to send to the workmen, others cooked meals, and still others cleaned and polished the woodwork as it was completed. One day Joseph Smith entered the temple and saw the women working together sewing the temple veils. "Well, sisters," he said, "you are always on hand. The sisters are always first and foremost in all good works. Mary was the first at the resurrection; and the sisters now are the first to work on the inside of the temple." [^2]

Smith, Emma HalePPWhen the Saints moved to Nauvoo a few years later, women again joined together to help with the building of the Nauvoo Temple. And again, there were many tasks to be done. Sarah M. Kimball, wife of nonmember Hiram Kimball, and her seamstress sewed shirts for the men working on the temple. Knowing that additional hands could produce more clothing, they invited several neighbors to join with them in the Kimballs' parlor on March 4, 1842. As they worked, the women discussed the idea of a ladies' society. Their enthusiasm grew as the hours went by; and before the day was over, Eliza R. Snow had been asked to write a constitution and bylaws to present to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Smith, Emma HalePPAccording to Sarah Kimball's account, Joseph told Eliza that although the constitution and bylaws were the best he had ever seen, "this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and He has something better for them than a written constitution. Invite them all to meet me and a few of the brethren in the Masonic Hall over my store next Thursday afternoon, and I will organize the sisters under the priesthood after a pattern of the priesthood." [^3]

Smith, Emma HalePPWhen the twenty sisters met with the Prophet on Thursday, March 17, Elders John Taylor and Willard Richards of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles were also present. Addressing the group, Joseph put in words the "object of the Society": "that the Society of Sisters might provoke the brethren to good works in looking to the wants of the poor—searching after objects of charity, and in administering to their wants—to assist by correcting the morals and strengthening the virtues of the community." [^4] At a later meeting, he told them they were "not only to relieve the poor, but to save souls." [^5]

Smith, Emma HalePPThe women chose Emma Smith as their president, and she then selected Sarah M. Cleveland as first counselor and Elizabeth Ann Whitney as second counselor. John Taylor ordained the counselors and then gave Emma a blessing in which he "confirmed upon her all the blessings which have been conferred upon her, that she might be a mother in Israel and look to the wants of the needy, and be a pattern of virtue and possess all the qualifications necessary for her to stand and preside and dignify her office, to teach the females those principles requisite for their future usefulness." [^6] He then suggested that the new organization be named the Nauvoo Female Benevolent Society. Emma objected to the word benevolent because of its association with corrupt organizations. Eliza Snow agreed, noting that their society should not follow the popular institutions of the day and should set its own course. "We are going to do something extraordinary," Emma explained. "When a boat is struck on the rapids with a multitude of 'Mormons' on board, we shall consider that a loud call for relief; we expect extraordinary occasions and pressing calls." [^7] Her remarks were persuasive, and the name chosen was The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.

Smith, Emma HalePPJoseph donated a five-dollar gold piece for the initial funding of the society, and additional contributions at that meeting brought the total to $10.62. Members of the new society elected Eliza R. Snow as secretary, Phebe M. Wheeler, assistant secretary, and Elvira A. Coles, treasurer. Seven women who were not in attendance were accepted into membership, making a total of twenty-seven official members of the first Relief Society. Emma then discussed the duties of the members as she saw them: to "seek out and relieve the distressed—that each member should be ambitious to do good." [^8]

Smith, Emma HalePPForty-four new members joined the society at its second meeting. They included Zina D. H. Young, who would be the third general president of the Relief Society; Mary Fielding Smith, wife of Joseph's brother Hyrum; and Lucy Mack Smith, mother of Joseph and Hyrum.

Smith, Emma HalePPLucy addressed the group. "This Institution is a good one," she said. "We must cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another and gain instruction, that we may all sit down in heaven together." [^9]

Smith, Emma HalePPVilate Kimball, wife of Heber C. Kimball, expressed her desire to be "found aiding in every benevolent cause," [^10] and Elizabeth Ann Whitney stressed the need to avoid the appearance of evil and to pray for one another so that the work might succeed. Emma then led a discussion on the needs of the poor and outlined proposals to help women obtain necessities and employment. She also suggested establishing societies in other Mormon communities. Soon branches of the Relief Society were organized in the neighboring towns of Macedonia and LaHarpe.

Smith, Emma HalePPEach week additional women joined the sisterhood. Of the first testimony meeting held April 19, 1842, Eliza R. Snow recorded: "The meeting was very interesting, nearly all present arose and spoke, and the spirit of the Lord like a purifying stream, refreshed every heart." [^11]

Smith, Emma HalePPJoseph Smith attended several of the meetings. On April 28 he told the sisters, "You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to those sympathies which God has planted in your bosoms. If you live up to these principles, how great and glorious will be your reward in the celestial kingdom! If you live up to your privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates." [^12] After giving them further instructions, he added, "And I now turn the key to you in the name of God, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time—this is the beginning of better days to this Society." [^13]

Smith, Emma HalePPBy summer, membership was so large that no building in Nauvoo could accommodate the women, so the Relief Society held its meetings outdoors in the "Grove," near the temple site. The sisters had much to do in assisting the poor, welcoming the ever-increasing number of newly arrived Saints, caring for the sick, and contending with persecution from anti-Mormon forces. During the late summer, Emma Smith, Eliza R. Snow, and Amanda Smith presented a petition to Illinois Governor Thomas Carlin on behalf of the Relief Society to plead for protection from suits pending against the Prophet. [^14]

Smith, Emma HalePPWith membership over eleven hundred and a lack of indoor facilities during the winter, the Relief Society did not meet formally from September 1842 to June 1843, but the women continued to help one another. The "necessity committee," forerunner of today's visiting teaching, was organized in 1843 to search for those who were "poor and suffering." Emma led the way in compassionate service, not only by virtue of her calling but also by her compassionate nature. Emmeline B. Wells recalled: "Sister Emma was benevolent and hospitable; she drew around her a large circle of friends, who were like good comrades. She was motherly in nature to young people, always had a houseful to entertain or be entertained. She was very high-spirited and the brethren and sisters paid her great respect. Emma was a great solace to her husband in all his persecutions and the severe ordeals through which he passed; she was always ready to encourage and comfort him, devoted to his interests, and was constantly by him whenever it was possible. She was queen in her home, so to speak, and beloved by the people, who were many of them indebted to her for favors and kindnesses." [^15]

Smith, Emma HalePPWhen the Relief Society reconvened on June 16, 1843, Emma was away from Nauvoo, so her counselor Elizabeth Ann Whitney conveyed her instructions to "not only relieve the wants of the poor but also cast in our mites to assist the brethren in building the Lord's House." [^16] With four wards in Nauvoo by then, Emma suggested dividing the Relief Society into separate ward groups with one set of officers serving all four groups. Elvira A. Coles (Holmes), treasurer, reported the financial status of the society: five hundred dollars had been received, and four hundred dollars had been spent. She noted that "much good had been done, and the hearts of many had been made to rejoice." [^17]

Smith, Emma HalePPDuring its second year, 1843-44, only fourteen Relief Society meetings were reported, most of them in private homes. The sisters again adjourned for the winter months, reconvening in March 1844.

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma presided at two meetings—one in the morning and one in the afternoon—on March 9, 1844. Both meetings were too crowded for all of the sisters who wanted to attend, so two additional sessions were planned for the following week. At the March 16 meetings, Emma expressed her desire to have all the sisters gather again when they could find an adequate building—not knowing that there would be no more meetings of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo. Over the next few months escalated turmoil in Nauvoo would result not only in the martyrdom of the Prophet but also in the eventual expulsion of the Saints from Illinois. Thus, nearly two years to the day after its organization, the Relief Society ceased. It would remain disbanded for more than two decades, when it would be reorganized in a new place and under a new prophet.

Smith, Emma HalePPEarly Life and Marriage

Smith, Emma HalePPAs a young girl, Emma Hale Smith could not have imagined the dramatic and difficult course her life would take.

Smith, Emma HalePPHer father, Isaac Hale, a Connecticut-Vermont Yankee, joined the army in the Revolutionary War at age seventeen. Following the war, he decided not to farm the Vermont property he inherited from his grandfather and instead moved to the frontiers of Pennsylvania along the Susquehanna River. He returned to Vermont briefly to find a wife, and in 1790, he courted and married Elizabeth Lewis, whose family had settled in Wells, Vermont. She was both strong and educated, qualities that suited her well for frontier life.

Smith, Emma HalePPIsaac and Elizabeth, her brother Nathaniel, and his wife, Sarah, were among the first settlers in the Susquehanna Valley and bought adjoining tracts of land. A good hunter and farmer, Isaac provided well for his and Elizabeth's family, which eventually included nine children: Jesse, David, Alva, Isaac, Phoebe, Elizabeth, Emma, Tryal, and Reuben. Emma, the seventh child and third daughter, was born July 10, 1804.

Smith, Emma HalePPFrom her older brothers, Emma learned to ride horses expertly and to maneuver a canoe skillfully. Elizabeth taught her daughters to sew and cook, and the girls practiced their culinary talents by helping Elizabeth feed the boarders she took in to add to the family income. The children were taught at home until 1813, when enough people had settled in the valley to build a community schoolhouse. Emma was nine years old when the school opened. Several years later, her father sent her to a girls' school.

Smith, Emma HalePPThe Hales belonged to the Methodist Episcopal Church, in which Elizabeth remained a faithful member all her life. Isaac left the Methodist fold for a time until he heard his young daughter Emma pray for his return.

Smith, Emma HalePPEmmeline B. Wells, who knew Emma as an adult, described the five-foot nine-inch Emma as "large and well proportioned, of splendid physique, dark complexion, with piercing eyes that seemingly looked one through; noble in appearance and bearing." [^18] She also had a lyrical soprano voice, a spirited attitude, and a quick wit that reflected her natural intellect. A granddaughter described her as "a brilliant conversationalist," articulate in both writing and speech, adding that "Emma never used slang and was very particular about her grammar and her choice of words." [^19] At twenty-one years of age, she was teaching school when she met Joseph Smith, Jr.

Smith, Emma HalePPFive years earlier, in 1820, Joseph had received a vision that was the beginning of the restoration of the kingdom of God to the earth—a work for which Joseph's name would be "had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues." [^20] He also received a series of visitations from an angel named Moroni, who revealed to him the location of an ancient record inscribed on gold plates and prepared him for the time when he would receive the plates for translation.

Smith, Emma HalePPIn October 1825, Joseph left his home near Palmyra, New York, and went with his father, Joseph Smith, Sr., to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to work for a farmer named Josiah Stowell. Stowell hired the Smiths and several other men to help him dig for a silver mine he believed existed near Harmony. Having heard of Joseph's vision, Stowell thought he would be able to divine precious metals. The workers boarded at the Hale home, near the site of the supposed mine, and there Joseph met Emma. A month later, when the project was abandoned and his father returned home, Joseph stayed on with Josiah Stowell and worked on his farm.

Smith, Emma HalePPIsaac Hale did not like the Stowell crew in general, and Joseph Smith in particular—especially since Emma was attracted to the handsome young man, who was over six feet tall and had light brown hair and blue eyes. Besides objecting to Joseph's religious claims, Isaac thought he was uneducated and without a reputable occupation and was, therefore, not a suitable match for his daughter. Emma said that her father not only bitterly opposed their marriage, but twice refused to give Joseph permission to marry her.

Smith, Emma HalePPOn January 18, 1827, Joseph and Emma eloped. Emma recalled in her later years that she had no intention of marrying when she left home that winter morning but "preferring to marry him to any other man," [^21] she rode with Joseph to South Bainbridge, where Squire Zachariah Tarbell married them in his home. Joseph was twenty-one years old, and Emma, eighteen months older.

Smith, Emma HalePPFearing her father's wrath, Emma did not return home for any of her belongings. Instead, the newlyweds went directly to the home of Joseph's parents in Manchester, New York, near Palmyra. Though she had not previously met her new daughter-in-law, Lucy Mack Smith welcomed Emma, and they soon became dear friends.

Smith, Emma HalePPBy summer Isaac Hale was willing to make peace with his daughter and agreed to give Emma her clothing and some furniture and cows. When Emma and Joseph visited the Hale home, Isaac's welcome was short-lived, for he was still angry with Joseph for taking his daughter and for not having a decent occupation. Nevertheless, he invited them to live with the Hale family, in hopes that he could help Joseph get started in a profitable and worthwhile business. He offered the couple thirteen acres and a small cabin to live in. Emma and Joseph moved to Harmony in December 1827—but for different reasons than Isaac had expected. Three months earlier, on September 22, Joseph had gone to the Hill Cumorah and received the gold plates from Moroni, along with a charge to use all his efforts to protect them. When word reached the community that Joseph had gold plates, persecution and threats multiplied. The greedy and the curious attacked him or broke into his home to try to steal the plates. To protect them, Joseph moved them several times, including placing them in a box under the hearthstone of his parents' home and then in his father's cooper shop in a pile of flags. Finally Martin Harris, an affluent friend, gave Joseph fifty dollars to help him and Emma move away from the increasing persecution in Palmyra.

Smith, Emma HalePPIn December, Joseph and Emma, now pregnant, began the four-day trip to Harmony, thinking it would provide the peace Joseph needed to concentrate on his translation work. To protect the plates during the move, he hid them in the bottom of a forty-gallon barrel of beans.

Smith, Emma HalePPThe Smiths lived in the cabin on the Hale farm for the next two and a half years, and it was there that Joseph translated the characters on the plates. Emma served as his first scribe. Although she never saw the actual plates, she felt them. "The plates often lay on the table without any attempt at concealment, wrapped in a small linen tablecloth which I had given him [Joseph] to fold them in," she recalled. I once felt the plates as they lay on the table, tracing their outline and shape. They seemed to be pliable like thick paper, and would rustle with a metallic sound when the edges were moved by the thumb, as one does sometimes thumb the edges of a book." [^22]

Smith, Emma HalePPMartin Harris visited the Smiths in Harmony in February 1828 and returned two months later to take over as Joseph's scribe. His wife, Lucy, accompanied him and stayed for two weeks, disrupting the Smith household. Because Lucy thought Joseph an impostor and feared that Martin would continue to give him financial support, Martin begged Joseph to let him show her the translation. After repeatedly taking Martin's request to the Lord, Joseph received permission for Martin to take the 116 pages that had been translated to show only to certain family members. Martin left Harmony on June 14, taking the manuscript with him to show Lucy in Palmyra.

Smith, Emma HalePPThe next day, June 15, Emma gave birth to a son, whom she and Joseph named Alvin, after Joseph's deceased brother. The child died a few hours after birth. With Emma critically ill for several weeks, Joseph put aside translating to care for her. As she began to recover, she wondered, as did Joseph, why Martin had not returned the manuscript, so she suggested that Joseph go back to Palmyra to locate Martin and the manuscript. When Martin confessed that he had lost the 116 pages, Joseph despaired: "O, my God! All is lost! all is lost! What shall I do? I have sinned—it is I who tempted the wrath of God." [^23]

Smith, Emma HalePPJoseph feared not only the Lord's wrath but also the effect the news would have on Emma's health. She finally recovered, and in February 1829 Joseph resumed translating, with Emma again serving as scribe. Shortly thereafter, in April, Joseph's brother Samuel brought Oliver Cowdery, a teacher who had boarded with the Smith family in Manchester, to meet Joseph. Oliver agreed to serve as scribe for Joseph's translation, and he remained until the translation was completed.

Smith, Emma HalePPWith the translation completed, Joseph now sought a way to get the book published. Much to Lucy Harris's dismay, her husband, Martin, mortgaged his farm to pay for the printing of five thousand copies of the book, which was now known as the Book of Mormon, and on March 26, 1830, the finished books went on sale in Palmyra. Eleven days later, on April 6, Joseph gathered a group of believers together at the Peter Whitmer farm in Fayette, New York, to organize a church, the restored Church of Jesus Christ. Nearly sixty people crowded into the farmhouse. For legal purposes, six of those present—Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Samuel H. Smith, and David Whitmer—were named as the founding six members of the organization.

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma Smith was not present at that first meeting, but two months later, on June 28, she was baptized in a dammed-up stream near Colesville, New York. The baptism was marred by a jeering mob, and before her confirmation could take place that evening, a constable arrived with a warrant for Joseph's arrest. Emma watched helplessly as her husband was led away to jail. After two hasty trials, Joseph was released from jail, and he and Emma returned to Harmony.

Smith, Emma HalePPAn Elect Lady

Smith, Emma HalePPIn July 1830 at Harmony, the Lord gave to Emma through her husband, Joseph, a revelation that is now section 25 of the Doctrine and Covenants. In it Emma was told: "Behold, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou art an elect lady, whom I have called. . . . And the office of thy calling shall be for a comfort unto my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., thy husband, in his afflictions, with consoling words, in the spirit of meekness. . . . And thou shalt be ordained under his hand to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my spirit. . . .

Smith, Emma HalePP"And verily I say unto thee that thou shalt lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better. And it shall be given thee, also, to make a selection of sacred hymns, as it shall be given thee, which is pleasing unto me, to be had in my church. For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads.

Smith, Emma HalePP"Wherefore, lift up thy heart and rejoice, and cleave unto the covenants which thou hast made. . . . Keep my commandments continually, and a crown of righteousness thou shalt receive."

Smith, Emma HalePPThe couple stayed in Harmony only two months before returning to Fayette. When she left Harmony, Emma bade farewell to her parents for the last time; she would not see them again. During the following winter at Fayette, Joseph received a revelation commanding the Saints to move west to Kirtland, Ohio. Emma was again pregnant, and on April 30, 1831, not long after they arrived in Kirtland, she gave birth to twins, a boy and a girl. The babies, who were given the names Thaddeus and Louisa, died the same day. By coincidence, the next day Julia Murdock, a neighbor, died while giving birth to healthy twins, a boy and a girl. John Murdock, realizing he could not care for his babies, asked Joseph if he and Emma would adopt them. The Smiths, grateful for this opportunity, agreed, and they named the twins Joseph and Julia.

Smith, Emma HalePPFor the first three years they were in the Kirtland area, Joseph and Emma lived in the homes of others. In the fall of 1831 they moved to the farm of John Johnson near Hiram, Ohio, thirty miles south of Kirtland. Six months later, on March 24, a drunken mob burst through the door at night and dragged the Prophet from his bed into the snow, tore off his clothes, and smeared his body with tar. In the confusion, baby Joseph, who was ill with measles, was exposed to the cold. That night Emma helped peel the tar from her husband, and for the next five days she tried desperately to save the baby, but he died on March 29. Emma and Joseph had now buried four of their five children. At the time she was in the fourth month of another pregnancy.

Smith, Emma HalePPImmediately after the baby's burial, on April 1, Joseph left on a journey to Missouri on church business. Fearing that the mob would return, he advised Emma to take Julia back to Kirtland to stay with the Newel K. Whitneys, with whom they had boarded when they first arrived in Kirtland. But Sister Whitney's aunt was visiting and refused to allow Emma to stay, so she sought shelter with others. Over the next two and a half months, until Joseph returned, she and baby Julia stayed with three different families. Soon after he returned, he secured a small apartment for his family above the Whitney store, and that would be their home for the next two and a half years as well as the center of church activity. Their son Joseph III was born while they lived there, and to Joseph and Emma's great joy he was a healthy baby.

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma was, in part, responsible for Joseph's receiving the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom. During the winter of 1833, Joseph established the School of the Prophets to teach languages, geography, and doctrine. the school met in the Smith apartment. The men who attended the school smoked pipes and chewed tobacco, and Emma complained to her husband about having to clean up the room after they left. After thinking about the conduct of the men, particularly as it pertained to tobacco, Joseph prayed to the Lord. In response he received a revelation outlining a health code that forbade the use of tobacco and strong drink and urged the use of fruits and grains in season and meat eaten sparingly.

Smith, Emma HalePPAs the Prophet's wife, Emma welcomed many visitors to the small apartment. Guests remembered seeing her often in an apron, the corner of which she would finger as she talked. She also frequently wore a string of gold beads Joseph had given her. Lucy Mack Smith said of her daughter-in-law's hospitality: "How often I have parted every bed in the house for the accommodation of the brethren, and then laid a single blanket on the floor for my husband and myself, while Joseph and Emma slept upon the same floor, with nothing but their cloaks for both bed and bedding." [^24] In December 1834, Joseph Smith, Sr., presiding patriarch of the Church, gave blessings to Joseph and Emma. Emma's blessing addressed many of the difficulties of her life, including her father's anger, the persecutions against Joseph, and the loss of her babies; it also made known the role she would play in Relief Society in instructing the women of the Church. [^25]

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma experienced two other important events in 1836. First was the birth of a son, Frederick Granger Williams Smith, on July 20—another healthy boy. The second was Emma's completion of the hymnal she had been instructed to compile. The collection was published in 1836, although the title page had an 1835 date: "A collection of SACRED HYMNS, for the Church of the Latter Day Saints. Selected by Emma Smith, Kirtland, Ohio: Printed by F. G. Williams & Co. 1835." Included in the book were well-known Methodist hymns and many new hymns written by Church members, such as Eliza R. Snow, W. W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, and Emma herself. She worked on subsequent revisions in 1839 and 1842.

Smith, Emma HalePPAs hostilities against the Saints in Ohio escalated, plans were made to move the Church's headquarters to Jackson County, Missouri, which had been identified by revelation in 1831 as Zion, the "central gathering place" of the Saints. Narrowly escaping mob violence in Ohio, Joseph left for Missouri in January 1838. Emma, again pregnant, left Kirtland soon afterward and joined him in Far West, Missouri. There a son, Alexander Hale, was born on June 2. In good humor despite her difficult circumstances, Emma noted that at Alexander's birth, a regular "Halestorm" occurred.

Smith, Emma HalePPIn Missouri the Saints received an extremely hostile reception, with mobs again destroying their property and trying to drive them out. As a result, Emma not only lived in poverty, sharing what little she had with those in need, but also suffered persecution. In early November, she watched in terror and in tears, with her children clinging to their father's legs, as a mob dragged him and his brother Hyrum away to jail in Liberty, Missouri. Emma nursed Hyrum's wife, Mary Fielding Smith, who was hovering near death after the birth of her first child. Later that month, Emma visited her husband for several days in the dark, cramped jail. She returned to the jail in December 1838 and again in January 1839 with Mary Fielding Smith.

Smith, Emma HalePPAs the persecutions increased in Missouri, Emma and her children were forced to flee Far West in February 1839 with a group headed by Stephen Markham. They headed east across Missouri and the frozen Mississippi River to Illinois, with Emma carrying her two babies, Alexander and Frederick, while Joseph III and Julia clutched her skirts. Joseph's papers were tied to her waist in cloth bags under her dress. She wrote in a poignant letter to her husband, "No one but God, knows the reflections of my mind and the feelings of my heart when I left our house and home, and almost all of everything that we possessed excepting our little children, and took my journey out of the State of Missouri, leaving [you] shut up in that lonesome prison. But the reflection is more than human nature ought to bear, and if God does not record our sufferings and avenge our wrongs on them that are guilty, I shall be sadly mistaken." [^26]

Smith, Emma HalePPIn April, Joseph escaped from Liberty jail and appeared at the home of John and Sarah Cleveland, in Quincy, Illinois, where Emma and the children were staying. Emma recognized the pale man in rags and ran into his arms.

Smith, Emma HalePPNauvoo, "the Beautiful"

Smith, Emma HalePPThe Saints were offered property at Commerce, Illinois, some fifty miles north of Quincy. Although the site, on the east bank of the Mississippi River, was low-lying and swampy, Joseph saw its potential for becoming a prosperous river port. The Saints purchased the land, and the Smith family, along with other refugee Saints, moved to Commerce, whose name Joseph changed to Nauvoo, which he said meant "the beautiful." Within just five years, Nauvoo became a thriving community, second in size in Illinois only to Chicago.

Smith, Emma HalePPIn Nauvoo Emma at last had her own home. A two-story log house, which the Smiths named the Homestead, was built for her family. A constant stream of Saints from other parts of the United States and from Europe arrived in Nauvoo, and many were invited to lodge temporarily with Joseph and Emma. By 1842, more space was needed to house the arrivals, so a larger home, the Mansion House, was built on a corner lot across from the Homestead. Eventually the Mansion House had twenty-two rooms; the Prophet's family occupied three, and the rest served as hotel rooms. W. W. Phelps once remarked to Emma, as she struggled to feed the many visitors, that Joseph should have a smaller table in order to limit the number of guests, as did Napoleon. Her reply was, "Joseph is a bigger man than Napoleon; he could never eat without his friends." [^27]

Smith, Emma HalePPEstablishing their new headquarters in Nauvoo and surrounding environs wasn't without difficulties and sorrows for the Saints, however. The swampy marshlands bred mosquitoes that carried malaria, and hundreds of the Saints became ill with the disease, or swamp fever, as it was called. Many died in the epidemic, including Don Carlos, Emma and Joseph's son who had been born in Nauvoo on June 14, 1840. Despite the threat to their own lives, Joseph and Emma opened their home to the sick. And when there was no more room in the house, Joseph and Emma gave up their own bed and slept in a tent in the yard. Emma's nursing skills and her kindness in sharing her store of herbs and medicines endeared her to the Saints.

Smith, Emma HalePPFive months after the death of Don Carlos, Emma anxiously awaited the birth of another baby to fill her empty arms. A son was born but died at birth, unnamed. Emma was so heartbroken that Joseph made arrangements with the MacIntires, who had recently had twin girls, to allow Emma to care for one of the twins during the day. Joseph returned the baby girl to her parents every evening. When this child died two years later, Joseph and Emma grieved as if she were their own. Emma mothered a number of children whose own mothers had died or who, for whatever reason, needed a home.

Smith, Emma HalePPAlthough Emma constantly faced heartache, hard work, and worry about her husband's safety, she nevertheless found relief and pleasure in hostessing parties, leading a parade on horseback dressed in her black velvet riding habit, attending plays, singing, and teaching and delighting in her children. In one letter to Joseph, who was often away from home, she wrote: "Little Alexander who is now in my arms is one of the finest little fellows, you ever saw in your life. He is so strong that with the assistance of a chair he will run all round the room." [^28]

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma also found joy and comfort in the love and support she received from her husband, the Prophet. On one occasion, when he was forced to leave Nauvoo to avoid arrest, she managed to join him after dark at an island on the Mississippi River between Nauvoo and Montrose, Iowa. He wrote of that meeting:

Smith, Emma HalePP"With what unspeakable delight, and transports of joy swelled my bosom, when I took by the hand, on that night, my beloved Emma—she that was my wife, even the wife of my youth, the choice of my heart. Many were the reverberations of my mind when I contemplated for a moment the many scenes we had been called to pass through, the fatigues and the toils, the sorrows and sufferings, and the joys and consolations, from time to time, which had strewed our paths and crowned our board. Oh what a commingling of thought filled my mind for the moment, again she is here, even in the seventh trouble—undaunted, firm, and unwavering—unchangeable, affectionate Emma." [^29]

Smith, Emma HalePPThe Nauvoo Temple was not yet completed when Hyrum Smith performed the sealing ceremony for Joseph and Emma on May 28, 1843, at the Old Homestead. That September Emma was the first woman to receive the temple endowment, which was given to her in the upstairs room of the Mansion House. She then presided over the administration of the temple ordinances for the women.

Smith, Emma HalePPAlthough Joseph and Emma often signed their letters to each other "forever" and "eternally yours," only through the power of the priesthood could they be sealed for all eternity in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. Earlier the Prophet had received a revelation that instituted among the Saints the practice of plural marriage. Emma struggled with this doctrine, and in what would become section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord instructed her to "receive all those that have been given unto my servant Joseph." (V. 52.) Although at one point she apparently accepted it, she never fully embraced the principle, and in her later years she publicly denied that Joseph had ever practiced the doctrine.

Smith, Emma HalePPPolygamy was one of the key issues that fired anti-Mormon feelings against the Saints in Illinois, and Joseph, the primary target of that hatred, had a price put upon his head. All during the month of June 1844, tension in Nauvoo mounted, climaxing with the city council's order to destroy the anti-Mormon newspaper, the Nauvoo Expositor. Joseph and several others were charged and tried for instigating a riot. Their acquittal outraged many Illinois citizens, who threatened to march on Nauvoo if the new governor, Thomas Ford, did not cooperate with their demands. Convinced that the Mormons were guilty of various crimes, Governor Ford tried to schedule another trial. But Joseph, realizing that the mobs wanted him and Hyrum, decided to go across the river to Iowa and then head west. Emma, who was again pregnant, sent a letter to him through Porter Rockwell and begged him to return to Nauvoo. Joseph came back and spent his last night with Emma and the children. Accompanied by about twenty men, he left the next day for Carthage, some ten miles southeast of Nauvoo, to answer the charges in the Expositor incident, though he knew he was going "as a lamb to the slaughter."

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma wanted Joseph to give her a blessing before he left, but since there wasn't time, he suggested that she write out the blessing she desired and he would sign it upon his return. After his departure, Emma composed what she termed "the desires of my heart":

Smith, Emma HalePP"First of all that I would crave as the richest of heaven's blessings would be wisdom from my Heavenly Father bestowed daily, so that whatever I might do or say, I could not look back at the close of the day with regret, nor neglect the performance of any act that would bring a blessing. I desire the Spirit of God to know and understand myself, that I desire a fruitful, active mind, that I may be able to comprehend the designs of God, when revealed through his servants without doubting. I desire a spirit of discernment, which is one of the promised blessings of the Holy Ghost.

Smith, Emma HalePP"I particularly desire wisdom to bring up all the children that are, or may be committed to my charge, in such a manner that they will be useful ornaments in the Kingdom of God, and in a coming day arise up and call me blessed.

Smith, Emma HalePP"I desire prudence that I may not through ambition abuse my body and cause it to become prematurely old and care-worn, but that I may wear a cheerful countenance, live to perform all the work that I covenanted to perform in the spirit-world and be a blessing to all who may in any wise need aught at my hands.

Smith, Emma HalePP"I desire with all my heart to honor and respect my husband as my head, ever to live in his confidence and by acting in unison with him retain the place which God has given me by his side, and I ask my Heavenly Father that through humility, I may be enabled to overcome that curse which was pronounced upon the daughters of Eve. I desire to see that I may rejoice with them in the blessings which God has in store for all who are willing to be obedient to his requirements. Finally, I desire that whatever may be my lot through life I may be enabled to acknowledge the hand of God in all things." [^30]

Smith, Emma HalePPJoseph, Hyrum, Willard Richards, and John Taylor were locked in the upper room of the jail in Carthage. Late in the afternoon of June 27, a mob with blackened faces overpowered the guards, rushed up the stairs of the jail, and fired shots through the closed door, killing Hyrum. Shots were also fired through the window from the outside. John Taylor was wounded, and one bullet struck his pocket watch, stopping it at 5:15. The mob then broke through the door and fired at Joseph, while others outside the jail continued to shoot through the window. Crying "O Lord, my God!" Joseph, mortally wounded, fell through the window to the ground.

Smith, Emma HalePPLorenzo Wasson, a nephew, broke the news to Emma that Joseph and Hyrum were dead; others went to tell Lucy Mack Smith, the brothers' mother, and Hyrum's wife, Mary. The women, in shock, were overcome with grief When a friend tried to console Emma, telling her that her sorrow would be the crown of her life, she responded, "Joseph was my crown." [^31]

Smith, Emma HalePPEliza R. Snow wrote of Emma after Joseph's death:

Smith, Emma HalePPI knew her ere she had been left In her heart's loneliness— Before her prospects were bereft Of all its happiness. I've seen the willow bending low, And 'tis unbroken still. [^32]

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma and Joseph's last child, David Hyrum, was born November 17, 1844, five months after the Prophet died. One of the greatest sorrows of Emma's life was the fact that out of eleven Smith children (including two who were adopted), just five lived beyond childhood. Frederick died at age twenty-six, and only Julia, Joseph, Alexander, and David Hyrum lived through adulthood.

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma's Last Years

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma elected not to go west with Brigham Young and the majority of Saints in the exodus from Nauvoo that began in February 1846, choosing instead to remain in Illinois with about a thousand other Mormons. Perhaps the years of poverty and homelessness she had endured contributed to her decision, for she reportedly said in her own defense, "You may think I was not a very good Saint not to go West, but I had a home here and did not go because I did not know what I should have there." [^33] Contention between Emma and Brigham over the disposition of properties and possessions in Joseph's name may also have influenced her decision.

Smith, Emma HalePPAlthough she wanted to remain in Nauvoo, Emma feared the continued anti-Mormon sentiment in the area, so she took her family to Fulton, Illinois, for six months. When she returned to Nauvoo and reopened the Mansion House, she took in boarders for income, as she had done many times before.

Smith, Emma HalePPIn the next few years Emma had several suitors, but it was Lewis Bidamon who won her hand. She was then forty-three and he was forty-five. Handsome and charming, he was nicknamed "the Major" because he occasionally wore military attire. Twice married, Lewis was not religious and imbibed liquor, but Emma and her children admired his sense of humor and his generosity. She welcomed Lewis's two daughters into the family, and Lewis, in turn, helped raise her children. While he did not believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, he would not allow anyone to criticize him.

Smith, Emma HalePPLucy Mack Smith went to live with Emma and Lewis in 1851. Lucy regarded Emma highly, writing in her history, "I have never seen a woman in my life, who could endure every species of fatigue and hardship, from month to month, and from year to year, with that unflinching courage, zeal, and patience, which she has ever done; for I know that which she had had to endure: She has been tossed upon the ocean of uncertainty, she has breasted the storms of persecution, and buffeted the rage of men and devils, which would have borne down almost any other woman." [^34]

Smith, Emma HalePPWhen Lucy became too crippled with arthritis to walk or to feed herself, Lewis built her a wheelchair and Emma tended to her every need. Lucy's death on May 14, 1856, ended her thirty-year relationship as mother-in-law and close friend of Emma.

Smith, Emma HalePPAs Mrs. Bidamon, Emma continued as she had always done, caring for the sick and taking people into her home. She welcomed her grown children, as well as Lewis's, to live with them at various times. She raised Charles, Lewis's illegitimate son, then hired his mother, Nancy Abercrombie, as a housekeeper so Nancy could be with her son. Weeks before her death, Emma asked Lewis to marry Nancy. A year later they married.

Smith, Emma HalePPAlthough Emma no longer affiliated with the main body of the Saints and her sons later led the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, she continued to testify that Joseph was a prophet and that the work he was instrumental in restoring was divine. A few years before her death, she was quoted by her son Alexander Hale Smith as declaring, "I know Mormonism to be the truth; and believe the church to have been established by divine direction." [^35] To Parley P. Pratt she reportedly said, "I believe [Joseph] was everything he professed to be." [^36] In her last recorded testimony she said, "My belief is that the Book of Mormon is of divine authenticity. I have not the slightest doubt of it. . . . Though I was an active participant in the scenes that transpired, and was present during the translation of the plates . . . and had cognizance of things as they transpired, it is marvelous to me, 'a marvel and a wonder,' as much so as to anyone else." [^37]

Smith, Emma HalePPIn the early morning hours of April 30, 1879, Emma lay weak and dying in her Nauvoo home. Suddenly she called, "Joseph, Joseph, Joseph." Her husband, Lewis, and her children, Julia, Joseph III, and Alexander, witnessed her passing as she murmured, "Joseph! Yes, yes, I'm coming." [^38]

Smith, Emma HalePPTwo days later, the family held a funeral service for Emma in the Mansion House. Speakers remembered her "loving hand, her consoling and comforting words, her unswerving integrity, fidelity, and devotion, her wise counsel." [^39] On a bank overlooking the Mississippi River, in the yard of the Homestead, she was buried beside Joseph, whose unmarked grave she showed to her sons before her death.

Smith, Emma HalePPEmma Hale Smith was an elect lady. As first president of the Relief Society, she filled a role different from that of her successors, serving at a younger age and for a shorter time than any of the other Relief Society presidents. Circumstances and personal struggles kept her from moving to Utah with the rest of the Church. But although she no longer affiliated with the restored church or the reinstated Relief Society, she continued throughout her life to act in the spirit of her office, which, as she told the sisters in 1842, was to "seek out and relieve the distressed . . . [to] be ambitious to do good." [^40]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Eliza: A Woman and a Sister," New Era, October 1974, p. 16.
[^2] Eliza R. Snow, "My Epitaph," Times and Seasons 4 (April 15, 1843):176.
[^3] Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Eliza R. Snow," in Sister Saints, ed. Vicky Burgess-Olsen (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), p. 3.
[^4] Western Courier, August 5, 1826, in Sister Saints, p. 5, footnote.
[^5] Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), pp. 30-31.
[^6] Eliza R. Snow Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, 1884), p. 4.
[^7] Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal (Salt Lake City: Nicholas G. Morgan Sr. Foundation, 1957), p. 4. A holograph of the original manuscript, Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," is in the Bancroft Library, Berkeley, California.
[^8] Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, p. 6.
[^9] Ibid., p. 6.
[^10] Minutes of the Senior and Junior Cooperative Retrenchment Association, June 22, 1872, LDS Archives.
[^11] Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, 6.
[^12] Eliza R. Snow, "Two Chapters of the Life of President Joseph Smith," Poems, Religious, Historical, and Political, 2 vols. (Liverpool, 1856, and Salt Lake City, 1877), 1:15.
[^13] Ibid., 1:3-6.
[^14] Jaynann M. Payne, "Eliza R. Snow, First Lady of the Pioneers," Ensign, September 1973, p. 62.
[^15] Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, p. 7.
[^16] Ibid., p. 7.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 7-8.
[^18] Ibid., p. 8.
[^19] Ibid., p. 10.
[^20] Eliza R. Snow, "Appeal to Americans," Poems, Religious, Historical, and Political, 1:60.
[^21] Beecher, "Eliza: A Woman and a Sister," p. 15.
[^22] Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Leonora, Eliza, and Lorenzo: An Affectionate Portrait of the Snow Family," Ensign, June 1980, p. 67.
[^23] LeRoi C. Snow, "Devotion to a Divine Inspiration," Improvement Era, June 1919, p. 656.
[^24] Eliza R. Snow, Diary, December 22, 1846, LDS Archives. Also, Beecher, "Leonora, Eliza, and Lorenzo," p. 67.
[^25] Ivan J. Barrett, Heroines of the Church (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1966), p. 59.
[^26] Edward Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York: 1877), pp. 295-96.
[^27] Woman's Exponent 15 (August 1, 1886): 37.
[^28] Andrew Jensen, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:695.
[^29] Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, pp. 17-18.
[^30] Hymns, 1985, no. 292.
[^31] Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, p. 21.
[^32] Ibid., p. ii.
[^33] Eliza R. Snow, Diary, June 3, 1847, LDS Archives; also Sister Saints, p. 10.
[^34] Snow, Diary, June 1, 1847.
[^35] Snow, Diary, June 6, 1847; also Sister Saints, p. 10.
[^36] Snow, Diary, June 8, 1847; also Carol Lynn Pearson, Daughters of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), p. 18.
[^37] Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Women at Winter Quarters," Sunstone 8 (July-August 1983): 12.
[^38] Ibid., p. 13.
[^39] Eliza R. Snow, Diary, December 22, 1846, LDS Archives.
[^40] Church News, November 23, 1963, p. 16.
