Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

2

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza R. Snow

Snow, Eliza R.PP1866 - 1887

On a summer day in 1887, Stake President Angus Cannon drove his carriage up Salt Lake City's South Temple Street to the Lion House, where eighty-three-year old Eliza R. Snow waited. Slight and frail, Eliza had to be lifted in President Cannon's arms to the waiting carriage. This was not the first time he had taken Eliza for an afternoon carriage ride, and it would not be the last, but today the ride would be different. As Eliza enjoyed the warm sunshine, she made her funeral requests known to President Cannon. [^1] She had already written her own eulogy:

Snow, Eliza R.PP 'Tis not the tribute of a sigh . . . From sorrow's heaving bosom drawn, Nor tears that flow from pity's eye, To weep for me when I am gone. . . In friendship's mem'ry let me live, . . . For friendship holds a secret cord, That with the fibres of my heart, Entwines so deep, so close; 'tis hard For death's dissecting hand to part! I feel the low responses roll, Like the far echo of the night, And whisper, softly through my soul, "I would not be forgotten quite." [^2]

Snow, Eliza R.PPAn organizer of rare ability, Eliza tended to the details of her funeral with the same energy and strength of purpose as she had tended to countless Relief Society projects during her twenty-one years as president. At her funeral, she said, the choir was to sing the opening hymn—her masterpiece, "O My Father," which spoke of returning to live with heavenly parents. She suggested another detail of importance: the Assembly Hall was to be draped in white and filled with white flowers. She wanted no black, only white, the symbol of hope.

Snow, Eliza R.PPNew England Childhood

Snow, Eliza R.PPPriestess, prophetess, and presidentess. [^3] These are titles by which Eliza Roxey Snow was known through the fourscore and three years of her life. She was born on January 21, 1804, in Becket, Massachusetts, the second child of Oliver and Rosetta Pettibone Snow. When her older sister, Leonora, was four and Eliza two, the family moved to Mantua, Ohio, then a heavily wooded frontier. There five more children were born: Percy, Melissa, Lorenzo, Lucius, and Samuel. Eliza was especially close to her brother Lorenzo. Though he was ten years her junior, the two had much in common, including their love of books and intellectual pursuits. They both loved history and felt pride in their Revolutionary War heritage.

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza and her brothers and sisters worked hard and learned self-discipline as their parents maintained New England values in their home on the Western Reserve of Ohio. Rosetta Snow taught her daughters how to keep a clean and orderly home, and during these early years she taught Leonora and Eliza how to sew. Both became skilled seamstresses and called upon their sewing skills many times throughout their lives. Eliza also learned to weave straw and won first prize two years in a row at the county fair for her leghorn hats.

Snow, Eliza R.PPOliver Snow held various public offices, and Eliza often helped him with clerical duties. This early working experience, which also brought her into association with community leaders, may have helped her to develop her organizational and verbal skills and to explore new ideas.

Snow, Eliza R.PPThroughout her life, Eliza often expressed her feelings and ideas in writing, especially poetry. Once, as a child, she even wrote a school assignment in verse. As a young poet, she used pseudonyms to avoid drawing attention to herself, but her talents were soon recognized. When two former United States presidents, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, died on July 4, 1826, she was asked to write a requiem, [^4] and with the publication of this poem she received wide recognition. However, she did not write the requiem for fame; she wrote it out of a deeply instilled sense of patriotism. "I was born a patriot," she said. "Narratives of revolutionary sufferings recounted by my grand-parents, so deeply impressed my mind, that as I grew up to womanhood I fondly cherished a pride for the flag which so proudly waved over the graves of my brave and valiant ancestors." [^5]

Snow, Eliza R.PPDespite Eliza's patriotic sentiments, she opposed Lorenzo's decision as a young man to join the military. However, she agreed to sew his military uniform. "It was beautiful, magnificent," she wrote, "and my brother donned it with as much, if not of military pride, of self-satisfaction as ever Napoleon won a battle." [^6]

Snow, Eliza R.PPThe Snows were a religious family. They regularly attended the Baptist Church in Mantua, where Oliver served as a deacon. But, Eliza wrote, their home "was a welcome resort for the honorable of all denominations." [^7] At one meeting in their home, they heard the preaching of Sidney Rigdon, then a follower of Alexander Campbell. For a time the Snows affiliated with the Campbellites, but when Sidney Rigdon left the Campbellites and joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Snows, too, learned of the restored gospel. "It was what my soul hungered for," wrote Eliza, "but . . . I considered it a hoax—too good to be true." [^8]

Snow, Eliza R.PPMantua was not far from Kirtland, Ohio, where the new church established its headquarters in early 1831. One evening that year Joseph Smith came to the Snows' home, and as he sat near the fire and told the family about his vision of the Father and the Son in a grove near his parents' home in upstate New York, Eliza studied his face. "I decided that his was an honest face," she later wrote." [^9]

Snow, Eliza R.PPRosetta Snow and her daughter Leonora joined the Church soon after Joseph's visit, but Eliza was not baptized until four years later, in the spring of 1835. "I had to battle very strongly with the powers of darkness," she explained. "The evil one brought forth many strong arguments against my joining the Church, and it was with difficulty that I overcame them. I finally commanded Satan to depart from me. Then my mind was again enlightened and filled with the spirit of God, and I had firmness sufficient to ask for baptism." [^10]

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza wrote of her feelings following baptism: "I realized the baptism of the Spirit as sensibly as I did that of the water in the stream. I had retired to my bed and as I was reflecting on the wonderful events transpiring around me, I felt an indescribable, tangible sensation, if I may so call it, commencing at my head and enveloping my person and passing off at my feet, producing inexpressible happiness. Immediately following, I saw a beautiful candle with an unusual long, bright blaze directly over my feet. I sought to know the interpretation, and received the following, 'The lamp of intelligence shall be lifted over your path.'" [^11]

Snow, Eliza R.PP"Zion's Poetess" and Schoolteacher

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza's creative work went in a different direction after she joined the Church. "For thy approval, Lord, shall prompt my pen," she wrote. [^12] National recognition as a poet was no longer her goal; she now saw her poetry serving two purposes: to cheer the Saints and teach them the doctrine of the gospel, and as a means for personal expression, "when there's nobody here but Eliza and I." [^13] Within the Church, her talents became highly esteemed. Joseph Smith referred to her as "Zion's poetess," a title that was hers for life and has endured to this day.

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza's meticulous and precise approach to everything she did carried over into her appearance. She loved elegant yet feminine clothes. She put extra yards of material into her dresses and trimmed them elaborately, which complemented her slender build and above average height and added to her graceful, lofty carriage. A high forehead and large, deep-set eyes gave her a regal countenance. [^14] Her speech was eloquent and dynamic.

Snow, Eliza R.PPShortly after Eliza's baptism, Joseph Smith asked her to leave Mantua and go to Kirtland, to teach his daughter and nieces in the Smith home. Eliza accepted and, as one of the first schoolteachers in the Church, taught in that "select school for young ladies." [^15]

Snow, Eliza R.PPDuring the next three years, as Eliza boarded with the Smiths and continued to teach school in their home, she developed a great love and respect for the Prophet. She wrote of him: "Again I had ample opportunity of judging of his daily walk and conversation, and the more I made his acquaintance, the more cause I found to appreciate him in his divine calling. His lips ever flowed with instruction and kindness. . . . His expansive mind grasped the great plan of salvation. . . . Three times a day he had family worship; and these precious seasons of sacred household service truly seemed a foretaste of celestial happiness." [^16]

Snow, Eliza R.PPWhen Eliza was asked for a contribution for the construction of the Kirtland Temple, she willingly gave all the money she had. Although Joseph offered her a note in return, she refused to take it, accepting instead a lot near the temple with a two-family home on it. She remained with the Prophet's family and let her sister Leonora and two children live in half the house. She likened the acquiring of this two-family home to "many other trivial events in human life, [which] proved to be one of the little hinges on which events of immense weight occasionally turn." [^17]

Snow, Eliza R.PPNot long after Eliza acquired the home, her brother Lorenzo, who had been attending a college of religion, became disillusioned with his studies. He wrote to her, "If [they] have nothing better to offer than this, then good-bye to all religions." [^18] Eliza seized this opportunity to invite him to Kirtland, where he could live in the vacant half of her home and study Hebrew at the School of the Prophets. He accepted. Once in Kirtland, he was impressed with Joseph Smith and the other leaders of the Church. He studied Hebrew and also learned of the principles of the gospel, and in June 1836 he was baptized in the Chagrin River, the last member of the Snow family to join the Church.

Snow, Eliza R.PPWhile living in Kirtland, Eliza became friends with Zina D. Huntington, and a lasting friendship was begun. Both Eliza and Zina would later serve as president of the Relief Society, and in their later lives they would travel together to visit the sisters of the Church.

Snow, Eliza R.PPTo Missouri and Nauvoo

Snow, Eliza R.PPAs persecution against the Church intensified in Ohio, many of the Saints fled to Missouri, which the Saints called "Zion." Eliza, her parents, two sisters, three brothers, and Leonora's two daughters left Kirtland in the spring of 1838, planning to go to Adam-ondi-Ahman, Missouri, where they hoped to establish a new home. Lorenzo became very ill during the journey, and Eliza held his head in her arms to absorb the shocks as the wagon jolted over the rough roads. When they arrived at Far West, Lorenzo was still very ill, so Eliza volunteered to remain with him there while the rest of the family continued on to Adam-ondi-Ahman. They stayed in Far West with Sidney Rigdon for two weeks, until Lorenzo was well enough to travel.

Snow, Eliza R.PPThough the Saints had hoped to find refuge in western Missouri, anti-Mormon persecution was intensifying. Finally, in 1839, Missouri Governor Lilburn W. Boggs gave the Saints just ten days to leave the state or face extermination. Eliza's father helped widows and others in need, while Eliza directed her family's preparations.

Snow, Eliza R.PPThe Snows were among the last to leave the area. The family began their trek back across Missouri on a bitterly cold day, with snow covering the ground. Eliza walked alongside the wagon in order to stay warm and to keep her feet from freezing. Soon the militia overtook them. One of the men shouted at Eliza, "Well, I think this will cure you of your faith!" Eliza stared at him and replied, "No, sir. It will take more than this to cure me of my faith."

Snow, Eliza R.PPSurprised at her response, the man meekly commented, "I must confess, you are a better soldier than I am." She later wrote: "I passed on, thinking that, unless he was above the average of his fellows in that section, I was not highly complimented by his confession." [^19] She viewed the expulsion from Missouri and the bitter persecution of the Saints as "a dark, foul stain on the Eagle's crest." [^20]

Snow, Eliza R.PPWhen they left Missouri, the Snows lost many of their possessions, including two homes. Soon after they arrived at Quincy, Illinois, forty miles south of Nauvoo, Eliza and Leonora went to the town of Lima to find work as seamstresses. There they rented an upstairs room from a local family. One evening their landlord loudly criticized the Mormons. Then, after considerable shouting, he changed his tone and praised the "two noble women" who lived upstairs. "No better women ever lived," he proclaimed quietly. [^21] Fearing persecution, the sisters had not told the landlord that they were Mormons.

Snow, Eliza R.PPEventually members of the Snow family were reunited in Nauvoo. Their peace was short-lived, however, for the spring of 1842 brought unrest to both the Church and the Snows. Some of the family were becoming somewhat disenchanted with the Church, and that year they moved to Walnut Grove, Illinois, seventy-five miles from Nauvoo. Oliver wrote to his son Lorenzo: "Eliza cannot leave our Prophet. Mother [Rosetta] did not like to. For my part I am very glad, at present, to be away. Turmoil and confusion, these stalk abroad at noon day." [^22]

Snow, Eliza R.PPThis turn of events was upsetting to Eliza. She wondered in her journal why her parents "did not in their trials draw out from the springs of consolation which the gospel presents that support which was their privilege, and which would have enabled them to rejoice in the midst of tribulation and disappointment." [^23]

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza remained deeply committed to the Church, as did her brother Lorenzo. In about May 1840, an incident took place between brother and sister that reveals their trust in each other. One day as Lorenzo was studying the scriptures, "the eyes of my understanding were opened," as he would later describe the experience, and he formed in his mind the following couplet:

Snow, Eliza R.PPAs man now is, God once was: As God now is, man may be.

Snow, Eliza R.PPLorenzo felt this to be a sacred communication, and he related it only to Eliza at the time. Three years later he recited the couplet to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and Joseph replied that it was "a true gospel doctrine, and a revelation from God." [^24]

Snow, Eliza R.PPDespite her personal heartache over her parents' diminishing faith, Eliza's seven years in Nauvoo were a time of wonderful flowering in her life. Again she taught school in the home of the Prophet, and when the Relief Society was organized on March 17, 1842, she was called to be secretary. Among her duties were maintaining orderly minute books and seeing that the meetings began and ended on time. She did not own a watch, so the Prophet laid his own gold watch on the table for her to use. Later, he gave it to her as a gift. [^25]

Snow, Eliza R.PPThis gift possibly represented more to Joseph than simply a means of accurate timekeeping. "I was sealed to the prophet, Joseph Smith, for time and eternity," Eliza wrote in her journal in the early summer of 1842, "in accordance with the celestial law of marriage which God had revealed. . . . This, one of the most important events of my life, I have never had cause to regret." [^26] The sealing took place on June 29. Out of necessity Eliza retained her maiden name, but throughout her life she referred to Joseph Smith as "her first and only love . . . the choice of her heart and the crown of her life." [^27]

Snow, Eliza R.PPWhen Joseph and his brother Hyrum were martyred on June 27, 1844, Eliza was overcome with grief, unable to eat or to sleep, and even pled with the Lord to let her die also. One night as she lay in bed still sorrowing, Joseph appeared to her and told her she must not desire to die. Though his mission was complete, he said, hers was not—the Lord desired her to live and to help build up His kingdom. She was to be of good cheer and help lighten the burdens of others. [^28]

Snow, Eliza R.PPThis vision served as a motivation for Eliza for the rest of her life. From that time forward, she put her grief to work for her and dedicated her talents to the Church. "The mob in the vicinity of Nauvoo, knowing that I wielded the pen, had threatened my life, lest, as they said, I should write about the tragic scene at Carthage," she wrote. "Although I had neither fear nor dread of death, I felt as I expressed in the following:

Snow, Eliza R.PPLet us go—let us go to the wilds for a home Where the wolf and the roe and the buffalo roam— Where beneath our own vines, we in peace may enjoy The fruits of our labors, with none to annoy. Let us go—let us go where our Rights are secure— Where the waters are clear and the atmosphere pure— Where the hand of oppression has never been felt— Where the blood of the prophets has never been spilt. Let us go—let us go where the Kingdom of God Will be seen in its Order extending abroad— Where the Priesthood of heaven, unopposed will go forth In the regeneration of man and of earth." [^29]

Snow, Eliza R.PPIn October 1844, Eliza R. Snow became a plural wife of Brigham Young. Though this was primarily a marriage of respect and convenience, it provided Eliza with security.

Snow, Eliza R.PPDuring the following year, 1845, Eliza lived in an attic room at the home of Stephen Markham. It had been a year since the death of the Prophet. The mother of her dear friend Zina Huntington had also died. Contemplating these events, Eliza took up a small gold pencil given to her by Joseph Smith and wrote of eternal life:

Snow, Eliza R.PPO my Father, Thou that dwellest In the high and glorious place! When shall I regain Thy presence, And again behold Thy face? In Thy holy habitation, Did my spirit once reside; In my first primeval childhood, Was I nurtured near Thy side? For a wise and glorious purpose Thou hast placed me here on earth And withheld the recollection Of my former friends and birth; Yet ofttimes a secret something Whispered, "You're a stranger here," And I felt that I had wandered From a more exalted sphere. I had learned to call thee Father, Thru thy Spirit from on high, But, until the key of knowledge Was restored, I knew not why. In the heav'ns are parents single? No, the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason; truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there. When I leave this frail existence, When I lay this mortal by, Father, Mother, may I meet you in your royal courts on high? Then, at length, when I've completed All you sent me forth to do, With your mutual approbation Let me come and dwell with you. [^30]

Snow, Eliza R.PPIn February 1846, Nauvoo, "the city beautiful," was in chaos as once again the Mormons were driven from their homes. Eliza went with the Markham family across the frozen Mississippi River and began the long journey westward with the Saints. On the journey she learned to drive a team of oxen. She wrote about the experience: "Had it been a horse-team I should have been amply qualified, but driving oxen was entirely a new business; however, I took the whip and very soon learned to 'haw and gee,' driving most of the way to Winter Quarters." [^31]

Snow, Eliza R.PPAt Winter Quarters, a temporary stopping place built by the Saints on the west bank of the Missouri River opposite Council Bluffs, Iowa, Eliza became ill with "a slow fever that terminated in chills and fever." She wrote: "Sometimes wet nearly from head to foot, I realized that I was near the gate of death; but my trust was in God, and his power preserved me." [^32]

Snow, Eliza R.PPKeeper of the Flame

Snow, Eliza R.PPWhen she recovered, both her practical and spiritual skills were put to use. With her abilities as a seamstress, she helped the women to prepare wagon covers, clothing, and camping equipment. And, as the sisters gathered in tents or cabins in the evenings, Eliza and other leaders, including Zina D. H. Young, bore their testimonies and shared their spiritual gifts. Entries such as "spent the eve[ning] at Sarah Ann's—had a pow'rful time—deep things were brought forth which were not to be spoken," [^33] and "truly a glorious time with the mothers & daughters of Zion," [^34] filled Eliza's diary. "I then blest the girls in a song," she wrote on one occasion, "singing to each in rotation." [^35] Spiritually invigorated, Eliza even left a meeting on Tuesday, June 8, after a heavy rain, "with Loisa & Zina in the mud rejoicing." [^36]

Snow, Eliza R.PPIn many ways, these meetings were an extension of the spirit of the Relief Society, which had been disbanded in Nauvoo in March 1844. With nearly half of the households headed by women (for many a temporary situation), [^37] it is not surprising that the women would reach out to one another for support. One woman's account lists 217 out of 556 days filled with visits or meetings of women. [^38] Eliza's natural leadership skills kept her at the forefront of such activities, and many sisters looked to her for spiritual strength and direction.

Snow, Eliza R.PPFor Eliza, these gatherings filled a need for companionship. Now forty-two years old, she had lived most of her life without a husband or children. As a plural wife of Brigham Young, while she was part of a large polygamous family, she had few close family ties. Most of the Snow family remained in Illinois when the Saints left Nauvoo.

Snow, Eliza R.PPSometime in the winter of 1846-47, Eliza received word of her mother's death in Walnut Grove, Illinois, on December 22, 1846. Leonora left Winter Quarters and returned to Walnut Grove to help care for the family. Eliza wrote that she felt "a sweet consolation inasmuch as she [Rosetta] is freed from the ills of the present life." [^39] Eliza's father, Oliver, had died in October 1845, four months before Eliza left in the exodus from Nauvoo. Of the Snow family, only Leonora, Lorenzo, and Eliza traveled west with the Saints.

Snow, Eliza R.PPAs the winter of 1846-47 passed, preparations began to be made for the trek west. Gathering her belongings together, Eliza noticed that an indispensable item was missing, and with her last remaining dime she purchased a bottle of ink. [^40] From this ink bottle and her pen came remarkable songs, letters, and journal entries written as she traveled to the Salt Lake Valley.

Snow, Eliza R.PPWith the summer, Eliza joined the second company that departed Winter Quarters, traveling with the Robert Pierce family, She had packed the minute books from the Relief Society in Nauvoo and now brought them west with the same careful concern for their preservation that she had exhibited in writing them. By day on the trail, she intermittently drove the horses or visited with other women as they walked beside the wagons. At night, she climbed into her wagon box and took up her pen and ink and wrote. Though the trek was strenuous, Eliza's heart overflowed with song. The Saints rejoiced in fervently singing all seven verses of her composition "Camp of Israel, Number One." Upon crossing the Mississippi River she wrote "Camp of Israel, Number Two." And on the banks of the Platte River, she penned "Song of the Desert":

Snow, Eliza R.PPBeneath the cloud-topp'd mountain— Beside the craggy bluff, Where every dint of nature Is wild and rude enough: Upon the verdant meadow— Upon the sun-burnt plain— Upon the sandy hillock, We waken music's strain. Beneath the pine-tree branches Which have for ages stood— Beneath the humble cedar, And the green cotton-wood: Beside the broad smooth river— Beside the flowing spring— Beside the limpid streamlet, We often sit and sing. Beneath the sparkling concave, When stars in millions come To cheer the weary strangers And bid us feel at home. Amid the cheering moon-light, Fair Cynthia's mellow rays In social groups we gather, And join in songs of praise. Cheer'd by the blaze of fire-light, When evening shadows fall, And when the darkness deepens Around our spacious hall; With true and warm emotion To saintly bosoms given, In strains of pure devotion We praise the God of heaven. [^41]

Snow, Eliza R.PPWhen the company arrived in the Salt Lake Valley in August 1847, Brigham Young arranged for Eliza to live with Clara Decker, another of his wives, in one of the eighteen-foot-square log houses that lined the walls of the Old Fort. It was not long before a spirit of sisterhood, similar to that in Winter Quarters, found its way into meetings held in these log dwellings. The women found many of the same spiritual experiences and the same leaders surrounding them, in the absence of a formal organization, that they had experienced in Nauvoo and Winter Quarters. The nucleus of the Relief Society was still intact; the flame still burned brightly.

Snow, Eliza R.PPA humorous incident that occurred after one of these meetings exemplifies Eliza's optimism. "The roof of our dwelling was covered deeper with earth than the adjoining ones," she wrote. "Consequently it did not leak so soon and some of my neighbors huddled in for shelter; but one evening, when several were socially sitting around, the water commenced dripping in one place, and then in another; they dodged it for awhile, but it increased so rapidly that they finally concluded they might as well go to their own wet houses. After they had gone I spread my umbrella over my head and shoulders as I ensconced myself in bed. . . . During the night, despite all the discomfort, I laughed involuntarily while alone in the darkness of the night I lay reflecting on the ludicrous scene. . . . The storm was much worse indoors than out, and as the water . . . pattered on the floor, [it] washed stones from the earth above, and they went clink, clink, while numerous mice . . . ran squealing back and forth." [^42]

Snow, Eliza R.PPIn 1856 Eliza moved into the Lion House, which Brigham Young had built to house many of his wives and children. President Young respected Eliza's intellect and valued her opinion. She always sat on his right at the dinner table and at family prayers. Clarissa Young Spencer, a daughter of Brigham Young, described Eliza: "She was slight and fragile and always immaculate in dress. I see her now in her full-skirted, lace-trimmed caps and a gold chain around her neck, looking for all the world like a piece of Dresden china." [^43]

Snow, Eliza R.PPAfter the Saints arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, Eliza suffered from ill health. In May 1855, when the Endowment House was dedicated, President Young asked her to preside over the ordinance work of the sisters. He coupled his request with a blessing that her health would improve if she accepted the call. Eliza accepted. After all, she had once written, "To be able to do Father's will is what I wish to live for." [^44] She chose to serve, and good health returned.

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza's service in helping to prepare the sisters for the sacred temple ordinances undoubtedly gave her a special aura. Historian Maureen Ursenbach Beecher has written, "It is understandable that Eliza's image would take on a special holiness in the eyes of the women of the church, that the aura of the sacred mystery that surrounds the ordinances of the temple should somehow cling to Eliza. It did indeed become a part of the legend, an addition to the sanctity that already clothed her in the eyes of her contemporaries." [^45] Eliza apparently had special gifts of the spirit, and many individuals recorded blessings she had given them that resulted in healings and prophecies concerning future potential.

Snow, Eliza R.PPAs the Church grew in the arid environs of the Great Basin, Eliza's poetry and songs continued to inspire hope in the Savior and in the future just as they had done on the trek west. "How Great the Wisdom and the Love," "In Our Lovely Deseret," "Behold the Great Redeemer Die," "Truth Reflects upon Our Senses," and "Though Deepening Trials" were some of her hymns sung in the boweries of town squares, in newly built meetinghouses, and in the Saints' homes. The lyrics of these hymns endeared the sometimes aloof Eliza to the people in a way that would have been unlikely on a one-to-one basis.

Snow, Eliza R.PPFinally, by 1866, Brigham Young called upon the bishops to organize a Relief Society in each ward. Eliza, who had helped keep the spirit of Relief Society burning over all those years, was given "a mission to assist them in organizing, and to take with her Sister Zina D. Young." [^46]

Snow, Eliza R.PP"We recommend these Female Relief Societies to be organized immediately," Brigham Young said on December 18, 1867, as he again advised the bishops to organize Relief Societies in every ward. "We have many talented women among us, and we wish their help in the matter. . . . You will find that the sisters will be the mainspring of the movement. . . . Let a sister appeal for the relief of the suffering and poverty, and she is almost sure to be successful. . . . If you take this course you will relieve the wants of the poor." [^47]

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza's first important job as president was to rekindle the spirit of the Relief Society, which she had loved and nurtured for twenty-three years, and to reestablish its place in the Church. Her primary goal continued to be to establish the organization after the pattern set in Nauvoo by the Prophet Joseph Smith. As she traveled to the various wards, she told the Saints about that original Relief Society and bore her testimony of Joseph as a prophet of God.

Snow, Eliza R.PPAs Relief Society president, Eliza also echoed the priorities that her mother had taught her in her childhood. "Let your first business be to perform your duties at home," she said. "Inasmuch as you are wise stewards, you will find time for social duties, because these are incumbent upon us as daughters and mothers in Zion. By seeking to perform every duty, you will find that your capacity will increase, and you will be astonished at what you can accomplish." [^48] However, she was quick to see spiritual aspects in everything temporal, encouraging the sisters not to "let go [of the] Golden Harp and take up the Wooden Whistle." [^49]

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza also exhibited a sense of mercy toward and understanding of the women of the Church, declaring, "There are many of the sisters whose labors are not known beyond their own dwellings and perhaps not appreciated there, but what difference does that make? If your labors are acceptable to God, however simple the duties, if faithfully performed, you should never be discouraged." [^50]

Snow, Eliza R.PPWhen Eliza was asked to collect handmade items from the sisters of the Church to display in Philadelphia at an exposition celebrating the U.S. Centennial in 1876, she was overwhelmed with articles. Since there was not enough money to ship all of the items to the exposition, she organized a territorial exhibition to be held in the Constitution Building on Main Street in Salt Lake City. This fair opened on July 4, 1876, and ran for two months. As the exhibition drew to a close, Eliza realized that this was an opportunity for women to sell their items. With Brigham Young's approval, she started the Women's Commission Store, which prospered." [^51]

Snow, Eliza R.PPParadoxically, while Eliza was supportive of the women's suffrage movement and a leader of Mormon women, she was not a leader in the suffrage movement. She believed that God's order required "submission on the part of women." A conference for women held January 13, 1870, in Salt Lake City was one of the few occasions on which she spoke out on the subject. She told the more than six thousand women in attendance, "Our enemies pretend that, in Utah, woman is held in a state of vassalage—that she does not act from choice, but by coercion. What nonsense!

Snow, Eliza R.PP"I will now ask of this assemblage of intelligent ladies, Do you know of any place on the face of the earth, where woman has more liberty and where she enjoys such high and glorious privileges as she does here as a Latter-day Saint? No! the very idea of a woman here in a state of slavery is a burlesque on good common sense. . . . As women of God, filling high and responsible positions, performing sacred duties—women who stand not as dictators, but as counselors to their husbands, and who, in the purest, noblest sense of refined womanhood, are truly their helpmates—we not only speak because we have the right, but justice and humanity demands we should!" [^52]

Snow, Eliza R.PPA Natural Leader

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza R. Snow's role in the programs of the Church in early Salt Lake City was distinctive. Brigham Young respected her intelligence and leadership abilities and entrusted her with major responsibilities. Few women possessed as much power and independence as she did; yet it was her dauntless loyalty, obedience, and submission to the Church's leaders that provided her with that power and independence and made it possible for her to serve as a link between the women and the priesthood.

Snow, Eliza R.PPWith minor exceptions, Eliza and President Young saw eye to eye on things. One exception is illustrated in the following story: "On one occasion he [Brigham Young] gave his older daughters colorful sashes. When Phoebe Young laid her sash out on the bed while dressing for a dance, the ribbon disappeared. Confronted by President Young, Eliza replied, 'I felt that you wouldn't approve of anything so frivolous for your girls so I put it away.'

Snow, Eliza R.PP"'Sister Eliza,' said her husband, 'I gave the girls those ribbons, and I am judge of what is right and wrong for my girls to wear. Phoebe is to have her sash.'" [^53]

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza relented, but her true feelings on the subject again became evident in many of the standards established for the Young Ladies Retrenchment Association (now the Young Women Organization), which Eliza helped to organize in 1869.

Snow, Eliza R.PPThis was not the only organization Eliza R. Snow had a hand in founding. Concurrent with her position as Relief Society president, she aided Louisa L. Greene with the creation of the Woman's Exponent in 1872 and helped Aurelia S. Rogers in establishing the Primary Association in 1878.

Snow, Eliza R.PPOn June 19, 1880, the leaders of the women's organizations were gathered together for the purpose of firmly establishing their leadership. Eliza R. Snow, as president of the Relief Society, was officially given counselors. Zina D. H. Young as first counselor and Elizabeth Ann Whitney as second counselor. "Mother Whitney," as Elizabeth was affectionately referred to, had had the distinction of having served as second counselor to Emma Smith, first president of the Relief Society. The presidencies of the Primary and Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association were also established.

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza and Zina traveled throughout the territory as they served together in the Relief Society presidency. One of the homes they visited in Pleasant Grove was that of Margaret Zimmerman Brown, mother of Amy Brown Lyman. Amy, who would become the eighth president of the Relief Society, described Eliza as "dignified, reserved, and rather cold, so much so that one would hesitate to approach her or to assume any familiarity whatever. She was so powerful and able, however, that she impressed people, even children, with her superior intelligence, wisdom, vision, and leadership, and won their admiration and confidence. 'Aunt Zina' as we knew her, was a gentle, kind, honey-hearted woman, beloved for her graciousness and the warmth of her soul, for her generous and tender service to the sick, needy, unfortunate, and discouraged. . . . No hand was ever held out to her but that succor was forthcoming." [^54]

Snow, Eliza R.PPOne of the highlights of Eliza's years as president took place in 1872-73 when she went to the Holy Land with her beloved brother Lorenzo and a group of other Church leaders. Eliza was especially grateful to the women who took up a collection to pay her fare. While there, President George A. Smith rededicated the land for the return of the Jews. Eliza and Lorenzo basked in the spirit of the Savior as they visited many of the places where he had lived, had ministered to the people, and had taught them his Father's plan. [^55]

Snow, Eliza R.PPThe need for women to serve as nurses, midwives, and even doctors was an early priority for Eliza. Classes in home nursing and midwifery were organized, and many young women—including Ellis Shipp Reynolds and Romania Penrose Pratt—were encouraged to go east to study medicine. As these women returned to practice medicine in the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young established the Deseret Hospital Association. Eliza served as president of the association's board of directors in 1881, and on July 17, 1882, she became the first president of the new Deseret Hospital.

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza R. Snow devoted much of her life to the women of the Church, nurturing the sisters for more than four decades and serving for twenty-one years as general president of the Relief Society. Through all these experiences her spirit remained strong and vibrant, though her physical health declined. She died at the Lion House on December 5, 1887, just a month before she would have been eighty-four years old. "She seemed to be one of those perfect women that was prepared for the age," said President Jacob Gates of the First Council of the Seventy at her funeral, "and [she] represent[ed] her sex in this great Latter-day work, and nobly filled the mission for which she was appointed." [^56] She was buried on a hillside near the Lion House in President Brigham Young's private cemetery.

Snow, Eliza R.PPEliza R. Snow indeed became a legend during her own lifetime. Women, now as then, honor her as a great woman, but to practical Eliza, "greatness" was simply "usefulness." [^57] "I will go forward," she wrote in a summary of her beliefs and goals. "I will smile at the rage of the tempest, and ride fearlessly and triumphantly across the boisterous ocean of circumstance . . . and 'the testimony of Jesus' will light up a lamp that will guide my vision through the portals of immortality, and communicate to my understanding the glories of the Celestial kingdom." [^58]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Autobiography of Zina D. H. Young, LDS Archives, p. 2. Hereafter cited as Autobiography.
[^2] Zina Baker Huntington, letter dated March 5, 1817, LDS Archives.
[^3] Mary Firmage Woodward, personal letter to author, April 13, 1988.
[^4] Zina D. H. Young, "How I Gained My Testimony," Young Woman's Journal 4 (April 1892): 317.
[^5] Ibid., p. 318.
[^6] Ibid., p. 318.
[^7] Ibid., p. 319.
[^8] "A Distinguished Woman," Woman's Exponent 10 (December 15, 1881):107.
[^9] Zina D. H. Young, Diary, April 1, 1845, LDS Archives. Hereafter cited as Diary.
[^10] Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), pp. 207-8.
[^11] Autobiography, p. 4.
[^12] David H. Jacobs, "Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs Smith Young," Church Education System Church History Symposium, Brigham Young University, August 19, 1977, p. 55.
[^13] "'Aunt Zina' D. Young Sought After as 'Angel of Mercy,'" Church News, November 30, 1963, p. 16.
[^14] History of Oliver Boardman Huntington, 1842-1900, typescript, LDS Archives, p. 27.
[^15] Mary Brown Firmage [Woodward], "Great-Grandmother Zina: A More Personal Portrait," Ensign, March 1984, p. 38.
[^16] Autobiography, p. 2.
[^17] Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, p. 213.
[^18] "Mother," The Young Woman's Journal 22 (January 1911): 45.
[^19] Oa Jacobs Cannon, "Zina Diantha Huntington Young," Relief Society Legacy Lecture, 1982.
[^20] Diary entry dated June 27, 1844, holograph, LDS Archives.
[^21] Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., "'All Things Move in Order in the City': The Nauvoo Diary of Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs," BYU Studies 19 (Spring 1979): 288.
[^22] Diary, typescript in possession of Mary Firmage Woodward, p. 1.
[^23] History of Zina D. H. Young, typescript in possession of Oa Jacobs Cannon, p. 2.
[^24] Diary, typescript, p. 3.
[^25] Susa Young Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association (Salt Lake City, 1911), p. 23.
[^26] Diary, typescript.
[^27] Ibid., p. 34.
[^28] This baby was the third in a mother-daughter chain of six Zinas: Zina Baker Huntington, Zina Diantha Huntington Young, Zina Presendia Young Williams Card, Zina Card Brown (wife of President Hugh B. Brown), Zina Lydia Brown, and Zina Elizabeth (Betty) Brown.
[^29] Emmeline B. Wells, "Zina D. H. Young-A Character Sketch," Improvement Era 5 (November 1, 1901): 45.
[^30] Claire Noall, Guardians of the Hearth: Utah's Pioneer Midwives and Women Doctors (Bountiful, Utah: Horizon Publishers, 1974), pp. 54-55.
[^31] Diary, typescript, p. 6.
[^32] Chris Rigby Arrington, "The Finest of Fabrics: Mormon Women and the Silk Industry in Early Utah," Utah Historical Quarterly 46 (Fall 1978): 378.
[^33] Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985), p. 199.
[^34] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, p. 21.
[^35] "Centennial of President Zina D. Huntington Young," Relief Society Magazine 8 (March 1921): 134.
[^36] Romania P. Pratt, "Woman's Suffrage Convention," Woman's Exponent 10 (March 1, 1882): 146.
[^37] Orson F. Whitney, "History of Utah," Utah Historical Quarterly 4 (October 1904): 577.
[^38] Wilford Woodruff, "Blessing of Zina D. H. Young," Salt Lake City, October 11, 1888, copy in possession of Mary Firmage Woodward.
[^39] Diary, July 25, 1879, holograph, LDS Archives.
[^40] "Centennial of President Zina D. Huntington Young," p. 131.
[^41] Young, "How I Gained My Testimony of the Truth," p. 319.
[^42] "Centennial of President Zina D. Huntington Young," p. 133.
[^43] "Aunt Zina D. H. Young," Young Woman's Journal 12 (October 1901): 473.
[^44] 44. Eliza R. Snow address, "Salt Lake Stake Relief Society Conference," September 15, 1887, Woman's Exponent 16 (October 1, 1887): 70.
[^45] 45. Sister Saints, p. 12.
[^46] 46. Kate B. Carter, History of the Relief Society (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1970), pp. 11-12.
[^47] 47. Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 12 (December 8, 1867): 115.
[^48] 48. Jill Mulvay Derr and Susan Oman, "The Nauvoo Generation," Ensign, December 1977, p. 38.
[^49] 49. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Eliza Roxey Snow's Way to Sainthood," Woman's Exponent II, Winter 1984, p. 12.
[^50] 50. "Speech by Eliza R. Snow," July 29, 1868, Woman's Exponent 19 (May 1, 1891): 167; also Ensign, December 1977, p. 38.
[^51] 51. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "U.S. Centennial," Church News, July 5, 1976, p. 16.
[^52] 52. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Eliza R. Snow," in Mormon Sisters, Claudia L. Bushman, ed. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Emmeline Press, 1976), p. 32.
[^53] 53. Clarissa Young Spencer, One Who Was Valiant (Caldwell, Idaho: Caxton Printers, 1940), p. 76; also Beecher, "Eliza R. Snow," in Mormon Sisters, pp. 28-29.
[^54] 54. Amy Brown Lyman, In Retrospect (Salt Lake City: General Board of the Relief Society, 1945), p. 38.
[^55] 55. Eliza R. Snow Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, Letters I-XV.
[^56] 56. Life and Labors of Eliza R. Snow (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1888), p. 21.
[^57] 57. Woman's Exponent II, Winter 1984, pp. 11-12.
[^58] 58. Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, frontispiece; also in Eliza R. Snow, Poems, Religious, Historical, and Political, pp. 147-48.
