Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

3

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina Diantha Huntington Young

Young, Zina D. H.PP1888 - 1901

"In my earliest reading of history, Confucius, Columbus, and William Wallace, I used to muse while watching the consuming back log in our old fashion fireplaces why I could not have been born in a day when something was going on in the nations of the Earth, not that I wished to see distress, but some enterprise." [^1]

Young, Zina D. H.PPSo wrote Zina Diantha Huntington, who, as the daughter of a prosperous New York farmer, enjoyed a comfortable childhood—although to her thinking an uneventful one.

Young, Zina D. H.PPUnbeknownst to Zina at the time, however, something was "going on," an "enterprise" in its beginning stages that would alter the course of her life, her family's, and that of the entire world. In 1820, one year prior to her birth, Joseph Smith had received the First Vision. The subsequent translation and publication of the Book of Mormon and the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1830 set in motion "the stone . . . cut out of the mountain" (Daniel 2:45), the restoration of the gospel—the enterprise she desired. Zina herself would assume a major role in the dramatic unfolding of the restored church as the third general president of the Relief Society and as a wife of the first two presidents of the Church.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina's mother, Zina Baker Huntington, seemed to have a presentiment of this great drama. She had written to her own mother, Dorcas Dimmock Baker, in 1817: "I think sometimes I am fitting for the approach of some great event, but hope I shall ever be prepared for all that awaits me, and ever feel reconciled to God's will and rejoice in his government." [^2]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina Huntington's ancestors participated in significant events in American history. Simon Huntington, an English Puritan, sailed for America in 1633 but died at sea, leaving a widow and three sons to join the Massachusetts colony. Samuel Huntington, Zina's great-uncle and a signer of the Declaration of Independence, was, according to family tradition, the source of the Uncle Sam symbol of the United States. As governor of Connecticut and president of the Continental Congress, Samuel was frequently consulted by the colonists for his expertise on a wide variety of subjects, and was known to many as "Uncle Sam." [^3] William Huntington, Zina's paternal grandfather, enlisted in the Revolutionary army and was one of the first settlers in the Black River Valley in northern New York. Zina's father, also named William, fought in the War of 1812.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina Diantha was born January 31, 1821, in Watertown, Jefferson County, New York, the seventh of nine children of William and Zina Baker Huntington. The first two children, Chauncey and Nancy, were twins; Nancy died as an infant. Another daughter, Adaline, also died in childhood. The other children were Dimmock, William, Oliver, John, and Presendia.

Young, Zina D. H.PPWilliam cleared three hundred acres of land for farming and built a comfortable story-and-a-half stone house in Watertown for his sizable family. Before morning prayers each day, the family read aloud a chapter from the Bible. After supper and evening chores, they often gathered around the fireplace and enjoyed folk tunes and hymns, with Father Huntington playing the bass viol; Zina, the cello; William, Jr., the cornet; and Dimmock, the drum.

Young, Zina D. H.PPWilliam and his family were strict Presbyterians until a controversy developed between the Presbyterians and the Congregationalists over the method of appointing the clergy. The Presbyterians believed that clergymen should be chosen and appointed by the clergymen themselves, while the Congregationalists believed that the clergy should be chosen by the people. William Huntington decided to join the sect that followed the proper form of worship, and to determine this, he studied his Bible to see what it said.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina later recalled her impressions of her father's quest: "I can remember my father sitting quietly perusing the Bible, determined to find the right way, his firm lips closed with the determination to succeed if success was possible. After many hours of study and reading, aided no doubt with hours of anxious prayer, father one day declared that none of the churches were right according to the way he read the Bible, for none of them had the organization peculiar to the primitive church. There were no prophets, no apostles, no spiritual gifts as were possessed by the ancient saints. Nothing could shake him from this belief, and the more he thought and conversed upon the matter, the plainer and simpler it seemed to be presented to his understanding." [^4]

Young, Zina D. H.PPA "New and Golden Bible"

Young, Zina D. H.PPAt that time a rumor began circulating that a prophet in a "distant country" had found a "new and golden Bible." That "distant country" was actually not far off, Watertown being only a hundred miles from the Hill Cumorah. William Huntington had spent many hours discussing religion with a neighbor, Joseph Wakefield. Both were anxious to meet this so-called prophet, and they decided that one of them should go. Joseph seemed the best candidate because as a cooper, or barrelmaker, he was not working in the winter, while William, a farmer, had animals to feed. Joseph Wakefield left at once. He met Joseph Smith, gained a testimony of the truthfulness of the restored gospel, and returned with a copy of the Book of Mormon and a heart full of zeal for this new book of scripture.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina recorded that she knew of the divinity of the Book of Mormon even before she read it: "One day on my return from school I saw the Book of Mormon, that strange, new book, lying on the window sill of our sitting-room. I went up to the window, picked it up, and the sweet influence of the Holy Spirit accompanied it to such an extent that I pressed it to my bosom in a rapture of delight, murmuring as I did so, 'This is the truth, truth, truth!'" [^5]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina's parents were baptized in April 1835, but she did not join the Church until August, when Hyrum Smith and David Whitmer visited the Huntington home. One morning at prayers, she felt the time had come for her baptism. "I had presented to me a heavenly vision of a man going down into the water and baptizing someone," she wrote. "So when this message came I felt it was a testimony that the time had come for me to receive baptism." [^6] She was baptized by Hyrum Smith that very day, August 1, 1835, along with her brother Dimmock and his wife, Fanny. Zina was fourteen years old.

Young, Zina D. H.PP"Soon after this," she wrote, "the gift of tongues rested upon me with overwhelming force. I was somewhat alarmed at this strange manifestation, and so checked its utterance. What was my alarm, however, to discover that upon this action upon my part, the gift left me entirely, and I felt that I had offended that Holy Spirit by whose influence I had been so richly blessed.

Young, Zina D. H.PP"I suffered a great deal in my feelings over this matter, and one day while mother and I were spinning together, I took courage and told her of the gift I had once possessed, and how, by checking it I had lost it entirely.

Young, Zina D. H.PP"I walked down to a little spring in one of the meadows, and as I walked along I mused on my blessing and how I had turned away the Spirit of God. When I reached the spring, I knelt down and offered up a prayer to God and told Him if He could forgive my transgression, and give me back the lost gift, I would promise never to check it again, no matter where or when I felt its promptings.

Young, Zina D. H.PP"I have kept this vow, but it has been a heavy cross at times, for I know that this gift is the least of all gifts, and it is oftentimes misunderstood and even treated lightly by those who should know better. Yet it is a gift of God." [^7]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina used this gift throughout her life, often in company with Eliza R. Snow, whose speaking in tongues Zina interpreted. The Woman's Exponent described Zina as having "as perfect a gift of interpretation of tongues as any person in the Church, for although her opportunities for education in language have been limited, and she is not a poet or rhymer, yet she gives the interpretation of hymns, psalms and sacred songs in the most musical and happy manner, without thought or hesitation. There is something divinely beautiful in thus rendering, by the gift of inspiration, words uttered in an unknown tongue." [^8] Zina mentioned in her own diary several occasions when she used the gift. One of her diary entries, dated April 1, 1845, reads: "Went to Brother Brewer's to see Mother Brewer, the first time I have been there. Father Huntington came in the evening. He spake in tongues. Henry also sung in tongues. It was very good. I interpreted the talk by the help of the spirit of God. Had an agreeable visit." [^9]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina was blessed with other spiritual gifts as well. Her patriarchal blessing promised her, for example, that she would witness the ministering of angels and on one occasion in the Kirtland Temple, she and her sister, Presendia, heard angelic singing. Presendia related: "The whole of the congregation were on their knees, praying vocally, for such was the custom at the close of these meetings. . . . While the congregation was thus praying, we both heard, from one corner of the room above our heads, a choir of angels singing most beautifully. They were invisible to us, but myriads of angelic voices seemed to be united in singing some song of Zion, and their sweet harmony filled the temple of God." [^10]

Young, Zina D. H.PPJoining the Saints

Young, Zina D. H.PPThe Huntington family moved to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1836 at the advice of Joseph Smith, Sr., who visited Watertown that spring. Chauncey, the eldest son, did not convert to Mormonism, however, and remained in New York.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina described her first meeting of the Prophet Joseph at Kirtland: "On the 10 [November 1836], I saw the Prophet's face for the first time. He was 6 feet, light auburn hair and a heavy nose, blue eyes. . . . When he was filled with the spirit of revelation or inspiration to talk to the saints his countenance would look clear & bright. . . . When warning the saints of approaching danger if we forsook the path of truth & right . . . it was truly affecting and any one that ever heard, I should think, could never forget." [^11]

Young, Zina D. H.PPAt Kirtland also, Zina met Eliza R. Snow, a woman seventeen years her senior, but one to whom Zina would be a very close friend and an associate in many facets of their lives. Some compared their friendship to that of Jonathan and David. [^12]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina encountered other "friends" in Kirtland. Joseph Smith had purchased four Egyptian mummies, together with hieroglyphic texts that were eventually translated into the Book of Abraham; and on one occasion when anti-Mormon sentiment posed a threat, the mummies were removed from the temple and stored in the Huntington home—under Zina's bed. One evening as she entered her room, she discovered the hidden artifacts. But sleeping in the same room with four dead bodies did not seem to alarm her, for she reportedly undressed and went to bed as usual. [^13]

Young, Zina D. H.PPTheir eighteen months in Kirtland was a joyful time for the Huntingtons, but they also met with financial reverses in the events that preceded the exodus of the Church from Ohio. William had sold his farm willingly, though at a great loss, to make the move from Watertown. The family's clothing and household goods, shipped by steamer, never arrived in Kirtland, leaving them with only the few items they carried with them. William then invested his cash funds in the Kirtland bank, which failed within a short time. Zina's brother Oliver good-naturedly recounted, "When the bank went broke we were broken and as poor as the best of the Mormons; well, we expected to become poor but not quite so quick." [^14] According to Zina, "We were as bare as a sheared sheep." [^15]

Young, Zina D. H.PPThe Huntingtons joined the Saints' migration to Far West, Missouri, arriving at the height of mob persecutions. Zina, who was seventeen at the time, wrote of the move, "God in his providence saw it best for us to remove to Missouri in the spring of 1838. We were with the saints moving with oxteams almost 1000 miles. We were 8 weeks and 3 days on the road, 4 families a pleasant company. The prairie with its sea of flowers, its waving grass was lovely—much more enjoyable than when a wind would strike us in the night with the elements all at war. The rain [fell] in torrents and we had to sit and hold the covers on our wagons or be left without. I need not mention our condition in the morning." [^16] Six weeks later they moved on to Adam-ondi-Ahman.

Young, Zina D. H.PPWith the expulsion of the Saints from Missouri a year later, the Huntington family was forced to move again. During their move to Commerce, Illinois (later to be named Nauvoo the Beautiful), the entire family—which at that time included Zina, her parents, and her brothers Oliver and John—became ill with cholera. Joseph and Emma Smith took the family into their home to nurse them. But the cholera, combined with the hardships of the Missouri persecutions and the lack of adequate food and shelter, took their toll on Zina's beloved mother. Knowing she would not live, she called Zina to her bedside. "Zina," she said, "my time has come to die. You will live many years; but O, how lonesome father will be. I am not afraid to die. All I dread is the mortal suffering. I shall come forth triumphant when the Saviour comes with the just to meet the saints on the earth." [^17] She died July 8, 1839. Only two members of the family were well enough to attend her funeral.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina deeply mourned her mother's death, becoming almost inconsolable. But while she was still grieving months later, her mother's words came into her mind one evening, "Zina, any sailor can steer on a smooth sea. When rocks appear, sail around them." Zina, who described this experience many years later, reported that she was consoled and prayed, "O Father in heaven, help me to be a good sailor, that my heart shall not break on the rocks of grief." [^18]

Young, Zina D. H.PPIn Nauvoo, Zina's life changed dramatically. On March 7, 1841, at age twenty, she married Henry Bailey Jacobs. Like Zina, Henry was born in Jefferson County, New York; he joined the Church in 1832, three years before the Huntingtons were baptized. During the five years he and Zina spent in Nauvoo, Henry served five missions. Their first son, Zebulon William, was born January 2, 1842

Young, Zina D. H.PPOn June 27, 1844, Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum were murdered by a mob at the Carthage Jail. Zina, who in 1841 had been sealed to the Prophet Joseph for eternity, was deeply shocked. "My pen cannot utter my grief nor describe my horror," she wrote in her diary. Nevertheless, "after a while a change came to us to comfort us in the hour of dreadful bereavement. Never can it be told in words what the Saints suffered in our days of trials, but the sweet spirit of the Comforter did not forsake us." [^19]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina's diary entry the day of the martyrdom indicates her understanding of the purpose of her sealing to Joseph, for she refers to him as the one who "g[a]ve me a seat in thy Celestial Kingdom." [^20] When the Nauvoo Temple was completed, both Henry and Zina received their endowments; then Zina's sealing to Joseph was "confirmed by proxy" as Henry "stood approving." [^21]

Young, Zina D. H.PPLeaving Their Homes

Young, Zina D. H.PPIn February 1846, eighteen months after the martyrdom, Zina recorded in her diary: "9th Feb. We were informed that we were to leave with the first company as the saints were obliged to leave the State. . . . Clear and cold we left our house all we possessed in a wagon left many things standing in our house unsold for most of our neighbors were as ourselves on the wing. Shall I ever forget standing on Major Russells porch and seeing Tomas Grovers wagon sink on a sandbar, the Brethren taking the little ones from the wagon cover the bows just peeped above the water at the same time the bells were ringing the Temple was on fire and we leaving our homes for the wilderness trusting God like Abraham. . . . After we had crossed the river I sent back . . . to get a little more thread and a few needles not knowing when we should again have the opportunity. . . .

Young, Zina D. H.PP"Camped on Sugar Creek and here we found many dear ones some comfortably fixed up for a long journey and others too sad to relate were it not that we knew it to be the work of God we are engaged in and he would bring us off victorious through all our hardships and toils." [^22]

Young, Zina D. H.PPJust a few weeks later, on March 22, Zina gave birth to another son. He was named Henry, after his father, and Chariton, after river beside which he was born, Zina noted the event in her diary:

Young, Zina D. H.PP"We reached the Chariton River between 3 and 4 weeks after leaving Nauvoo. I had been told in the Temple that I should acknowledge God even in a miracle in my deliverance in woman's hour of trouble, which hour had now come. We had traveled one [morning] about 5 miles, when I called for a halt in our march. There was but one person with me—Mother Lyman. There on the bank of the Chariton River, I was delivered of a fine son. Occasionally the wagon had to be stopped that I might take breath. Thus I journeyed on. But I did not mind the hardship of my situation, for my life had been preserved, and my babe was so beautiful." [^23]

Young, Zina D. H.PPThe family went on to Mount Pisgah, Iowa, which served as one of a number of temporary camps on the route westward. Zina's father, William Huntington, who had by then remarried, presided over this camp. Zina described their conditions: "Sickness was so prevalent, and deaths so frequent, that help enough could not be obtained to make coffins, and many of the dead were wrapped in their grave clothes and buried with split logs at the bottom of the grave and brush at the sides that being all that could be done for them by their mourning friends. Too soon it became my turn to mourn. My father was taken sick, and in eighteen days he died. Like my dear mother, who died in the expulsion from Missouri, he died in the expulsion from Nauvoo. Sad was my heart. I alone of all his children was there to mourn. It was a sad day at Mount Pisgah, when my father was buried. The poor and needy had lost a friend—the kingdom of God a faithful servant. There upon the hillside was his resting place. The graveyard was so near that I could hear the wolves howling as they visited the spot; those hungry monsters, who fain would have unsepulchred those sacred bones!" [^24]

Young, Zina D. H.PPHenry and Zina did not remain together as husband and wife. After Chariton's birth, Henry left on a mission to England, and he later settled in California. He remained interested in and concerned about his sons, and occasionally corresponded with Zina. Before she left Nauvoo, Zina had been sealed for time to Brigham Young, and she and her two little sons and her brother Oliver now joined the Young family in the migration first to Winter Quarters and then to Utah in 1848. Zina helped drive the team. Cooking over a campfire, she was apparently "an expert breadmaker, and her salt-rising would come up when all the others were dead and cold." [^25]

Young, Zina D. H.PPArriving at last at the valley of the Great Salt Lake, Zina wrote her impressions, which expressed both relief and dismay: "One log house outside the old fort as it was called, the only sign of civilization. There is no words to describe our feeling. This our future home, to live, raise families and die, as we used to say, 1000 miles from anywhere. I had more to cheer me than many. My only sister Presendia Kimball was with me. My dear Brother Dimick & family that had been in the [Mormon] Battalion had returned." [^26]

Young, Zina D. H.PPOliver converted Zina's wagon box into a home in the Old Fort until log cabins were erected a few months later for Brigham Young's wives. Within a few weeks after arrival in the valley, Zina, seeing children running around with nothing to occupy them, started a school. "This was pleasant to me," she wrote, "and we had 45 scholars." [^27] She taught her students more than "book learning"; she also tried to instill in them high values and a desire for improved living.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina's only daughter, Zina Presendia Young, was born April 3, 1850, in Salt Lake City in the log home. [^28] When the Lion House was completed in 1856, Zina and her children occupied two rooms at the rear of the house. She also raised four other children—Maria, Willard, Mary, and Phoebe—whose mother, Clarissa Ross Young, died in 1858. Although as a young woman Zina had vowed she could never become a stepmother, she lovingly considered these children her own.

Young, Zina D. H.PP"Angel of Mercy"

Young, Zina D. H.PPIn the 1850s, at Brigham Young's suggestion, Zina took a course in obstetrics from a doctor who was visiting in the territory. She subsequently helped deliver the babies of President Young's wives and many other women, a service for which she was not usually paid. "Aunt Zina," as she was affectionately called, combined her medical skills with her great faith. A close friend, Emmeline B. Wells, said of her, "Numberless instances might be cited of her ministrations among the sick, when she seemed to be inspired by some higher power than her own . . . when courage and faith had failed in those around the sick-bed. At such times she seemed an angel of mercy in very deed." [^29]

Young, Zina D. H.PPChariton's wife, Emma, owed not only her own life but also that of her baby to Zina. While in the Salt Lake Temple, Zina heard Emma cry, "Mother, I need you." She left immediately for Ogden, some forty miles north of Salt Lake, where Emma was in labor and under the care of another midwife. Neither the midwife nor Zina was able to deliver the baby, so Zina insisted that Chariton go for a doctor. When the baby, a girl, was finally delivered, she appeared lifeless. Zina and the midwife breathed life into the baby, who at last began to cry, while the doctor concentrated on saving Emma. [^30]

Young, Zina D. H.PPOne of Zina's favorite home remedies was an ointment used for treating "caked breasts, strains, lame backs, and rheumatism." She recorded the recipe in her journal:

Young, Zina D. H.PP"Good sized live Toads 4[;] put in boiling water—cook very soft[;] take them out[;] boil the water down to 1/2 pint and add 1 lb fresh butter[;] simmer[;] add 2 oz. tincture arnica."

Young, Zina D. H.PPHer treatment for fever sores called for anointing the sore with skunk oil. [^31]

Young, Zina D. H.PPWith her brief medical education, Zina realized that home remedies and midwives were not adequate to meet the medical needs of the growing population of the area. She was therefore instrumental in establishing the Deseret Hospital, serving on its board of directors for many years. She also started a nursing school and for a time headed a school of obstetrics.

Young, Zina D. H.PPAnother critical need of the pioneers was fabric. Although the women carefully patched and mended their clothing, the production of new textiles was urgent. Wool was available, and a woolen mill was built as early as 1852. Also during the 1850s, Church leaders sent groups to Southern Utah to establish the Cotton Mission, but it would be ten years before a successful cotton crop was grown.

Young, Zina D. H.PPSericulture, the production of raw silk by raising silkworms, appeared to be a promising solution, not only for supplying local needs, but also for producing income through export. Joseph Smith once said that "the time would come when the people would come to Zion to buy the finest of fabrics." [^32] Silk seemed to fit that description. Because of the popularity of sericulture in the Northeastern United States as well as in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois during the 1830s and 1840s, many Saints had been exposed to it. A few experienced silkworm raisers brought mulberry seeds to the Salt Lake Valley, and one woman grew silkworms from eggs her husband brought her from England. But sericulture did not get a serious start in the territory until Brigham Young promoted it as a home industry. He charged Zina with the responsibility of establishing silk culture in the early 1870s, and the Deseret Silk Association was formally organized June 15, 1876, with Zina as president.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina's first cocoonery occupied an adobe building at the back of Brigham Young's Forest Dale Farm residence, but after several batches of eggs failed to hatch, perhaps due to the dampness of the building, the cocoonery was moved to a larger brick building. Zina and others of Brigham's family raised sixty-four ounces of silkworm eggs and several pounds of cocoons during the first six weeks of operation, indicating that sericulture was suited to the climate and soil of Utah. Wagonloads of rooted mulberry trees and silkworm eggs were then distributed all over the territory along with a printed pamphlet, Instructions to Silk Growers. Zina supervised the silk industry, often traveling from Logan in the north to St. George in the south to encourage and advise the growers.

Young, Zina D. H.PPSilkworms were particularly abhorrent to Zina—in her words, a "terror." (Ironically, she had a worm-shaped birthmark on the palm of her hand.) She was plagued with nightmares of feeding the worms, but stalwartly and silently she endured, fed millions of them herself, and watched the silk industry enjoy a quarter-century of success in its primary goal of providing fine fabric, although its secondary goal of providing income was never met.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina had not attended the organizational meeting of the Relief Society in Nauvoo on March 17, 1842, but she was voted in as a member at the second meeting. When Brigham Young reorganized the Relief Society in Salt Lake City in 1866, she was chosen as treasurer.

Young, Zina D. H.PPOn August 29, 1877, Brigham Young, Zina's third husband and president of the Church, died in Salt Lake City. Brigham and Zina's daughter, Zina, who was at his bedside along with several wives and children, recorded his passing: "When he was placed upon the bed in front of the window, and opening his eyes, he gazed upward, exclaiming: 'Joseph! Joseph! Joseph!,' and the divine look in his face seemed to indicate that he was communicating with his beloved friend, Joseph Smith, the Prophet. This name was the last word he uttered." [^33] Following his funeral in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, Zina, her daughter, her stepchildren, the other wives, and four thousand of the Saints formed a cortÃ¨ge to the burial in his private cemetery two blocks away.

Young, Zina D. H.PPThe "Heart" of Relief Society

Young, Zina D. H.PPWhen the general organization of the Relief Society, encompassing all the local Relief Societies, was formed in 1880, Eliza R. Snow, the president, selected Zina as her first counselor. Author Susa Young Gates wrote: "Some spoke of the two as the head and heart of the women's work in Utah. Sister Snow was keenly intellectual, and she led by force of that intelligence. Sister Zina was all love and sympathy, and drew people after her by reason of that tenderness," [^34]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina and Eliza traveled thousands of miles by wagon and carriage to Relief Societies throughout the territory; their visits were the main line of communication between Church headquarters and the sisters in outlying areas. Frequently on such trips, the two elderly ladies would have to make an unscheduled stop to repair a wagon wheel or fix a broken buggy tongue. When they were unable to make enough mileage between settlements before nightfall, they camped out under the stars.

Young, Zina D. H.PPThe Relief Society presidency organized and directed not only the Relief Society but also the Young Ladies' Retrenchment Society and the Primary Association. (Later three separate presidencies and boards were organized.) The Relief Society Magazine reported that Zina and Eliza would frequently hold two to four meetings a day, "organizing branches of the Retrenchment, or Mutual Improvement Associations, meeting with the Relief Societies, 'preaching up' silk, or the loyal support of home industry; securing subscribers to the Woman's Exponent; urging women and the girls to study well their responsibilities, as mothers, wives and daughters. Then, one meeting dismissed, the same audience would assemble while these two orators and organizers would call a session of the Suffrage Society, or perhaps, a meeting of the children's Primary Association." [^35]

Young, Zina D. H.PPIn the winter of 1881-82, the First Presidency had sent Zina and Ellen Ferguson, a doctor, to New York to advocate women's suffrage and to dispel misinformation about Mormonism. There they met Harriet Beecher Stowe, Susan B. Anthony, and other suffrage leaders and were invited to the Woman's Congress in Buffalo. Both Zina and Ellen were asked to speak to the convention, but when their identity as Mormons was discovered, they were dropped from the program. Ironically, they were the only two women at the meeting who had the right to vote, yet they were denied the opportunity to speak on women's voting rights because of polygamy.

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina and her daughter, Zina Y. Williams Card, had also attended the National Suffrage Association Convention in New York in 1882. Romania P. Pratt, in The Woman's Exponent, reported an encounter Zina had with another woman at the convention. The woman approached Zina, who was dressed in a sealskin sacque and velvet robe. "I believe you are Mrs. Young," she said. Zina replied, "I am." The woman scrutinized Zina from head to toe, stepped back, and with "supreme surprise" declared, "Why you do not look very degraded!" [^36]

Young, Zina D. H.PPUpon the death of Eliza R. Snow in 1888, Zina, now sixty-seven years of age, was called to be the third general president of the Relief Society. She chose Bathsheba W. Smith as first counselor, Jane S. Richards as second counselor, and Sarah M. Kimball as secretary. Emmeline B. Wells served as corresponding secretary. (Both Bathsheba W. Smith and Emmeline B. Wells would later occupy the position of general president.)

Young, Zina D. H.PPAs a young girl, Zina was prepared by her mother for her role in Relief Society. Orson F. Whitney, in his History of Utah, wrote: "Zina Baker Huntington was a 'voluntary relief society in herself.' At Kirtland it was her custom, without direction or prompting from any one, to take her daughter Zina in her buggy and hunt out the distressed and needy in and about that place. Whatever was found necessary beyond her own means to supply, they would travel among the people, in and out of the Church, and secure. Thus early was 'Little Zina' inducted into the spirit and mission of the Relief Society, although it then had no existence." [^37]

Young, Zina D. H.PPWhen President Wilford Woodruff set Zina apart as the president of the Relief Society, he blessed her that she would continue to have her heart "drawn out towards . . . [the] sisters" and that she would "do much good and relieve the suffering of those who are sick and afflicted." [^38] Serving as general president enabled Zina to broaden her sphere of service. She continued visiting Relief Societies in the widely spread Mormon settlements in the West, encouraging local units to establish nursing classes and to improve medical care. Before Utah gained statehood in 1896, she also campaigned for the restoration of women's voting rights. (The Edmunds-Tucker Act of 1887 had rescinded the voting privileges granted to women by the territorial legislature.)

Young, Zina D. H.PPAt the Chicago World's Fair held in 1893, Zina, at age seventy-two, represented the women of the Territory of Utah and sat on the platform with other territory and state representatives. When Utah became a state in 1896, it was the second state, following Wyoming, to give women suffrage.

Young, Zina D. H.PPDuring Zina's administration, the Relief Society also became a charter member of the National Council of Women. Zina, who was elected as one of the vice presidents of the council, attended a number of its conferences.

Young, Zina D. H.PPAs the Church became too large for the general leaders of Relief Society to continue giving personal instructions to local units, representatives from each stake were invited to attend the first general conference of the Relief Society. Zina presided at this meeting, held in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square April 6, 1889.

Young, Zina D. H.PPDuring Zina's years of service in Relief Society, the program began to spread beyond the intermountain area. She traveled as far as New York, Canada, and Hawaii to encourage and to instruct sisters in their duties. In New York she visited relatives in Watertown. Of her trip to the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) in 1879 she wrote: "Friday met with the relief society. They brought gifts for Susa [Young Gates] and I, vegetables of all kinds as much as a wheel barrow load. . . . I thought it was a donation for the poor but they ware [were] tokens of friendship for us." [^39] As her gift to the islanders, Zina obtained an organ for their church meetings.

Young, Zina D. H.PPFriendliness was as natural as breathing to Zina. She loved people and they loved her. She addressed letters to her family, "My dear sister Presendia," "My loving son Zebulon," and "My precious son Chariton"—often adding, "Give my love to those dear, dear children." When she stayed at the homes of Relief Society leaders, their families felt she was their "Aunt Zina." Many baby girls were named Zina out of regard for her. On one occasion when Zina was told that a certain woman did not like her, she replied, "Well, I love her, and she can't help herself." [^40]

Young, Zina D. H.PPZina was an effective and powerful speaker, yet one who motivated people through love rather than exhortation. She bore strong testimony to the divinity of the work in which she was engaged. "From the day I received the sweet testimony of the Spirit, when grasping the precious Book of Mormon in my hands to my breast, I have never doubted nor faltered in my faith," she said. "I know this is the Church and Kingdom of God, and I rejoice in putting my testimony before the daughters of Zion, that their faith may be strengthened, and that the good work may roll on. Seek for a testimony, as you would, my dear sisters, for a diamond concealed. If someone told you by digging long enough in a certain spot you would find a diamond of unmeasured wealth, do you think you would begrudge time or strength, or means spent to obtain that treasure? Then I will tell you that if you will dig in the depths of your own hearts you will find, with the aid of the Spirit of the Lord, the pearl of great price, the testimony of the truth of this work." [^41]

Young, Zina D. H.PPWhen the Salt Lake Temple was dedicated in 1893, the First Presidency called Zina to be president of the sisters' department, or temple matron. She fulfilled that assignment, in addition to her duties as general Relief Society president, until her death. While visiting her daughter in Cardston, Alberta, Canada, Zina suffered a stroke on August 22, 1901, and never regained consciousness. She died August 28, 1901, in Salt Lake City, having served as Relief Society president for thirteen years.

Young, Zina D. H.PPThough she went through many years of hardship in her adult life, Zina Diantha Huntington Young never looked back on the comfortable life she had led before missionaries brought the message of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ to her as a young girl. For sixty-six years she was one of the leading figures in the Church—as a wife of Joseph Smith and then Brigham Young, as mother to seven children, as general Relief Society president, and as a close friend of many prominent women in the Church, including Eliza R. Snow, Emmeline B, Wells, and Bathsheba W. Smith.

Young, Zina D. H.PPWhatever her roles, "Aunt Zina" was beloved by all who knew her, for "in her tongue was the law of kindness." (Proverbs 31:26.) The Relief Society Magazine said of her: "She was thus for [thirteen] years, elect lady of the Church and no more beautiful soul ever occupied that exalted position." [^42] At Zina's funeral, Emmeline B. Wells said of her, "No woman was ever greater loved than she," and Elder Anthon H. Lund of the Council of the Twelve added, "She was 'Aunt' Zina to all Israel." [^43] Fittingly inscribed on her gravestone is the Relief Society motto, "Charity never faileth."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Family Group Sheet of Mark Bigler, Family History Library.
[^2] Bathsheba W. Smith, Autobiography, typescript, LDS Archives, p. 2. Hereafter cited as Autobiography.
[^3] George Albert Smith, Journal, July 25, 1841, LDS Archives.
[^4] Autobiography, p. 2.
[^5] Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] Ibid., p. 3.
[^7] Ibid., p. 5.
[^8] George Albert Smith, Journal, August 25, 1841, LDS Archives.
[^9] Autobiography, p. 6.
[^10] Bathsheba W. Smith to George A. Smith, February 14, 1851, holograph, George A. Smith Collection, LDS Archives.
[^11] Autobiography, p. 12.
[^12] Susa Young Gates, ed., History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association (Salt Lake City, 1911), p. 26.
[^13] Julia P. M. Farnsworth, "A Tribute to Bathsheba W. Smith," Young Woman's Journal 21 (November 1910): 608.
[^14] Autobiography, p. 7.
[^15] Preston Nibley, "She Knew the Prophet Joseph Smith: Part III-Bathsheba W. Smith," Relief Society Magazine 49 (June 1962): 410-11.
[^16] Bathsheba W. Smith to George A. Smith, July 6, 1844, holograph, George A. Smith Collection, LDS Archives.
[^17] Autobiography, p. 9.
[^18] Ibid., p. 9.
[^19] Ibid., p. 9.
[^20] Richard S. Van Wagoner and Steven C. Walker, A Book of Mormons (Salt Lake City, 1982), p. 271.
[^21] Autobiography, pp. 10-11.
[^22] Bathsheba W. Smith to George A. Smith, June 7, 1846, George A. Smith Collection, LDS Archives.
[^23] Autobiography, p. 15; also Edward W. Tullidge, Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), pp. 342-43.
[^24] Mary Isabella Horne, "Migration and Settlement of the Latter-day Saints," dictated memoir, microfilm of holograph, LDS Archives.
[^25] George A. Smith, Journal, March 1851, LDS Archives; also Church News, May 24, 1975, p. 16.
[^26] Bathsheba W. Smith to George A. Smith, April 13, 1851, holograph, George A. Smith Collection, LDS Archives.
[^27] Bathsheba W. Smith to George A. Smith, June 12, 1851, and July 12, 1851, holograph, George A. Smith Collection, LDS Archives.
[^28] Bathsheba W. Smith to George A. Smith, August 1851, holograph, George A. Smith Collection, LDS Archives.
[^29] Autobiography, pp. 29-30.
[^30] Ibid., pp. 23-24.
[^31] Julia P. M. Farnsworth, "A Tribute to Bathsheba W. Smith," Young Woman's Journal 21 (November 1910): 609.
[^32] Autobiography, p. 24.
[^33] Ibid., pp. 31-32.
[^34] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, pp. 26-28.
[^35] "Past Three Score Years and Ten," Young Woman's Journal, 12 (October 1901): 440; also Carol Lynn Pearson, Daughters of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), p. 45.
[^36] Romania P. Pratt, "Woman's Suffrage Convention," Woman's Exponent 10 (March 1, 1882): 146.
[^37] Orson F. Whitney, "History of Utah," Utah Historical Quarterly 4 (October 1904): 577.
[^38] Wilford Woodruff, "Blessing of Zina D. H. Young," Salt Lake City, October 11, 1888, copy in possession of Mary Firmage Woodward.
[^39] Diary, July 25, 1879, holograph, LDS Archives.
[^40] "Centennial of President Zina D. Huntington Young," p. 131.
[^41] Young, "How I Gained My Testimony of the Truth," p. 319.
[^42] "Centennial of President Zina D. Huntington Young," p. 133.
[^43] "Aunt Zina D. H. Young," Young Woman's Journal 12 (October 1901): 473.
