Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

4

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBathsheba W. Smith

Smith, Bathsheba B.PP1901 - 1910

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPOn a cold February morning in 1846, Bathsheba Smith watered her potted flowers for the last time and moved them out of the draft. She looked around the room. Only a few months before, she and her sister Melissa had spent happy afternoons there sewing curtains and making flower pots for their homes. But more recently, as part of the Saints' preparation to leave Nauvoo, Bathsheba had willingly cleared her parlor of its furniture and heirlooms so it could be used as a paint shop for the wagons. And now, pregnant with her third child, she was getting ready to leave Nauvoo with her husband, George A. Smith; their four-year-old son, George A., Jr., and their two-year-old daughter, Bathsheba. With hundreds of other families, they crossed the frozen Mississippi River that day, leaving their homes and many of their possessions behind. Their destination was a temporary refuge called Winter Quarters.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPThe exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo, Illinois, was just one of many instances in which Bathsheba gave up her home because of her testimony of the gospel, a pattern of sacrifice that characterized the eighty-eight years of her life. Her strongest talents lay in her abilities at the loom and with the needle; her strongest character traits lay in her devotion to husband and family and her diligence in lovingly arranging her surroundings to match the love she felt for them.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBathsheba had the privilege of witnessing many remarkable events in the early history of the Church, as well as enduring the day-by-day trials weathered by the majority of the early Saints. For example, in the fall of 1838, the company she was traveling with to Far West, Missouri, met up with the group of Saints who were massacred the next day by a mob at Haun's Mill. Their company narrowly escaped being part of the massacre themselves.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPNot long after Bathsheba's arrival at Far West, a battle occurred at nearby Crooked River, and David W. Patten, one of the Twelve Apostles, was wounded. He was brought to the house where her family had stopped. She witnessed his death a few days later.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPAt age eighteen, in Nauvoo, Bathsheba earned the distinction of being the youngest woman present at the organization of the Relief Society in 1842. She also attended the laying of the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple. In Nauvoo, too, Bathsheba and her husband, George A. Smith, were among the first to receive their temple endowments and to be taught the principle of plural marriage by the Prophet Joseph Smith. After Joseph's martyrdom, Bathsheba was a witness when the mantle of the presidency fell upon Brigham Young. Having experienced these and so many other landmark events in Church history, she lived, appropriately enough, in the Historian's Office after the Church moved west to Utah. Her husband was Church historian.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPJoys and Persecutions

Bathsheba's conversion to the gospel was the pivotal point between the stability of her refined Southern childhood and the sacrifices required of her as a Latter-day Saint. Born May 3, 1822, near Shinnston, West Virginia, she was the eighth of nine children of Mark and Susannah Ogden Bigler: Matilda, Hannah (who died shortly after birth), Nancy, Jacob, Jonathan (stillborn), Maria, Sarah, Bathsheba, and Melissa. [^1] A cheerful child, Bathsheba loved to spin, weave, and embroider with her mother and to go horseback riding with her father over their 300-acre plantation. There were occasional opportunities for schooling, too, when her father and neighboring landowners hired a teacher to teach a few months out of the year in a vacant house on the Bigler farm. As a young girl, she and a girlfriend traded names as a symbol of their friendship, and throughout her life Bathsheba kept her childhood commitment and used her friend's surname, Wilson, or the initial W in place of her own maiden name. Religiously inclined, Bathsheba was careful to say her "secret prayers," as she called them. When Mormon missionaries knocked on the Biglers' door, they found Bathsheba and her entire family spiritually ready for the message of the restored gospel. Bathsheba wrote of her conversion:

Smith, Bathsheba B.PP"When I was in my sixteenth year, some Latter-day Saint Elders visited our neighborhood. I heard them preach and believed what they taught. I believed the Book of Mormon to be a divine record, and that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God. I knew by the spirit of the Lord which I received in answer to prayer, that these things were true. On the 21st of August 1837, I was baptized into the church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints. . . . The Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I knew that He accepted of me as a member in His kingdom." [^2] One of those missionaries was George A. Smith, a son of John Smith, the Prophet's uncle who would later serve as patriarch to the Church. The missionaries converted and baptized Bathsheba's entire immediate family and her uncle and his family.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBathsheba and George also were attracted to each other. Six months after her baptism they mutually agreed that "with the blessings of the Almighty in preserving us, in three years from this time, we will be married." [^3] Soon after this, George was called on a mission to England.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPWhen the Biglers were ridiculed and harshly criticized by neighbors for joining the Church, they decided to leave their home in West Virginia and join the Saints in Far West, Missouri. Bathsheba's married sister Nancy and her family planned to leave immediately, and Bathsheba was disappointed that she couldn't go with them. While pondering this disappointment, she heard a voice say, "Weep not. You will go this fall." The next morning her sister Sarah noticed a change in Bathsheba's attitude and said, "You have got over feeling badly about not going to Zion this fall, have you?" Bathsheba quietly but firmly replied, "I am going, you will see." [^4]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPShe was right. In the fall of 1837, Bathsheba and the rest of the Bigler family left for Far West. She wrote of the experience in her autobiography: "On our journey the young folk of our party had much enjoyment. It seemed so novel and romantic to travel in wagons over hill and dale, through dense forests and over extensive prairies, and occasionally passing through towns and cities sometimes traveling on macadamized roads and camping in tents at night." [^5]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPThough the journey seemed exciting to young Bathsheba, the Biglers soon found that the closer they got to their destination, the more hostile the Missourians were. Bands of men frequently stopped them and gathered around their wagons asking who they were, where they were from, and where they were going. Bathsheba reported, "Their consultation would result generally in a statement to the effect of, 'as you are Virginians we will let you go on, but we believe you soon will return for you will quickly become convinced of your folly.'" [^6]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBut Bathsheba and her family never thought of the new life they had chosen as folly, and such experiences only strengthened her conviction of the truthfulness of the gospel. She said, "In these distressing times, the spirit of the Lord was with us to comfort and sustain us, and we had a sure testimony that we were being persecuted for the Gospel's sake, and that the Lord was angry with none save those who acknowledge not his hand in all things." [^7]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPThe Biglers stayed only a short time in Missouri because of intense persecution against the members of the Church. In February 1839, in cold winter weather, they again left their home and farm behind and departed with thousands of other Saints for Illinois. Bathsheba gave up her seat on the wagon to those who were sick and walked most of the way. Despite the cold, illnesses, and death, she reported that at night the exiled Saints gathered around the campfire and sang the songs of Zion, trusting in the Lord that "all would yet be well." Bathsheba and her father both became ill with ague and fever. She recovered, but to her great sorrow her father died.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPThe Bigler family stayed in Quincy, Illinois, until 1840, when they were able to move on to Nauvoo. The following year, Bathsheba looked forward to the return of George A. Smith from his mission to England. A cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he now served as the youngest member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. He and Bathsheba were married July 25, 1841, just fourteen days after he returned from England.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPA Devoted Homemaker

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPA meticulous housekeeper, Bathsheba Smith took pride in the appearance of her home as well as of herself. She had grown up in a beautiful home in West Virginia, where she learned the art of Southern hospitality from her mother, who had come from an aristocratic and well-to-do family in Maryland. After her marriage Bathsheba no doubt longed for a nice home but instead set up housekeeping five different times in one year, in dwellings that were shabby at best, compared to her childhood home.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBathsheba wrote of her attempts to make her first home, located on the Iowa side of the Mississippi River, habitable. Unfortunately, she said, "the house leaked and smoked and was otherwise uncomfortable." Four weeks later, the newlyweds moved to Nauvoo. With new hope that first night, they knelt by their bed and dedicated themselves to God. They thanked him for his mercy in bringing them together after being separated so long, and prayed that he would bless them that prosperity might crown their labors. Their love was warm; however, the house "smoked and was open and cold." [^8]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPNext, they rented an unfurnished log home from Bishop Vinson Knight. The windows did not have glass, so Bathsheba hung blankets to keep out the cold. George A. built a brick chimney but discovered that it smoked. Although the home was unsatisfactory, that move enabled Bathsheba to become good friends with Bishop Knight's wife, Martha.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPJoseph Smith recognized his cousin's housing dilemma and gave George A. a small log house. Bathsheba wrote, "My husband fixed up the house the best he could, but after all it was the worst looking house we had yet lived in; I was ashamed to have any of my acquaintances see me in such a looking place." Then her optimistic nature surfaced and she added, "It had, however, the desirable qualities of neither smoking nor leaking." [^9]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPSoon George A. obtained another lot, which he fenced and drained, and built a more comfortable, two-story home with two rooms on each floor. He and Bathsheba were so anxious to move into this new home before the birth of their first child that they set up their bed in one of the unfinished rooms. Twelve days later, on July 7, 1842, a son was born. They named him George Albert Smith, Jr.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPOnly two months after George Jr.'s birth, George A. Smith was called on a mission to the eastern states, leaving Bathsheba with a new baby and an unfinished home. Many times during their married life, she would see George A., who was an outstanding leader, dynamic speaker, and willing servant, off on numerous missions and Church assignments. Her letters to him reflected her love for him, her reliance on him for counsel, and her strong testimony of the gospel. A letter dated February 14, 1851, was typical:

Smith, Bathsheba B.PP"I look at your portrait which I never forget. It hangs back of my bed and is the last thing I see and the first in the morning. Oh, it is such a comfort to me. It always looks pleasant and kind as you do and seems to say when I feel bad, 'Cheer up, all is well' and you will return and we will be more happy than if we had been together. . . . When the shades of night fall upon it, it does look so much like you that it makes the tears fall fast." [^10] During George A.'s absences, Bathsheba relied on her mother, sisters, and friends for companionship. Because George A. was related to Joseph Smith, Bathsheba also had many opportunities to associate with Emma Smith, Eliza R. Snow, Zina D. H. Young, and other female leaders. [^11] One of her "priceless visual mementos" was her memory of Emma Smith riding on her white horse beside Joseph through the streets of Nauvoo. [^12] Eliza asked Bathsheba to read the first manuscript of her poem "O My Father," and the experience made such an impression on Bathsheba that for years afterwards she was able to describe in minute detail the room in which Eliza had written it. [^13]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBathsheba was one of the first persons to receive the temple endowment in Nauvoo and to hear the Prophet Joseph Smith teach of the celestial order of marriage. In January 1844, a month after Bathsheba and George A. received their endowments, Joseph performed the sealing ceremony for them. She wrote of the effect of the revelation on celestial marriage on her life:

Smith, Bathsheba B.PP"Being thoroughly convinced . . . that the doctrine of plurality of wives was from God; and having a fixed determination to attain celestial glory, I felt to embrace the whole gospel. . . . Like Sarah of old, I gave to my husband five wives, good virtuous, honorable young women. This gave them all homes, with us; being proud of my husband and loving him very much . . . and believing he would not love them less because he loved me more, I had joy in having a testimony that what I had done was acceptable to my Father in Heaven." [^14]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPOver the next two years Lucy Meserve, Zilpha Stark, Sarah Ann Libby, Hannah Maria Libby (Sarah's sister), and Nancy Clement were married to George A. Smith, and Bathsheba accepted these women as sisters.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPAt a Relief Society meeting in Nauvoo, Bathsheba heard Joseph Smith express a presentiment of his. "He opened the meeting by prayer," she later wrote. "His voice trembled very much, after which he addressed us. He said: 'According to my prayer I will not be with you long to teach and instruct you, and the world will not be troubled with me much longer." [^15] When the Prophet and his brother Hyrum were martyred in Carthage Jail on June 27, 1844, George A. Smith was on a mission in Illinois. Bathsheba wrote to him on July 6, 1844:

Smith, Bathsheba B.PP"We have had strange times since you left. You will no doubt hear, before this reaches you, of the death of our beloved brethren Joseph and Hyrum Smith. They were killed at Carthage on the 27 of June and on the 28 they were brought home and such a day of mourning never was seen. It pains me to write such a painful tale, but the Lord has comforted our hearts in a measure. . . . Brother John Taylor was wounded but is getting better, is quite weak but quite cheerful. Brother Willard Richards was not hurt. They were both in jail at the time of the massacre. I will not write anymore on that subject as I expect you will hear all the particulars before this reaches you." [^16]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPOn August 14, 1844, two weeks after George A. returned from his mission, Bathsheba gave birth to a daughter, whom they named Bathsheba. An uneasy calm returned to Nauvoo as the Twelve Apostles returned from their various missions. George A. persuaded Bathsheba to take art lessons and to sing in the choir, while Bathsheba persuaded George A. to attend dances, which he did not like in the least.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPFrom December 1845 to February 1846, Bathsheba took part in the temple work as thousands of Saints received their endowments. Here she learned to love the work, a love that dominated her later life in Salt Lake City, On January 25, 1846, George A. and Bathsheba's two children were sealed to them in the Nauvoo Temple.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPMoving West

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPOf the family's exodus from Nauvoo on February 9, 1846, Bathsheba wrote: "In company with many others, my husband took me and my two little children, and some of the other members of our family, the remainder to follow as soon as the weather would permit, and we crossed the Mississippi River to seek a home in the wilderness. Thus we left a comfortable home, the accumulations and labor of four years, taking with us but a few things such as clothing, bedding and provisions, leaving everything else for our enemies. We were obliged to stay in camp for a few weeks on Sugar Creek because of the weather being so very cold. The Mississippi froze over so that hundreds of families crossed over on the ice." [^17]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPShe also wrote about their journey across the state of Iowa to Winter Quarters, a temporary camp on the banks of the Missouri River: "I will not try to describe how we traveled through storms of snow wind and rain, how roads had to be made bridges built and rafts constructed; how our poor animals had to drag on day after day with scanty food; how our camps suffered from poverty, sickness and death. We were consoled in the midst of these hardships by having our public and private meetings in peace, praying and singing the songs of Zion, and rejoicing that we were leaving our persecutors far behind. . . . The Lord was with us, and his power was made manifest daily in our journey." [^18]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPAt Winter Quarters Bathsheba again established a home—this time in a sod-roofed cabin. "In our travels the winds had literally blown our tents to pieces, so that we were glad to get into our cabin," she wrote. [^19]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBecause the Saints had few vegetables, except corn, to eat, many of those camped at Winter Quarters got scurvy. One of Bathsheba's sister wives, Nancy Clement, and her daughter, Nancy Adelia, died from it. George A. took a personal interest in finding a way to prevent scurvy and discovered that potatoes were effective. He planted potatoes at Winter Quarters in the spring of 1846 and thereafter wherever he lived, earning him the affectionate title of "The Potato Saint." [^20]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPDeath continued to strike at Bathsheba's family. On March 11, 1847, her mother died. Three weeks later, on April 4, Bathsheba gave birth to a son after three days' labor. The little boy, whom they named John, lived only four hours. Bathsheba did not recover from the birth for some months, suffering again with ague and fever. She was never able to bear any more children. [^21]

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPIn June 1847, many Saints left Winter Quarters for the Salt Lake Valley. Among them were Bathsheba's sisters, her in-laws, and her husband, George A. Bathsheba longed to go with them, but she decided to remain at Winter Quarters with the rest of George's wives and children, feeling it her duty to care for them. Even though she wondered later if she should have gone, she did what she thought would be her husband's wish. [^22] In all, she spent three years at Winter Quarters while George A. traveled back and forth to the Salt Lake Valley helping other Saints to migrate west.

Smith, Bathsheba B.PPBy late June 1849, George A. secured enough supplies and a wagon for each of his five families to move west. Bathsheba applied her homemaking skills to her wagon, which she described in her journal.

"On this journey my wagon was provided with projections, of about eight inches wide, on each side of the top of the box. The cover, which was high enough for us to stand erect, was widened by these projections. A frame was laid across the back part of our wagon, and was corded as a bedstead; this made our sleeping very comfortable. Under our beds we stowed our heaviest articles. We had a door in one side of the wagon cover, and on the opposite side a window. A step-ladder was used to ascend to our door, which was between the wheels. . . . I had, hanging up on the inside a looking-glass, candlestick, pincushion, etc. In the center of our wagon we had room for four chairs, in which we and our two children sat and rode when we chose. The floor of our traveling house was carpeted, and we made ourselves as comfortable as we could under the circumstances." [^23]

Once, while fording a stream, Bathsheba's awkward wagon threatened to wash downstream. Unruffled, she yelled, "Behold, Noah's Ark!" [^24]

After months of ferrying streams, fording others, traveling over sterile plains, high mountains, and through deep canyons, and enduring a thirty-six-hour snowstorm as well as a cattle stampede, George A.'s wagons arrived in the Salt Lake Valley. For a while, the families lived in their wagon beds. George A. began building an adobe house for Bathsheba, but before finishing it he was called to colonize Parowan, 250 miles south of Salt Lake City. Before he left for Parowan with his wife Zilpha, Bathsheba hid in his wagon a package containing a small sugar loaf, a bunch of English currants, and a poem that read, in part, "Now I give it unto thee, / That comfort you may in this, / My great large sugar kiss." George A. wrote of Bathsheba's gift in his journal, "For surely, I remember my first love." [^25]

Family Life in the Valley

Bathsheba and her children lived with her in-laws until her house was finished. At last she had a home with a shingled roof, plastered walls, glass windows, two fireplaces, and a bake oven. After moving into the new house, the family became ill with whooping cough, or "chin cough," as some called it. But in spite of sickness, Bathsheba industriously set about making her home comfortable. She wrote to George A. on April 13, 1851:

"Now my dear, I do not want you to think I cannot work yet, so I believe I will tell you what I have been doing this winter. I did nearly all Father's folks housework nine in the family most of the time with the exception of washing, made father two fine shirts, mother two dresses, three caps, made her some pillow cases, made John two fine bosoms, helped quilt two quilts, wrote thirty-odd [patriarchal] blessings, recorded several. Father gave me about seven dollars and a half in money. I made my carpet, made George a pair of pants and coat and siss some clothing, sewed some for Melissa (two dollars and a half worth) made me a nice hearth rug, made some nice soap, made a cushion for my rocking chair, sewed some for myself also knit for the children. . . . I have made my window curtains have three white ones in the best room . . . made my valances, sewed and fitted down my carpet, made some pillowcases and sheets, quilted two comforters . . . made me a dress and bonnet, Bathsheba an apron and various other things besides cooking, washing, mending, churning, feeding my cow, pigs, chicks and visiting the sick as well." [^26]

In June 1851, George A.'s wife Sarah died. Her sister Hannah did not get along well with Bathsheba and, after Sarah's funeral, argued with Bathsheba over who would raise Sarah's three-year-old son. As first wife, it was Bathsheba's responsibility to handle the situation. Far more comfortable working with her hands than dealing with challenges such as these, she wrote of the conflict to George A.: "What Hannah will do now I don't know. . . . I could take her home if she would be kind to me, but she will not. I was not very well and my mind was troubled knowing the feelings that existed in our family and Sarah just being dead and everybody looking on, one saying one thing and another thing for every mean thing that could be said had been said. . . . I will try to do the best I hope I can and if I do not write I hope you will tell me how and I will try to do it as I always have." [^27] By August, Bathsheba could write to her husband of resolving the conflict: "I saw Hannah today at meeting, she was as friendly as I have seen her since you left. I hope she will continue to be friendly for I do hate to have anyone cross with me." [^28]

George A. returned briefly the next month. The following year, in August 1852, Church leaders asked him to preside over the Saints in the Provo area, some forty miles south of Salt Lake City. He took Hannah and Lucy with him, leaving only Bathsheba in Salt Lake City. Her sister Melissa lived nearby, and Melissa's daughter Julina spent many hours with her aunt Bathsheba. Bathsheba's daughter delighted in making dolls and doll clothes for Julina to play with. Since Melissa had several small children and her husband was on a mission, Bathsheba's caring for Julina was a great help to her. By the time Julina was seven, in 1855, she lived with her aunt but went daily to see her mother.

In October 1857, George A. Smith took another plural wife, Susan Elizabeth West, and brought her to live with Bathsheba. Bathsheba later wrote of the common interest in home industry she shared with Susan:

"Sister Susan and myself for about ten or twelve years have spun, colored and wove full cloth, flannel, linsey janes, kerseys, blankets, coverlids, shawls, wove fringe, wool carpets, stair carpets, rag carpets, and have spun flax and tow, and wove table linen towels, bed ticks, and made sewing thread. We also carded, spun, and wove cotton, made cotton cloth for diapers, dresses, bedspreads, bed ticks, bags, spun candle wicking, spun and wove table cloths, towels, we knit our own stockings, socks, hoods neckwraps mittens, made netting, embroidery . . . and have done all to encourage home manufactory. We have exhibited many of our homemade goods at our territorial fairs and they always received favorable attention." [^29]

Some of their handiwork decorated the Historian's Office, which their families occupied after George A. was called to be Church historian in 1854. (The Historian's Office was built as a duplex, with half serving as an office and the other half as a residence.) In the evenings, the family members enjoyed entertaining visitors, reading, singing, playing musical instruments, and dancing. George Jr. played the flutena, flute, and fife, and he and his sister Bathsheba played the drums. Bathsheba wrote, "They made our home joyous with song and just their pleasure was mine. I was proud of them and so happy with them." [^30]

In 1858, President James Buchanan sent an army, commanded by General Albert Sidney Johnston, to the territory with orders to "put down the Mormons." It took several months for the army to traverse the plains and the Rocky Mountains, giving the Saints time to prepare to evacuate the Salt Lake Valley, if necessary. Finally Brigham Young instructed them to move south; only a few men and boys would remain to tend to crops and livestock and to set fire to buildings if it appeared the army planned to take possession. Before she left, Bathsheba stopped to sweep the floors of her home; then she loaded her trunks into her wagon and took her family to Provo.

The army entered the valley on June 26, and by June 30, Church and government leaders worked out a settlement. On July 3 Bathsheba and her children returned to Salt Lake City, traveling through the too-quiet streets near sunset. As far as she could tell, every door was shut and every window in the city was boarded up. At her home, she found weeds nearly as high as her head all around the house, choking out her flowers.

In 1860 Bathsheba's pleasant home life was shattered when she received news that Indians had killed her only son, George. While serving a mission to the Indians in Southern Utah, he was killed on November 2 in retaliation for a massacre of Navajos by other whites. His companion, Jacob Hamblin, could find only three bones and a lock of George Jr.'s hair to bring home for burial,

Two months later her daughter, Bathsheba, married Clarence Merrill. Still deeply grieving over her son's death, Bathsheba experienced a profound sense of loss when her daughter left home. But she was not alone. Julina still lived with her, and she was close to the children of Susan, George A.'s seventh wife. She took a particular interest in Susan's oldest daughter, Clarissa.

In time, Bathsheba's daughter had fourteen children, and Julina, who married in 1866, had ten, Bathsheba enjoyed these grandchildren immensely. She made mittens, comforters, hoods, linsey dresses, coats, and petticoats for them, carrying the handiwork in a flower-covered carpetbag. When Grandma Bathsheba came to visit, the grandchildren would run to her, shouting "Hurrah!" and eagerly waiting to see what gifts she had brought for them.

As she and George A. traveled to various branches of the Church throughout the territory, they were frequently met by bands playing and children carrying banners, flags, and singing songs of welcome, A friend, Julia P. M. Farnsworth, described Bathsheba on one of these trips: "She was then a tall, stately woman, with an abundance of beautiful brown hair, dark eyes smooth fair complexion, and was traveling in the company of her husband in President Young's party . . . to St. George. . . . I noted her superiority, her dignity of carriage, yet, with all that, she was easy to approach, lovable in manner, for she ever gave a sweet smile and a word of encouragement to little children and young people, also care and tenderness to the sick or aged. She was artistic in temperament, loved the beautiful, appreciated refinement, and always dressed in good taste." [^31]

Traveling together was a sweet culmination of Bathsheba and George A.'s thirty-four-year marriage, of which Bathsheba wrote: "I love my husband dearly. I believe but few in this wide world have been as happy as we have been. We have no differences, always agree on all points, our religion and our future hopes and expectations are the same." [^32]

George A. Smith died in September 1875 from complications resulting from an old injury, a lung punctured while he was serving on a mission. Bathsheba wrote of his death: "His head lay . . . against my bosom. Good angels had come to receive his precious spirit, perhaps our sons, prophets, patriarchs . . . but he was gone my light, my sun, my life, my joy, my Lord, yea almost my God. . . . I must not mourn but prepare myself to meet him but O my heart sinks within my bosom nearly." [^33]

Called to Serve

Bathsheba's remaining years without her husband were filled with grandmothering and with renewed service in Relief Society. In 1866, when Brigham Young reorganized the Relief Society as a Churchwide organization, Bathsheba was one of several women called to serve with President Eliza R. Snow. When the Relief Society of the Salt Lake Stake was organized in December 1877, Bathsheba became treasurer. Eleven years later, in October 1888, Zina D. H. Young was sustained as general Relief Society president and selected Bathsheba as her second counselor. When the beloved "Aunt Zina" died in August 1901, President Joseph F. Smith called Bathsheba to be the fourth general president of the Relief Society. She selected Annie Taylor Hyde and Ida Smoot Dusenberry as her counselors, Emmeline B. Wells as general secretary, and Clarissa S. Williams as treasurer.

This presidency served together nine years, until 1910. They continued the nursing classes that Zina Young had established, and, building on Bathsheba's interest in home industry, they introduced mothers' classes in which lessons were taught on marriage, prenatal care, child rearing, industry, obedience, honesty, and reverence. Bathsheba strongly believed that women in the Church should learn to be self-sufficient.

Bathsheba, along with many other Mormon women, supported the efforts of the National Woman's Suffrage Association for women's suffrage. While she was not a leader in this movement, she showed her support locally in talks and in articles published in the Woman's Exponent.

For much of the time Bathsheba served as general Relief Society president, the organization had no central office. At the Relief Society conference in the Assembly Hall on October 3, 1896, President Zina Young had called for a vote to build an office building, but nothing was done at that time, Three years later the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association and the Primary Association joined with the Relief Society in working toward construction of a building to serve the three organizations. During Bathsheba's administration, the project moved forward, but slowly. In 1908 the plans of the building were changed to include the offices of the Presiding Bishop, and when she heard the news, Bathsheba fainted. The structure, subsequently known as the Bishop's Building, was completed in 1909 in the block on the east side of Main Street, across from Temple Square. It housed offices of the three auxiliaries, the Presiding Bishopric, Church magazines, and some other organizations, and was headquarters for the Relief Society until 1956, when the present Relief Society Building was built.

Bathsheba believed that one of the most important things she could do as president of the Relief Society was to serve in the temple. When the Endowment House was completed in Salt Lake City in 1855, she resumed doing temple work as she had done in Nauvoo. She also worked in the Manti and Logan temples, and after the Salt Lake Temple was dedicated in 1893, she coordinated the women's work there. Until her death in 1910, Bathsheba faithfully attended the temple.

In a portrait painted in the last year of Bathsheba's life, artist Lee Greene Richards portrayed her draped in white lace, probably of her own making. Susa Young Gates, a daughter of Brigham Young, described Bathsheba as she served in the temple: "It is a lovely and an inspiring sight to see this high priestess of righteousness arrayed in her simple white gown of home-made silk, her dark eyes still bright, her fair, delicate face crowned with lustrous bands of shining white hair, her finely shaped head, with its rich, white lace draping, held erect, as her stately figure moves down the long aisle. The sweet smile of welcome greets all alike in its impartial graciousness. She is indeed the Elect Lady, and wisdom and peace crown her days." [^34] The last of the original twenty members of the Relief Society, Bathsheba Bigler Wilson Smith died September 20, 1910, at the age of eighty-eight.

"When I heard the Gospel I knew it was true," Bathsheba once wrote. "When I first read the Book of Mormon, I knew it was inspired of God; when I first beheld Joseph Smith I knew I stood face to face with a prophet of the living God, and I had no doubt in my mind about his authority." [^35] Her testimony remained strong throughout her life. Her gentle, unfailing devotion to her husband, her family, and her home served as an example to others; her skills in spinning, weaving, sewing, and homemaking sustained her in the various moves she made and homes she established; and her singular opportunities made her an influential witness to the unfolding history of the Church.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Based on description of Abbie H. Wells to Judith R. Dushku, March 27, 1975, which appears in part in Sister Saints, ed. Vicky Burgess-Olsen (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1973), p. 468.
[^2] Susa Young Gates, Improvement Era 24 (June 1921): 719.
[^3] Susa Young Gates, "Our Lovely Human Heritage," Relief Society Magazine 4 (February 1917): 74.
[^4] Emmeline B. Wells, Diary, January 4, 1878, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, p. 207. Hereafter cited as Diary.
[^5] Family Group Sheet of David and Diadama Hare Woodward, LDS Family History Archives.
[^6] Burgess-Olsen, ed., Sister Saints, p. 461.
[^7] Carol Cornwall Madsen, "Emmeline B. Wells," in Supporting Saints, ed. Donald Q. Cannon and David J. Whittaker (Provo: Brigham Young University), p. 311.
[^8] Carol Cornwall Madsen, "Aunt Em-A Leader and Truly 'Fine Soul Who Served Us,'" Church News, October 30, 1983, p. 10.
[^9] Young Woman's Journal 16 (December 1905): 554-56.
[^10] Burgess-Olsen, ed., Sister Saints, p. 462.
[^11] Diary, October 6, 1874.
[^12] Carol Cornwall Madsen, A Mormon Woman in Victorian America, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Utah, 1985, p. 78. Her source was a letter from Geneva Ramsey Kingkade to Carolyn Chouinard, August 24, 1970, copy in possession of Carol Cornwall Madsen.
[^13] Augusta Joyce Crocheron, Representative Women of Deseret (Salt Lake City, 1884), pp. 65-67.
[^14] Diary, September 23, 1874.
[^15] Woman's Exponent 17 (June 1, 1888): 1-2.
[^16] Emmeline B. Whitney to Daniel Wells, March 4, 1852, LDS Archives; also Supporting Saints, pp. 459, 309.
[^17] "Life Lessons," Woman's Exponent 4 (October 1, 1875): 70.
[^18] Phyllis C. Southwick, "Emmeline B. Wells-If She Were Here Today," paper delivered at the Women's Resource Conference, "Perspectives on Women," Salt Lake City, October 16, 1974; also Rebecca Anderson, "Emmeline B. Wells: Her Life and Thought," master's thesis, Utah State University, 1975, p. 33.
[^19] Woman's Exponent 5 (November 1, 1876): 84.
[^20] Woman's Exponent 16 (October 1, 1887): 67.
[^21] Woman's Exponent 10 (March 1, 1882): 148.
[^22] Woman's Exponent 18 (August 15, 1889): 46.
[^23] Emmeline B. Wells to M. E. Lightner, Salt Lake City, April 7, 1882, in Emmeline B. Wells Papers, LDS Archives.
[^24] Woman's Exponent 16 (May 1, 1888): 177.
[^25] Diary, March 26, 1891.
[^26] Diary, May 30, 1891.
[^27] Woman's Exponent 24 (October 1, 1895): 60.
[^28] Diary, August 1, 1895.
[^29] Diary, August 16, 1875.
[^30] Diary, February 29, 1912.
[^31] Susa Young Gates, "President Emmeline B. Wells," Album Book: "Daughters of the Utah Pioneers and Their Mothers," ed. Joseph T. Jakeman (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1911), p. 54.
[^32] Emmeline B. Wells to Hannah Wells, December 31, 1855, Emmeline B. Wells Papers, LDS Archives.
[^33] Ibid., pp. 31-32.
[^34] Gates, History of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, pp. 26-28.
[^35] "Past Three Score Years and Ten," Young Woman's Journal, 12 (October 1901): 440; also Carol Lynn Pearson, Daughters of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), p. 45.
