Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

5

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline B. Wells

Wells, Emmeline B.PP1910 - 1921

Wells, Emmeline B.PPAt the age of eighty-two, Emmeline B. Wells was called to serve as the fifth president of the Relief Society, the oldest woman chosen for that position. Her life spanned two centuries and two different eras of Relief Society. She had personally known each of the first four Relief Society presidents—Emma Smith, Eliza R. Snow, Zina D. H. Young, and Bathsheba W. Smith; yet she served as president in the twentieth century.

A dainty woman, Emmeline stood barely five feet tall and weighed only a hundred pounds. She refused to wear black dresses or a veil over her face, preferring instead pastel colors and soft, flowing scarves at her neck. Delicate earrings dangled from her pierced ears, layers of slender chains hung around her neck, and rings adorned her fingers, including one on her index finger (then the engagement finger). [^1] But her dynamic personality provided a distinct contrast to her small size. "The dominant characteristic of Mrs. Wells' life was her supreme will," wrote her friend Susa Young Gates. "That she turned the current of this forceful will into peaceful channels of the gospel of Jesus Christ made for righteousness and the upbuilding of many good causes." [^2] Describing Emmeline at age ninety, Susa called her "our little, delicate, great-minded President of the Relief Society, walking softly, yet with fierce independence into the room." [^3]

Wells, Emmeline B.PP"I believe in women," said Emmeline, summing up the theme of her own life. "I desire to do all in my power to help elevate the condition of my people, especially women . . . to do those things that would advance women in moral and spiritual, as well as educational work and tend to the rolling on of the work of God upon the earth." [^4] The sisterhood of women and their causes filled her ninety-three years. Her life revolved around her five daughters, her sister wives and female friends, the woman's suffrage movement, the Woman's Exponent, and the Relief Society.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline Blanche Woodward was born in Petersham, Massachusetts, on leap year day, February 29, 1828—an unusual day for an unusual life. She was the seventh of nine children born to David and Diadama Hare Woodward: Lucy, Pallas, Eliza, Manson, James, Cordelia, Emmeline, Adaline, and Ellen. [^5]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPA precocious child, Emmeline started school when she was only three years old, walking with her older brothers and sisters and spending part of each day napping underneath the teacher's desk. [^6] As she grew older, she spent many hours reading old letters, papers, and books stored in boxes in the attic of her home. She knew early in her life that she wanted to be a writer. "Under the hemlock boughs," she once wrote, "I sat on a summer's day with proud ambition burning in my soul, ambition to be great and known to fame, when a gentle whisper came . . . 'There is no excellence without labor.'" [^7]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPHer mother wanted her to become a teacher; writing did not seem practical. So Emmeline learned to do both, teaching when it was necessary to support herself but writing daily, laboring throughout her life for excellence.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPConversion and Marriage

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWhile Emmeline was away earning her teaching certificate at a select school for girls in New Salem, Massachusetts, her mother and three youngest sisters joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Although Diadama Woodward was not able to convert her older children, who were all married by the time she joined the Church, she found Emmeline to be more receptive to the new religion. Emmeline was baptized at age fourteen, on March 1, 1842, in a nearby brook. It was so cold that the ice had to be cut away, and hecklers—including ministers, judges, and some of her friends from the girls school—jeered while the ordinance was performed. She withstood both the cold water and the taunts and told her mother that she would dedicate her life to the work of the Church. [^8] Unbeknown to Emmeline at the time, sixteen days after her baptism an event took place in faraway Nauvoo, Illinois, that would have significance in her life: the organization of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo on March 17.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPNot long after she joined the Church, Emmeline began teaching school in the nearby town of Orange, Massachusetts, for a dollar and a half a week, and she soon found new friends among the small group of Latter-day Saints in the area. Her mother encouraged a relationship between her daughter and the branch president's son, James Harvey Harris, because she wanted Emmeline to remain secure in the Church. The two—who were just fifteen years of age—were married on July 29, 1843.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPIn March 1844, James and Emmeline left for Nauvoo with his parents. With the optimism of a young newlywed, Emmeline filled her diary account of the month-long trip. She later described their arrival in Nauvoo aboard a steamboat:

Wells, Emmeline B.PP"At last the boat reached the upper landing, and a crowd of people were coming toward the bank of the river. As we stepped ashore the crowd advanced, and I could see one person who towered away and above all the others around him. . . . His majestic bearing, so entirely different from anyone I had ever seen was more than a surprise. . . . When he took my hand, I was simply electrified. . . . The one thought that filled my soul was, I have seen the prophet of God, he has taken my hand." [^9]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPJust two months later, this man, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and his brother Hyrum were martyred in the Carthage Jail. The dark days that followed the martyrdom were momentarily brightened for Emmeline when, on September 1, 1844, she gave birth to a son, Eugene Henri Harris. But five weeks later, her baby became ill with chills and fever and died.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPDissension among some of the Saints and increasing persecution from anti-Mormon factions caused a number of people to leave Nauvoo, including James's parents. They encouraged James and Emmeline to return with them to New England, but the young couple chose to stay in Nauvoo with the main body of the Church. Shortly after the baby's death, however, James left to look for work elsewhere, and he never returned. Emmeline received only two letters from him. Heartbroken and lonely, she wrote in her diary on February 2, 1845:

Wells, Emmeline B.PP"Last night there came a steamboat up the river. Oh, how my youthful heart fluttered with hope, with anxiety. My limbs were affected to that degree. I was obliged to lay aside my work. I rely upon the promises he has made me and not all that has been said can shake my confidence in the only man I ever loved, but hope returned and was renewed in my bosom. I watched the boat and looked out at the door. I walked a few steps out of the yard . . . I saw a person approaching. My heart beat with fond anticipation. It walked like James. He came nearer and just as I was about to speak his name he spoke and I found I was deceived by the darkness. Last night I thought he had come home. I thought it was a reality, a Heavenly Gathering, bringing us together. Today I am alone and I have time for reflection." [^10] Throughout Emmeline's life, in her diary entries she lamented her loss of James and expressed her love for him. For example, in 1874 she wrote, "How dreadful when I remember my agony at that time, my utter loneliness, my inexperience—Oh what heartrending scenes we are called to pass through." [^11]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPDecades later, Emmeline learned that James Harris never remarried and that he died in 1859 in Bombay, India, while working on a whaling vessel. He had written many letters to her but made the mistake of mailing them to his mother, who did not forward them. On a trip to New England after the death of James's mother in 1888, Emmeline visited his childhood home. While rummaging through the attic she came across the letters James had written her. She insisted that her daughter and granddaughter, who were with her, take her to the cemetery. Her granddaughter wrote of the event: "There that tiny but mighty old lady stood with her arms raised over the grave and called down a curse upon her mother-in-law that made Mother tremble—and no doubt caused the wicked one to writhe in her shroud!" [^12]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPAt age seventeen, alone in Nauvoo and grieving over the death of her infant son and the loss of her young husband, Emmeline turned to the only work she knew: teaching. Bishop Newel K. Whitney and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, hired her to teach their children, The Whitneys, thirty years Emmeline's senior, gave her protection and security. On February 17, 1845, Emmeline became a plural wife of Bishop Whitney, and that day he gave her a blessing in which he promised that her abilities would have "tremendous influence in the building of the 'kingdom' in the west." [^13] The blessing reassured Emmeline of the sense of destiny she already felt about her life, though she continued to weep over James.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline joined the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo in February 1846 and lived for two years at Winter Quarters before beginning the trek west to the Salt Lake Valley. On November 2, 1848, one month after arriving in the valley, she gave birth to a daughter, Isabel (Belle) M. Whitney. Another daughter, Melvina (Mellie), was born on August 18, 1850. Only a few weeks later, Bishop Newel K. Whitney suddenly died.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPIn the Valley

Wells, Emmeline B.PPA widow with two baby daughters, Emmeline wrote that she had lost "as good a man as ever lived, a father to all within his reach and more than father to me." [^14] She was not entirely alone, however, for she had the sustaining love and lifelong friendship of Newel's first wife, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, who had served as a counselor to Emma Smith in the first Relief Society presidency.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline again turned to teaching school to support herself and her two children. She later recalled her teaching experience in Salt Lake City: "I taught 65 children in a log house without desks, charts, blackboards, or scarcely two books of the same kind. The remuneration was likewise trying, [one] bringing a piece of salt pork, another a bucket of flour, a third perhaps a skein of yarn; to repay the ever toiling task of school teaching; the work was unceasing; the day spent in the school room and the night in planning and working for the morrow, whole nights being spent in cutting fancy patterns and writing verses in blue ink and working on bits of cardboard mottoes in various colored silks for rewards, to urge the children to diligence and good behavior." [^15]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPAbout this time, two events occurred that significantly affected Emmeline's life. First, the Deseret News, which was established in 1850, began publishing news of the suffrage movement for women. As she learned more about the movement over the next twenty years, Emmeline became not only a sympathetic reader but also a suffrage leader. Second, in 1852 Brigham Young publicly announced plural marriage as a doctrine and practice of the Church.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPOnly twenty-four years old and with daughters to support, Emmeline knew she would benefit from the security that marriage offered. Therefore, following the public announcement of plural marriage, she sent a letter to Daniel H. Wells, a close friend of her late husband, Newel K. Whitney, asking him to "consider the lonely state of his friend's widow." She wrote that she hoped to be "united with a being noble as thyself," and asked him to "return to her a description of his feelings for her." [^16] In response to her gentle proposal, Daniel married Emmeline, his seventh wife, on October 10, 1852.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPAs a member of Daniel Wells's family, Emmeline at last had financial security. Both prosperous and prominent, Daniel would later serve as a member of the First Presidency of the Church for twenty-three years, superintendent of public works, mayor of Salt Lake City for ten years, and chancellor of the University of Deseret (which later became the University of Utah). A daughter, Emmeline (Emmie) Whitney Wells, was born to Emmeline and Daniel on September 10, 1853.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline's diaries reveal, however, that her marriage with Daniel was frustrating at times, and she often felt lonely and neglected. She also felt that she had little in common with his other wives, her relationship with them being amicable but not close. Preferring time for her own projects to the busyness of the large Wells household, Emmeline moved into a small adobe house on State Street with her three daughters in 1856. Two more daughters were born to Emmeline and Daniel: Elizabeth Ann (Annie) on December 7, 1859, and Louisa Martha (Louie) on August 27, 1862. The adobe home was not far from "the Big House" where most of the Wells family lived, and the families frequently visited each other. Emmeline and her daughters went there every day for family prayers. Nevertheless she appreciated the independence her new home gave her, and she especially loved her large garden, making it the theme of one of her favorite poems, "The Dear Old Garden."

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline had a close relationship with each of her five daughters—Belle, Mellie, Emmie, Annie, and Louie—mentioning them in nearly every diary entry. As they grew up, she not only gave them every motherly attention but also showed them by example how to assume responsibilities in the world outside their home. In 1875 she expressed her strong feelings about combining motherhood and other duties: "It is the opinion of many who are wise and learned that woman's mission upon the earth is maternity, with its minor details, its accompanying cares and anxieties, and needful exigencies; that these fill the measure of her creation; and when this is done, she should with becoming matronly dignity, retire from the sphere of active life and gracefully welcome old age. . . . That motherhood brings into a woman's life a richness, zest and tone that nothing else ever can I gladly grant you, but that her usefulness ends there, or that she has no other individual interests to serve I cannot so readily concede." [^17] Emmeline herself certainly did not "retire from the sphere of active life and gracefully welcome old age." Her usefulness began rather than ended with motherhood, and for the next several decades, she juggled family and personal challenges with her responsibilities with the Woman's Exponent, the women's suffrage movement, and the Relief Society.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPA Woman's Woman

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWhen the Relief Society was reorganized by President Brigham Young in 1866, Emmeline was one of ten women called to lead it, beginning a career of service to the women of the Church that would span the next fifty-four years. It was during the late 1860s, too, as political action increased against plural marriage, that the women of Utah became more actively involved in the national women's movement as a means of stopping legislation against them. Emmeline was at the forefront. In January 1870, she spoke to two thousand women at a meeting in Provo to protest the Cullom Bill, which would have outlawed polygamy. Woman's suffrage was also an issue, and Emmeline rejoiced the following month when women in the Utah Territory were given the right to vote.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPThe movement for women's rights, which had begun in America as early as 1848, rapidly gathered momentum after 1869, when Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton organized the National Woman's Suffrage Association in response to the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment, which guaranteed the right to vote only to men. At first glance, it may seem peculiar that two groups of women as different as Mormon plural wives from Utah and feminist leaders from the East should become part of the same women's movement. But the fact is that each group had something the other group was working toward, and they realized that they could help each other. Utah women already had the right to vote, which is what the feminists were fighting for; and feminists believed that legislation should not limit women's rights, which is what the women from Utah were fighting for. So although the feminists involved in the women's movement did not understand or condone plural marriage, they believed in a woman's right to live it if she so chose.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPOver the years, Emmeline became dearly loved by leaders of the women's movement. She wore a gold ring Susan B. Anthony gave to her and said of the gift, "It is a symbol of the sympathy of two great women for one great cause." [^18] Emmeline sent a black brocaded dress made from Utah silk to Susan B. Anthony on her eightieth birthday. In a large part it was this friendship that encouraged women involved in the national suffrage movement to accept Emmeline and the women of Utah.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWhile Emmeline gained prominence in the suffrage movement, she continued to serve in the Relief Society. In September 1876, Brigham Young asked her to direct a project for women to gather and store wheat. She accepted the responsibility and asked women throughout the territory to gather wheat scattered along the fences and ditch banks after the harvest. In an article for the Woman's Exponent pleading for support of the project, she wrote: "Who is there that can feel these things as deeply as a mother can; think what it would be to hear your little one cry for bread." [^19] The sisters gleaned from the fields, private granaries donated storage, and ward Relief Societies planned to build their own granaries as soon as they could raise the money. Emmeline was delighted with the results: 10,465 bushels of wheat were stored the first season, with the hope of 50,000 bushels the next year. The Relief Society donated wheat to the poor and loaned or sold several thousand bushels to farmers for spring planting.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPThe wheat project, which continued to grow over the years, became one of the most successful long-term Relief Society projects. As a result, Utah grain eased the effects of the drought that ravaged the southern part of the state in 1898-99; it helped survivors of the San Francisco earthquake and fire in 1906; and it fed thousands during World War I, when the Relief Society sold 100,000 bushels to the United States government for $412,000. President Woodrow Wilson personally thanked Emmeline in 1919 for the wheat.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline's abilities and confidence grew as a result of her experiences in the women's movement and the grain project. Once she had written that she felt "timid" and "trembled like a frightened bird," [^20] but as she continued to accept responsibilities, she became more confident. She also became more eloquent, which was plainly evident as she labored in the women's movement, for she believed that "a good Mormon was not silent; silence meant consent." [^21] She said she did not want "just the crumbs, but the whole loaf of bread for women." [^22]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPIn 1877, when Emmeline was forty-nine years old, she became editor of the Woman's Exponent, the first women's magazine published in the West and only the second published in the United States. With her two oldest daughters, Belle and Mellie, married and her three other daughters twenty-four, eighteen, and fifteen, Emmeline had time to pursue her writing interests. She began her writing career with the magazine in 1873, using a pseudonym, Blanche Beechwood, to write forty-two articles on women's issues. After she became editor, articles signed by the liberal-thinking Blanche were replaced by writings of the increasingly conservative "Aunt Em."

Wells, Emmeline B.PPFor the next thirty-seven years, Emmeline remained passionately devoted to the Woman's Exponent, She developed the format and content of the magazine, which was published twice a month and contained as many as twenty pages with three columns each. Sometimes her children and grandchildren helped to set the type and fold the printed sheets. She was so committed to the success of the paper, in fact, that she often spent her own money to publish it.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPUnder Emmeline's direction, the magazine became a powerful voice not only for Mormon women but also for the suffrage movement. Emmeline felt that Mormon women "should be the best informed of any women on the face of the earth, not only upon our own principles and doctrines but on all general subjects." [^23] Therefore, the magazine contained local, territorial, and worldwide news pertaining to women.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline believed that another purpose of the Woman's Exponent was to change the widely held perception that Mormon women were degraded and repressed. The publication projected a positive image of intelligence, commitment, self-confidence, and ability. One reader in the East wrote that while she did not support polygamy, she "frequently read the Exponent, and truly admir[ed] the bold manner with which [it dealt] with all questions pertaining to public interest." [^24] For more than twenty years, the masthead carried the motto "For the Rights of the Women of Zion and All Nations."

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWomen's Suffrage Leader

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline's continuing involvement in the suffrage movement focused on preventing or repealing antipolygamy legislation. In January 1879, she and Zina Y. Williams Card, the daughter of Zina D. H. Young, represented the Utah Territory at a conference of the National Woman's Suffrage Association in Washington, D.C. Susan B. Anthony introduced Emmeline as a speaker, and her address was well received. Emmeline and Zina also visited President Rutherford B. Hayes at the White House to present a paper defending plural marriage and to urge the repeal of an antipolygamy law. Their efforts brought about no change, but it was evident that as a leader, Emmeline had developed enough confidence to take her case directly to the president of the United States.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPControversy over plural marriage in Utah continued to increase, and in 1885 Emmeline attended another suffrage convention in Washington, D.C., remaining there until May 1886. She fought to prevent the creation of an industrial home for plural wives in Utah. The home was subsequently built, but few plural wives ever used it. Though difficult for others to understand, there were advantages to plural marriage. Many women viewed it as a form of liberation, for when wives lived in the same home, each woman was free to pursue individual interests because child care and housework were shared. Most also enjoyed the companionship of their sister wives. And plural marriage gave more women a greater choice of a worthy husband and an opportunity to have children.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWhen Emmeline's involvement in Utah's bid for statehood had begun in 1878 with her service as one of seven delegates and as secretary to the Territorial Convention, statehood was not linked to the women's movement. But with the passage of the stridently antipolygamy Edmunds-Tucker Act in 1887, Utah women lost their right to vote. Now the bid for statehood, which would give Utah the opportunity to make its own suffrage laws, became part of the same fight for suffrage that propelled the women's movement. The Utah Woman's Suffrage Association was organized in Utah in 1889, many of its leaders also being leaders in the Relief Society. The next year, 1890, President Wilford Woodruff issued the Manifesto, which officially ended the practice of plural marriage. "After doing and suffering what we have through our adherence to this principle," said President Woodruff, "[we are] to cease the practice and submit to the law." (See Doctrine & Covenants, Official Declaration 1.)

Wells, Emmeline B.PPThe legal battle was over. The power of the Edmunds-Tucker Act of 1887 had nearly broken the back of the Church, and the Saints had little choice but to stop the practice of plural marriage. Emmeline remained active in the Utah Woman's Suffrage Association, though her energies were no longer focused on the defense of plural marriage, but on obtaining statehood for Utah. She became president of the association in 1893 and continued to work in that position until 1896, when Utah became a state and full suffrage was returned.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPAmong other highlights of Emmeline's work in the women's suffrage movement was the opportunity in July 1899 to speak at the International Council of Women's Quinquennial Convention held at Westminster Hall in London. While in England, she had the opportunity to meet Queen Victoria. The national movement continued until 1920, when the Susan B. Anthony Federal Suffrage Amendment, which had been placed before Congress in 1917, was finally ratified and became the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution. At last, all women in America had the right to vote.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline's personal life presented her with other kinds of challenges. First, her daughter Emmie, at the age of twenty-four, died on April 8, 1878, as the result of an accident. For the rest of her life, Emmeline noted the anniversary of Emmie's death every year in her diary. Next, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, who had been a dear friend, sister wife, and surrogate mother to Emmeline, died in 1882. Then, in April 1887, Emmeline rushed to San Francisco to care for her daughter Louie, who was seriously ill from complications following the birth of a stillborn son. Louie died on May 16. Heartbroken, Emmeline returned home to discover that Daniel had sold her home.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPAgainst this backdrop of family heartaches and political activity, Emmeline continued to work in other areas. The Relief Society established the Deseret Hospital in 1882, after many of the women who had been encouraged to attend medical school had returned to Utah. Emmeline served as secretary for the hospital for twelve years and treasurer for ten years. Also in 1882, Emmeline helped Eliza R. Snow and Aurelia S. Rogers organize the Primary Association.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline served as corresponding secretary for the Relief Society general board in 1888—her first position on the general level of the Relief Society. She participated in the first general Relief Society conference in April 1889 when she read Zina D. H. Young's presidential address, and at the following conference in October, Emmeline herself was asked to speak. Her work with the Woman's Exponent and with the woman's suffrage movement had already established her as a political and intellectual leader among the women in Utah. Her efforts in Relief Society would establish her as a spiritual leader.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPIn the midst of all of Emmeline's activity in 1891, her husband, Daniel H. Wells, died. Emmeline had gone east to attend a suffrage convention, and when she returned home on March 20, he was ill. The relationship between Daniel and Emmeline had been rekindled two years earlier. She had written: "Such intense love he has manifested towards me of late years. Such a remarkable change from the long ago, when I needed him so much more, how peculiarly the things come about." [^25] He died on March 24. Her journal entry for Memorial Day that year reads. "I wanted to go to the graveyard last evening but could not and had no flowers to take up—but tears, tears in abundance, a soft rain came and it grew so dark—this morning the city is lively with music and flags are flying but my heart is more sad than usual. . . . I want to tell you . . . there never was a man like him." [^26]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWhen Emmeline was called to the position of general secretary of the Relief Society in 1892, she discovered that her job required more than clerical skills. She was responsible for a new department that provided burial clothes and a department that supplied food and clothing to needy Church members. Also, under the direction of Relief Society President Zina D. H. Young, Emmeline took charge of the jubilee anniversary of the founding of the Relief Society. Among the most impressive events of the jubilee celebration on March 17, 1892, was a prayer circle, held in Salt Lake City, symbolizing international unity. Women from Canada, Mexico, the Sandwich Islands, Australia, New Zealand, Great Britain, Switzerland, Germany, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway joined hands in prayer. [^27]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline was also appointed chairman of a churchwide effort to raise funds for a new Relief Society building. She believed that the money should be raised by the sisters through home industry. During the eleven years it took to raise the money and complete the building, Relief Society members participated in many varied projects. One group in Ephraim, Utah, headed by Sarah Peterson, donated all the money from the sale of eggs their chickens laid on Sundays. Some wards had sewing or quilting groups, Another group unraveled old cotton stockings, then knitted and crocheted articles from the yarn and sold them. Following the death of Zina D. H. Young in August 1901, Emmeline continued her fund-raising efforts as secretary for the new president, Bathsheba W. Smith. Of her workload as general secretary she wrote on one occasion: "Work is not done by looking on and really I do as much work as seven other women I firmly believe." [^28]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPThe Fifth General President

Wells, Emmeline B.PPOn October 3, 1910, after twenty-two years of service on the general level of Relief Society, Emmeline was called to be the fifth general president of the organization, with Clarissa Smith Williams and Julina Lambson Smith as her counselors.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPDuring Emmeline's administration, the Relief Society adopted the motto "Charity Never Faileth." The Relief Society owned real estate, storage buildings for grain, dressmaking shops, and cattle and sheep herds; and from these ventures, thousands of dollars were dispensed to help the poor and orphaned. To meet the demands of this expanding program, a social services department was organized in January 1919 under the direction of Amy Brown Lyman.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline placed a high value on education, and as a result the Relief Society established courses in theology, genealogy, art, literature, home science, obstetrics, and nursing. However, she opposed a centralized educational program and encouraged each ward and stake to decide how to shape its own program.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPDuring her years of involvement in Relief Society and the suffrage movement, writing and the Woman's Exponent remained high priorities for Emmeline. She filled the magazine's pages with her poetry, editorials, and articles, and even serialized her autobiographical short story "Hephzibah" in its pages in 1889. In 1896 she also published a book of her poetry, entitled Musings and Memories. She wanted to publish a book of "Aunt Em's Stories" in 1902 and tried to raise money through requests in the Exponent, but was unsuccessful.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPBathsheba W. Smith had proposed making the Woman's Exponent a publication of the Relief Society in 1910, but Emmeline did not feel ready to give up control and refused the offer. However, as president herself at eighty-six years of age, she found that the Exponent was becoming too difficult for her to continue editing, and at last she offered to turn it over to the Relief Society. But the Relief Society was no longer interested, and the board rejected her offer. Shortly afterwards, the Relief Society asked Susa Young Gates to be the editor of a new publication, to be called Relief Society Magazine. In what must have been a difficult decision for Emmeline, the February 1914 issue of the Woman's Exponent was its last. Perhaps to ease the pain of the loss of the magazine she so dearly loved, she issued a second edition of her book of poems in 1915.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPThroughout her life, Emmeline often fought off depression, which she referred to as "low-spiritedness," or "nervous attacks." She now commented in her diary: "I have been very ill again one of those old nervous attacks which I dread so much, and seem so like death." [^29] Similar entries are found throughout her forty-six diaries. The prose of her journal entries reveals private suffering; the poetry of her life reveals public strength.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPIn 1917, Emmeline moved into the Hotel Utah in downtown Salt Lake City so that she could work into the night in her Relief Society office nearby. Her life had come full circle: sixty-nine years earlier, she had given birth to her first daughter, Isabel, in a wagon bed on the site of the hotel.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline amusingly attributed her vigor to the fact that she was born on leap-year day and only aged every fourth year. On her eighty-fourth birthday in 1912, which could be observed on its actual date, February 29, she wrote in her diary: "The greatest day when was conferred upon me the degree of Dr. of Literature by President Jos. F. Smith & the Brigham Young College or more properly University." [^30] She was only the second person and the first woman to receive an honorary doctorate from Brigham Young University, and one of only a hundred women nationally who had received an honorary degree from any university. More than six hundred people attended a reception in her honor, hosted by the Relief Society general board in the Bishop's Building. Also in celebration of her eighty-fourth birthday, she unveiled a new monument on Temple Square—the Seagull Monument.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWhen Emmeline turned ninety, a party was given for her at the Hotel Utah. In honor of the occasion, a moving picture was made of her and other pioneers who had been living in Nauvoo at the time the Prophet Joseph Smith was martyred. On her ninety-second birthday, more than a thousand people attended her birthday party in the Hotel Utah.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPSusa Young Gates described the "Aunt Em" so many had come to know and love: "Her mind is keen, her intellect sure, and her powers unbending. She possesses a rarely beautiful spirit, and is affectionate, confiding and exquisitely pure. No unclean thing could enter her presence, or remain in her atmosphere. She is an eloquent speaker, a beautiful writer, a true friend, and a wise counselor. She is beloved by all who dwell in the Church, and by all who know her, and their name is legion." [^31]

Wells, Emmeline B.PPWhen President Heber J. Grant went to Emmeline's home on April 2, 1921, and released her as Relief Society president after eleven years of service, she was taken by surprise. Though she was ill at the time of the release, she had assumed that hers was a lifetime calling. After all, she had once fallen down an elevator shaft and was later hit by a streetcar, both while she was president, and on neither occasion had there been talk of a release. After President Grant left, she suffered a stroke on her way upstairs. She lay nearly comatose for the next three weeks and died on April 25, 1921, at the home of her daughter Annie Wells Cannon. Her funeral was one of the largest ever held in the Tabernacle. On April 29, flags flew at half-mast in Utah to commemorate her death—the first time this had been done in honor of a woman.

Wells, Emmeline B.PPOn the one-hundredth anniversary of Emmeline's birth, February 29, 1928, the women of Utah commissioned a marble bust of her to be placed in the rotunda of the State Capitol. The inscription reads "A Fine Soul Who Served Us."

Wells, Emmeline B.PPEmmeline B. Wells indeed believed in women and did all in her power to elevate them. Her words, penned in this letter to a sister wife, express her feelings of love, not only for her sister wives, but for women in general:

Wells, Emmeline B.PP"Pardon me for my familiarity but even as a sister do I love and esteem you—those who feel for me, who administer to my wants, who always seek to cheer and comfort me—they to me are sisters indeed, and in the truest sense of the word; the kindness, the sympathy and cordiality, with which I have been treated by you, constrains me to love you, as well as the rest of the band of sisters, with which I have (very fortunately) become associated and I would to heaven that the same benevolent and generous principles which exist in the bosoms of those of whom I now speak also had an existence in every female who helps to form this vast community." [^32]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John James, Jr., Williams Family Reunion booklet, June 1926, 1977, p. 15.
[^2] Letter of John A. West, July 28, 1856, Hoolau, Hawaii, in W. N. Williams Grand Family Reunion booklet, August 7-10, 1970, p. 7.
[^3] Richard W. James, "Mission to Wales-1877-'79" (privately published, 1987), p. vi.
[^4] Reunion booklet, 1970, p. 9.
[^5] "Brigham Young," The Friend, June 1971, pp. 20-21.
[^6] "Mission to Wales," p. vii.
[^7] "Sketch of the Home Life of Clarissa S. Williams," Alice Merrill Horne, p. 1; in possession of Richard W. James.
[^8] "Report of Relief Society Conference," Relief Society Magazine 15 (December 1928): 668.
[^9] Letter dated July 27, 1877, in "Mission to Wales," p. 40.
[^10] Letter dated March 19, 1878, in possession of Richard W. James.
[^11] William N. Williams letter to Clarissa, dated December 31, 1878, in "Mission to Wales-1877-'79."
[^12] "Sketch of the Home Life of Clarissa S. Williams," p. 3.
[^13] "Report of Relief Society Conference," p. 668; quoted in Evalyn D. Bennett, Relief Society Legacy Lecture, March 1982.
[^14] Personal history of Eva W. Darger.
[^15] Ibid.
[^16] Oral history of William C. VanLaw, typescript in possession of Richard W. James, pp. 11-12.
[^17] Bennett, Legacy Lecture.
[^18] Salt Lake Telegram, April 2, 1921, p. 8.
[^19] Clarissa Smith Williams, quoted in Deseret News, September 23, 1925, p. 2.
[^20] Amy Brown Lyman, "Clarissa Smith Williams," typescript in possession of Evalyn Darger Bennett.
[^21] Bennett, Legacy Lecture.
[^22] "Report of Relief Society Conference," p. 651.
[^23] "Tributes to Clarissa Smith Williams," Relief Society Magazine 16 (May 1930): 226.
[^24] Woman's Exponent 16 (May 1, 1888): 177.
[^25] Diary, March 26, 1891.
[^26] Diary, May 30, 1891.
[^27] Woman's Exponent 24 (October 1, 1895): 60.
[^28] Diary, August 1, 1895.
[^29] Diary, August 16, 1875.
[^30] Diary, February 29, 1912.
[^31] Susa Young Gates, "President Emmeline B. Wells," Album Book: "Daughters of the Utah Pioneers and Their Mothers," ed. Joseph T. Jakeman (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1911), p. 54.
[^32] Emmeline B. Wells to Hannah Wells, December 31, 1855, Emmeline B. Wells Papers, LDS Archives.
