Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

6

Clarissa Smith Williams

1921 - 1928

Clarissa West Smith Williams, sixth general president of the Relief Society and the first native Utahn to fill the office, enjoyed the benefits of being a third-generation Latter-day Saint. She had a secure home life, educational opportunities, and financial stability not known by her five predecessors in the Relief Society. Yet her pioneer heritage, her unique experiences, and her sympathetic concern for the welfare of others helped Clarissa, as the Relief Society president, to focus her energies on improving the lives of the women she served.

Clarissa's mother, Susan Elizabeth West, was born in Chalk Level, Tennessee, in 1833. That same year, two Mormon missionaries, David W. Patten and Warren Parrish, visited the West home, and Susan's mother, Margaret, was immediately convinced of the truthfulness of their message. She and her husband, Samuel Walker West, were soon baptized. They stayed in Tennessee for several years and gave generously to the missionaries who visited them from time to time.

One of the missionaries who visited the West family in Tennessee was George A. Smith. When the Wests moved to Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1842, Elder Smith helped them get established and introduced them to his cousin, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and also to Brigham Young.

Living in Nauvoo was a difficult adjustment for a family used to gentle Southern winters and modest prosperity. The Wests were cold and uncomfortable in their unfinished house, and for the first time in their married life, Samuel and Margaret were poor. Nevertheless, they did not consider their circumstances a hardship, for, as Margaret said, "We had learned to eat food we had thought impossible to relish, but who was to be blamed, no one. We felt that we had the priceless jewel worth striving for, which I had seen in my dreams three years before we had heard of the Gospel." [^1]

With the main exodus of Saints from Nauvoo in 1846, Samuel and Margaret took their nine children first to Mount Pisgah, Iowa, then to Kanesville, on the Iowa side of the Missouri River across from Winter Quarters. In 1851 they completed their journey to the Salt Lake Valley, arriving in September. Two weeks later at the October general conference, they heard their names read from the pulpit to join the Iron County Mission in Parowan. There they renewed their friendship with George A. Smith, the leader of the mission, who would soon become first counselor to President Brigham Young as well as Church historian.

By 1856, when Susan was twenty-three years old, three of her sisters were married. Her brother John, serving a mission in Hawaii, wrote of his concern about her marital status: "I would like to ask, if it would not be amiss, when Susan is getting married? This is what I have been expecting to hear for sometime, but it has not as yet greeted my ears, but is yet expected. You should know that in order to become perfect in the eternal worlds, you must be attached to some good man. . . . I suppose when the one comes along that you are looking for, it will all be right if your sight should be good enough to perceive him." [^2] Both pretty and intelligent, Susan indeed had sight "good enough to perceive" a "good man" in George A. Smith. She accepted his proposal and married him in October 1857, becoming his seventh wife. He took her to Salt Lake City to live in his home in the Historian's Office with his first wife, Bathsheba W. Bigler Smith. The Historian's Office, built in 1857 and "quite grand by pioneer standards." [^3] had separate wings for the office and for the residences of Bathsheba's and Susan's families.

Clarissa's Home Life

Clarissa West Smith, the first of Susan's five daughters, was born April 21, 1859; she was named after Clarissa Lyman Smith, her paternal grandmother. Her four younger sisters, Margaret, Elizabeth, Priscilla, and Emma Pearl, were also born in the Historian's Office. Clarissa, her sisters, and her mother lived there until 1870, when George A. left on a mission to Palestine. They had two subsequent homes in Salt Lake City, one on Second West and the other on West Temple.

Clarissa, unlike her mother and grandmother, spent her childhood in one city and much of it in one home, unhampered by the anti-Mormon persecution her family had suffered in Nauvoo and the hardship of crossing the plains to Utah. Because of his large family, her father was not prosperous until his later years; yet the Smiths were not poor. Clarissa enjoyed her comfortable home, family, friends, and neighborhood.

The close and harmonious relationship between Clarissa's mother, George A.'s last wife, and Aunt Bathsheba, his first wife, promoted a pleasant home life. Susan was known as a "kindly, gentle, lovable and self-sacrificing" person. Like most polygamous wives, she operated a cottage industry to help support her family. Clarissa remembered a typical Christmas in the Smith home: "A shiny red apple was placed on the mantle shelf for each, and each also had a home-made wooden doll, the head and body hand-turned, the head painted, the arms and legs made of cloth, and dressed in clothes made by [our] mother." [^4]

Clarissa and her friends often used nicknames for each other. Clarissa was "Clint" to some of her friends and "Clarissy" to her family. Her best childhood friends were Maimie and Josephine Young, daughters of Brigham Young. One afternoon President Young asked his two daughters to meet him at ZCMI, the Church-owned department store. They invited Clarissa to go with them. President Young asked the store clerk to cut two lengths of brown velvet for cloaks for his daughters, and when he saw Clarissa gazing at the beautiful material, he instructed the clerk to cut off another length for her. [^5]

Living literally at the center of Church headquarters afforded the Smith girls many social and educational opportunities. Brigham Young and his family lived across the street; the mayor, Daniel H. Wells, and his family also lived close by. Within a block or so were the Deseret Store, the Tithing Office and yard, offices of the Deseret News, and Temple Square. The Council House, which for many years was the civic and educational center, and the Social Hall, also a social, recreational, and educational center, were both within a few blocks, as was the Salt Lake Theater. [^6]

As the Smith girls grew older, they took organ, voice, and art lessons and attended the theater. Clarissa learned to card, die, and reel yarn before it was spun and woven; and she learned hand sewing, patching, knitting, lace making, netting, embroidery, fruit drying, corn drying, and the art of making hair and wax flowers. She also enjoyed cooking and reading. She was particularly adept with words and excelled in correctly pronouncing, defining, and spelling almost any word.

Even as a young girl, Clarissa showed leadership ability. John Henry Smith, her half-brother, affectionately called her "the Little General." She often played the leading lady in school and church dramas, which, according to her friends, she enacted with "queenly dignity." She often traveled with her father when she was young. George A. was responsible for setting up post offices between Salt Lake City and St. George, and he also traveled frequently on Church assignments. Clarissa enjoyed the times alone with him that these trips afforded.

Although Clarissa may not have had her father at home constantly, she did have a second mother in Bathsheba Smith. Bathsheba's only son, George A. Smith, Jr., had been killed by Indians in 1860 while on a mission with Jacob Hamblin. Two months later, her daughter married and moved away. Thus Aunt Bathsheba, a mother with an empty nest, devoted herself to Susan's five daughters, taking particular interest in the oldest, Clarissa. Bathsheba would have a lasting influence on the direction of Clarissa's life. Not only did she involve the young woman in Relief Society as a block teacher (now called visiting teacher), but she also prophesied that Clarissa would one day become general president of the Relief Society. [^7] Clarissa later recalled: "I began my Relief Society work when I was sixteen years old, going around the block as an assistant teacher, and I feel that the experience I gained at that time has been most valuable and formed the foundation for much of the work that I have been able to do since." [^8]

Although the territorial legislature set up school districts within Utah Territory in 1851, tax-supported education was not available until 1890. Parents thus had the choice of sending their children to either ward schools or private schools. Clarissa attended Miss Cook's School, which was held in the Social Hall. Besides studying reading, spelling, arithmetic, and grammar, she took drama and gymnastic exercises. Mary Cook and her sister, Ida, were genteel women who graduated from normal schools in New York State and came to Utah to open a school in 1870. Because of its reputation for excellence, Miss Cook's School had a large enrollment and thus required several assistants. At age fourteen, Clarissa was hired as a pupil teacher.

Clarissa's next educational venture was at the University of Deseret (later the University of Utah), where she graduated with a teaching certificate with the first class. She taught school while attending the university, and after her graduation in 1875 she established her own private school, first in her parents' home and then in Parowan.

George A. Smith died the same year Clarissa graduated. Although he provided well for his wives at his death and Susan had a large, comfortable home, she decided to board university students and young working people. Her home was also a stopping-off point for the many friends and relatives who came to the city for Church or other business. As the oldest daughter, Clarissa helped her mother in taking care of their guests.

Also in 1875, Clarissa met a handsome, blond Welshman, twenty-four-year-old William Newjent Williams, whose family had immigrated to Utah when he was ten. William's mother, Sarah Jeremy Williams, and her two brothers were among the first converts to the Church in Wales. His father, Evan, was not interested in this new religion and would not allow his children to be baptized. He was, however, willing to leave Wales and move to Utah so his family would not be separated. During the trek to Utah, Sarah became very ill, and after witnessing her miraculous healing, Evan joined the Church.

Courtship and Marriage

During their two-year courtship, William and Clarissa's attraction for each other continued to grow. Then William received a mission call to Wales. Realizing the depth of their commitment to each other, they hurriedly decided to get married before he left and were thus married the following day, July 17, 1877, by her uncle, Judge Elias Smith. The next day, William left for a two-year mission to his native land. A week later, Clarissa wrote to Will, as she called him:

"Darling old Will, If you only could imagine how badly I want to see you would come right straight back to me. . . .

"Oh! Will, when I think that I won't see you again for two years, it nearly drives me wild, and I don't expect you back in less than that. . . .

"The Sunday after you went away was the most lonesome day I ever spent. . . . On the Twenty Fourth I went to the Jubilee. . . . then Sade came down and said that John Henry wanted Maggie and I to go to the party with him. . . . I never realized my darling Will, how much you contributed to my happiness until that party. It was worse than eating beefstake without salt.

"Do you know Will, this is the first letter I ever wrote to you? Well it won't be the last for now you are my hus——. I can't write the rest it makes me blush." [^9]

To keep herself busy and relieve her loneliness, Clarissa taught school in Parowan in the Old Rock Church. Neither William nor his parents thought she needed to teach school to support him, but independent Clarissa wrote to William: "You wrote and advised not to teach any more but my dear . . . I have disobeyed you. I feel as if I had rather be independent as long as I possibly can." [^10]

William served his mission faithfully in Wales and wrote to Clarissa: "Very pleased to say that I have had joy and consolation in my labors and feel satisfied with them. I realize that the Lord has been with and has blessed me in various ways. I have had kind friends to minister to my wants, and have not suffered for the comforts and necessaries of life; have continually enjoyed excellent health and spirits, for which favors and blessings, I ever ascribe the praise, honor and glory to the Almighty Giver." He also noted some interesting personal statistics: "I have walked 2227 and rode 924 miles. Preached (or rather attempted to) 177 times, 36 of which was in the open-air. Written 140 letters, 50 of which were to you. . . . Baptized 1; confirmed 6; children blessed 6; ordained 4." [^11] He returned home in July 1879.

William and Clarissa's first home was at 37 North West Temple in Salt Lake City, next door to Clarissa's mother and across the street from the west gate of Temple Square. It was in this home that their eleven children were born, eight daughters and three sons: Clarissa, Susan, William Newjent, Sarah, Josephine, Hetty, Eva, Georgia, George Albert, Bathsheba, and Lyman Smith. Three of the children died before they reached adulthood: Susan as an infant; William Jr. of diphtheria at age five, on Christmas Eve; and Hetty of a rheumatic heart at age eighteen.

Aside from these periods of grief, the Williamses' home was a happy one, filled with laughter and good-natured humor. The children affectionately referred to their parents as "Mama" and "Papa." Though Clarissa did not raise her voice to discipline her children, they knew when their behavior disappointed her. At the dinner table she always sat at her husband's right so they could hold hands, characteristic of their devotion to each other. Dinner conversation centered around the children and what they were doing and the day's activities. Alice Merrill Horne, a granddaughter of Bathsheba Smith, often visited the home and remarked on the orderly yet loving atmosphere there:

"At noon times, each child curled, clean-bibbed and fresh-aproned, sat up at a table, ready for the father's entrance with his loving kisses at the stroke of 12:00. When the mother finished the weekly ironing of 28 starched dresses—the weekly allowance for the girls adorned the ample clotheshorse. The writer often wondered how the children were up and dressed with such promptness and she one morning witnessed the method: Uncle Will and Aunt Clarissa chose up sides and ran races to see which side should be dressed first, and every child was washed and smiling dressed and up to the breakfast table almost before I could say 'Jack Robinson.'" [^12]

In 1919 Clarissa and William built a large home at 1401 Sigsbee Avenue in the Federal Heights area of Salt Lake City, near the University of Utah. When their children were grown, they gathered every Sunday evening at their parents' home for supper and visiting with the ever-expanding family.

The Williamses valued education and urged their children to attend college. Clarissa especially had strong feelings about education for women and believed that higher education for girls was a necessity, not a luxury. She and William gave Eva, their first child to graduate from the University of Utah, a black graduation gown, which has been worn by all succeeding college graduates in the family.

In 1884 William established Co-op Furniture on West South Temple in Salt Lake City. A few years later the company moved to Main Street, next door to ZCMI. William was known as an astute businessman, but one who was fair and honest. Clarissa occasionally helped in the store as a bookkeeper. Co-op Furniture provided a good living for William and Clarissa, who enjoyed their money but were not ostentatious, although William always had fine horses and owned one of the first automobiles in Salt Lake City. When they traveled on both business and pleasure trips, they frequently took the children with them. During the summers, the entire family, joined by extended family of aunts, uncles, and cousins, spent time together in their mountain summer home.

Clarissa and William supported and complemented each other to a remarkable degree. In addition to running his furniture business, William was involved in numerous church and civic commitments, serving as Red Cross city chairman, state senator, and member of the Board of Regents of the University of Utah. He was active in several Welsh organizations as well. He, in turn, supported and encouraged Clarissa's activities outside the home. She once reminisced: "When I was married and had seven children, I was asked to be secretary of the Seventeenth Ward Relief Society. I felt that I could not do this with all of my little babies. But my husband said, 'My dear, you must do it; it is the very thing you need; you need to get away from the babies, and I will help you all I can, either by taking care of the children or making out your reports or copying your minutes, or any other thing I can do.'" [^13]

Clarissa was later called to preside over the Salt Lake Stake Relief Society. She also became involved in community organizations, including the Daughters of the Revolution and the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers. She was president of the Author's Club and a member of the Friendship Circle, both literary clubs. During World War I, she served as state chairman of the Woman's Committee of the National Council of Defense and on the Red Cross Civilian Committee. Clarissa and the woman who would become her successor as general Relief Society president, Louise Yates Robison, became friends while preparing surgical dressings for the Red Cross.

Clarissa and William were gracious hosts and entertained frequently. Their home on Sigsbee Avenue had a ballroom downstairs and was the scene of many parties. Clarissa was an expert cook, having taken classes from well-known chefs as well as helping to cook for her mother's boarders. She owned thirty-six place settings of fine china, which she used often. But her hospitality extended beyond setting a beautiful table and serving a delicious meal. She made her guests feet genuinely welcome in her home. A generous woman, she often served meals to uninvited guests. Her daughter Eva Williams Darger recalled, "As a little girl I remember the many hobos, vagrants or tramps who would knock at the back door for a 'handout.' One summer day when three or four men had come to the door for food, Mama asked, 'Where are these men coming from?' The hungry hobo said, 'Ma'am, there is a mark on the tree in your front yard that tells us that you are generous with your food. We have marks that let our friends know about mad dogs, gun crazy men and good victuals. You ought to be proud, Ma'am, of your generous reputation.'" [^14]

Clarissa's daughters inherited their mother's love of entertaining, for as adults, they and the daughters-in-law took turns hosting weekly Thursday luncheons at which Clarissa was the honored guest. These luncheons, Eva said, were "viewed as productions so the fine china, silver, crystal and linen were always used to set the table (often a card table in a small apartment) and the latest recipe from one of the current women's magazines was tried. All of the Williams girls prided ourselves on being excellent cooks and have always been as interested in the attractive presentation of the food as the taste and nutritional value." [^15]

A grandson, William C. VanLaw, described William and Clarissa as the "king and queen." He said: "Grandmother Williams was absolutely a beautiful woman and she had a stateliness about her that I've seen in very few people in all my life. When she walked into a room, everyone stopped talking and looked at her and admired her. She was always extremely well-groomed. She was a little on the heavy side and was extremely well-dressed. Navy was her favorite color. She had attractive jewelry which Grandfather I'm sure had given her. She was a stately woman. Grandfather, by the same token, was a very fine looking man. He was a little under six feet tall and was broad shouldered, very neat in appearance, wearing basically gray or navy suits.

"As I look back, I wonder what caused the charisma that they created with their family and with their friends. And it was just this graciousness about both of them and the stately approach they took. But they were just natural about everything; I don't ever remember either one of them putting on any airs. They were just delightful people to be around." [^16]

One of the reasons people liked Clarissa was that she liked people and remembered details about them. Evalyn D. Bennett, a granddaughter, said that with Clarissa's remarkable memory, "she could recall the face and name of just about everyone she ever met. She could come up with the circumstance of the meeting and incidentals about the events that would astound people. And she enjoyed laughing and had a wonderful sense of humor." [^17]

In 1901 Bathsheba W. Smith, the general Relief Society president, appointed Clarissa treasurer and member of the general board. When Emmeline B. Wells succeeded Sister Smith as general president in 1911, she selected Clarissa as first counselor.

The "Gracious General"

President Heber J. Grant called Clarissa to serve as the sixth president of the Relief Society in April 1921. She chose Jennie Brimhall Knight as first counselor and Louise Yates Robison as second counselor. Both women served in the presidency until Clarissa's release in 1928. The Salt Lake Telegram said of her appointment: "Mrs. Williams is gifted with rare executive ability and is a natural leader of women, being endowed with the highest quality of mind and heart. Her genial and friendly disposition, her pleasant personality and her goodness instinctively draw everyone to her." [^18]

During Clarissa's progressive administration, she combined the offices of secretary and treasurer and instituted modern accounting procedures for handling Relief Society funds. One of her major contributions came in her emphasis on social services. Concerned about infant and maternal mortality rates, the high number of child and adolescent deaths, lack of opportunities for the handicapped, and the low standard of living for many women, she expanded the Social Service Department of the Relief Society. The purpose of social service work, as she saw it, was to bring about advancements in "health, opportunity, and a decent standard of living for all those with whom we come in contact. Such an undertaking for general betterment comprehends careful preparation, training, educational work, and actual service." [^19]

Amy Brown Lyman, who was serving at that time as secretary-treasurer of the Relief Society, summarized some of the organization's programs: "With a view of improving the humanitarian work of the Society, regular study in the field of social service has been introduced in every ward and branch through the educational department in connection with the other well established courses. This study has included child welfare, poverty, disease, crime, employment and economic conditions, leisure time activities, etc. In addition, social service institutes have been held for the training of local workers and for the purpose of assisting them in solving some of their pressing practical problems. In connection with this work, a laboratory or department for experimental purposes and for training purposes has been established at Relief Society Headquarters." [^20]

Clarissa traveled extensively in the United States and abroad, visiting the ever-growing number of stakes. She also represented the Relief Society at two congresses of the National Council of Women, one in New Orleans, Louisiana, and the other in Cleveland, Ohio. In May 1914, she was one of nine United States delegates to the International Council of Women in Rome; and in 1925, when the council met in Washington, D.C., she was again in attendance.

William accompanied her to the Rome conference and they toured Europe afterwards, making an excursion to Wales in order to visit his family home in Brechfa. They were in England when World War I broke out and returned home immediately.

At the close of World War I, the U.S. government forbade any group or individual to store large quantities of food. The wheat from the grain storage program, which the Relief Society began in 1876, was therefore sold. As a result, wards that previously had large supplies of wheat suddenly had large supplies of cash. The Relief Society recommended that these funds be centralized in the Presiding Bishop's Office and that the accrued interest be used for health, maternity, and child welfare services. Clarissa was especially interested in the needs of handicapped and underprivileged children. One project the fund made possible was youth camps operated during the summers of 1924 to 1928, enabling city children to spend two weeks in the country. Other efforts involved health examinations for preschool children, a free milk fund, and courses in home hygiene and care of the sick.

Clarissa also proposed the creation of memorial funds to honor the past Relief Society presidents and to further important society projects. The general board approved her recommendation and honored her by establishing the Clarissa S. Williams Loan Fund for Public Health Nurses. Other memorials included the Eliza R. Snow Relief Society Memorial Prize Poem Fund, which provided first and second prizes for publication of poems in the Relief Society Magazine; the Zina D. H. Young Relief Society Memorial Nurse Loan Fund, for undergraduate nurses; the Bathsheba W. Smith Relief Society Memorial Temple Grant, which provided a yearly amount for temple work for women; and the Emmeline B. Wells Relief Society Memorial Loan Fund, established at Brigham Young University for upper-division female students.

William and Clarissa celebrated their fiftieth wedding anniversary in July 1927, although William was not well enough to greet guests. That December he died of cancer.

Knowing her own health was failing, and not wanting to hinder the work of the Relief Society, Clarissa asked for her release in October 1928, having served as general president for seven and a half years. In her last address as president, she said: "Now I like to feel that I have no regrets, that I have done my work as well as I could, that I have tried to have the spirit of the Lord with me at all times." [^21]

In the December 1928 issue of the Relief Society Magazine, the editors paid tribute to Clarissa: "President Williams always presided with graciousness and with dignity. She was never more lovable or appreciative than in those last days when she confided to the ward and to the stake officers and to her own Board her decision. . . . If there had ever been a particle of doubt about her generalship, which there had not, her closing hour crowned her as supreme." [^22]

Clarissa was a "leader of leaders" and an able administrator, but also "a friend of women," said Lotta Paul Baxter, Relief Society board member. "All women of her acquaintance felt her interest in them and her desire to make them happier by making surrounding conditions better. Filled with sympathy and understanding of the difficulties that beset women in remote places, she was thinking constantly of something to benefit them." [^23] Not only was she concerned about the physical welfare of women, but she also believed that women should develop their talents and skills and further their education so that they might make an impact on both the home and society.

Clarissa Smith Williams died on March 8, 1930, at the age of seventy-one. She was always devoted to the Lord's work and to the women she served, and in all of her relationships with family, friends, co-workers, and associates, she made lives happier and better through her gracious and genuine concern.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] All quotations in this chapter but two (notes 2 and 3) are taken from the family scrapbook compiled by Gladys Robison Winter, LDS Archives.
[^2] Jennie Knight Brimhall, "Louise Yates Robison," Relief Society Magazine 16 (January 1929): 3.
[^3] Oral History of Belle S. Spafford, LDS Archives, p. 40.
[^4] Reunion booklet, 1970, p. 9.
[^5] "Brigham Young," The Friend, June 1971, pp. 20-21.
[^6] "Mission to Wales," p. vii.
[^7] "Sketch of the Home Life of Clarissa S. Williams," Alice Merrill Horne, p. 1; in possession of Richard W. James.
[^8] "Report of Relief Society Conference," Relief Society Magazine 15 (December 1928): 668.
[^9] Letter dated July 27, 1877, in "Mission to Wales," p. 40.
[^10] Letter dated March 19, 1878, in possession of Richard W. James.
[^11] William N. Williams letter to Clarissa, dated December 31, 1878, in "Mission to Wales-1877-'79."
[^12] "Sketch of the Home Life of Clarissa S. Williams," p. 3.
[^13] "Report of Relief Society Conference," p. 668; quoted in Evalyn D. Bennett, Relief Society Legacy Lecture, March 1982.
[^14] Personal history of Eva W. Darger.
[^15] Ibid.
[^16] Oral history of William C. VanLaw, typescript in possession of Richard W. James, pp. 11-12.
[^17] Bennett, Legacy Lecture.
[^18] Salt Lake Telegram, April 2, 1921, p. 8.
[^19] Clarissa Smith Williams, quoted in Deseret News, September 23, 1925, p. 2.
[^20] Amy Brown Lyman, "Clarissa Smith Williams," typescript in possession of Evalyn Darger Bennett.
[^21] Bennett, Legacy Lecture.
[^22] "Report of Relief Society Conference," p. 651.
[^23] "Tributes to Clarissa Smith Williams," Relief Society Magazine 16 (May 1930): 226.
