Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

7

Louise Yates Robison

1928 - 1939

Louise Yates Robison, shy, self-effacing, and with little education and material wealth, could not have imagined as a young girl or even as a young mother that she would one day serve as general president of the Relief Society. Yet her faithful convert parents, her selfless service to others, her varied leadership experiences, and her understanding of the common women of the Church prepared her well to lead the Relief Society during the Depression years.

Louise's parents, Elizabeth Francis and Thomas Yates, were both from England. As a child, Elizabeth was told by her father, "We do not have the gospel the Bible tells about, but someday it will come and when it does, you must not be afraid to accept it." [^1] After she was married and had four children, Elizabeth heard about the restored gospel and was converted to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Her husband demanded that she abandon her new religion or give up her family, and her mother disowned her. But Elizabeth put her faith in a verse in the Bible that her father had taught her, "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Matthew 10:37.)

Elizabeth's husband left her, and she found work at a woolen mill to support her family. When he saw that she was getting along and still very happy with her new religion, he abducted their four little girls. Broken-hearted, Elizabeth spent the next six years and every pence she earned trying to locate her children. Two of the girls died when they were small, and she never saw them again. But many years later, in Utah, she and her remaining two daughters were finally reunited.

During those years of searching, Elizabeth met Elder Thomas Yates. His family were among the early converts in England, and Thomas served a six-and-a-half-year mission there. When Thomas saw how despairing and destitute Elizabeth was, he suggested that she live with his family. The two subsequently decided to join the gathering of Saints to Zion, and they were married in July 1863 on the journey west.

Arriving in Utah in October that year, Thomas and Elizabeth Yates lived in Lehi for a short time; then Church leaders sent them south with six other families to colonize Round Valley in Millard County. Finding only a few cottonwood trees and knee-high grass to greet them, the settlers lived in dugout shelters while they built log houses at the townsite of Scipio. There the Yates's first child, Elizabeth (Lizzie), was born in 1865. The next year Indians killed three members of the little colony in Scipio and drove off the settlers' cattle and horses. All the men were needed to recover the stolen livestock. Knowing it would not be safe for his wife and fifteen-month-old Lizzie to remain alone in the log house, Thomas hid them in a potato pit and secured the cover. Elizabeth, who was nine months pregnant, slipped on the crude ladder, fell in the pitch-dark pit, and spent a terrifying night injured and afraid the Indians might find her. A few days later Thomas and Elizabeth's second daughter was born in the only log house in town. The family soon moved to the log meetinghouse, where all the families in the settlement "forted up" as a further protection in the uneasy relations with the Indians. Elizabeth and Thomas named their second daughter Sarah Louisa Yates, and she became known as Louise. They had three other children: Emily, born in 1868; Thomas, 1870; and Maud, 1874. Emily and Maud died as children.

Pioneering had its hardships but also its pleasures, and Louise thought of her childhood as happy and her parents as "splendid, . . . refined, spiritual and loving." [^2] As a young girl, she learned to wash, dye and spin wool, knit stockings, and braid straw hats. Louise and her sisters always wore straw hats they fashioned themselves because Elizabeth would not let her daughters wear sunbonnets to church. She decorated their dresses and underclothing with velvet ribbon and lace she had brought from England. Louise knew the value her mother placed on fine things, for Elizabeth had given up her wagon seat and had walked across the plains rather than throw out her trunks of fabric and Haviland china.

"While candy was unknown," said Louise, "we always had a Christmas tree, decorated with molasses cookies, cut in fascinating shapes, and the ends of homemade tallow candles which had been saved for lighting the tree. Birthdays were never forgotten. There were always gifts under our breakfast plates—a new pinafore, handknit stockings, and often a homemade toy. For spring birthdays, a magic whistle made from the green twig of a tree was always a treasure." On their birthdays, the children were exempted from chores; the other children carried extra firewood and chips and did household duties for the birthday sibling.

A large child for her age, Louise claimed she was the ugly duckling of the family. She related an incident when her clumsiness, however, benefited her: "One time a neighbor gave my sister and me a real treat; a stalk each of sugar cane. Gentle cows roamed the streets, and they too enjoyed sugar cane. As we passed a cow on the way home, she caught Lizzie's cane in her mouth and easily drew it out of small hands. We were both frightened and ran home; Lizzie, wailing loudly, told of her adventure. Father asked how I had saved mine and I replied, 'I fell on it.' For years I could not understand my parents laughing over such a serious episode and Mother said, 'My poor child,' and laughed again."

In later years, Elizabeth acknowledged that Lizzie actually cried herself to sleep because her sister Louise was "so ugly no one would love her." Throughout her life, Louise was reserved and shy.

Louise learned fastidiousness from her mother, who maintained dignity and order in spite of pioneer conditions. Every evening one of the children carried water from the ditch so that Elizabeth and the children could take a sponge bath the next morning. Louise often heard her mother quote Grandfather Francis's words: "A lady does not leave home until her gloves are fastened and her veil adjusted." And Elizabeth seldom went out without her gloves and veil, even in Scipio. Louise followed her mother's example. Belle S. Spafford recalled in her own memoirs: "I never saw [Louise], not once to my memory, that she didn't have a pair of white gloves in her purse." [^3] Elizabeth also told her children that since they were gentle-born, their conduct must be good.

Since her mother served as ward Relief Society president for three years and then as president of the Millard Stake Relief Society for twenty-five years, Louise grew up with Relief Society. At her mother's side, she gleaned wheat for the Relief Society grain storage program, gathered "Sunday eggs" (money from eggs gathered on Sunday was donated to the Perpetual Emigration Fund), helped care for the sick, and prepared the dead for burial.

Louise learned lasting lessons on honesty from her father, who served as bishop of the Scipio Ward from 1882 until his death in 1903. He once bought a calf from a man who, several months later, claimed that Thomas had not paid for the animal. Thomas was sure that he had paid, but he did not have a receipt. Although he had saved enough money to attend general conference, he felt that he would not have the spirit to go if he had cheated someone so he paid for the calf a second time. Later, the man's wife remembered that Thomas had paid, and the man apologized.

As a young girl, Louise attended "School M'am Martin's" home school. Ann E. Martin set a high standard for education in the one-room dwelling that housed both her school and her family. Later, Louise attended classes in the Scipio town hall, which served as church, school, and amusement center.

When Lizzie was fifteen and Louise fourteen, they ventured from Scipio to Provo to attend the Brigham Young Academy. Riding to Provo on the train was a new adventure for the girls, and after their father found a home for them to live in, they experienced another first—going to the big city of Salt Lake for a "lark." Before he left Lizzie and Louise in Provo for his return trip to Scipio, Thomas bought the girls a bag of oranges, candy, and nuts, but he would not let them see him off at the train station—he didn't want to cry in front of them. After he left, Louise and Lizzie felt very homesick. Louise recalled, "Even our new dresses and the joy of wearing them for every day, our cambric underwear trimmed with store embroidery instead of the bleached muslin with homemade lace, could not make up to us our loneliness for our home."

The thoroughly English Yateses, wanted their children to have not only academic learning but also vocational training. They reared their children on the maxim, "Knowledge is never a burden; learn all you can." Thus, at the end of the year at Brigham Young Academy, Elizabeth took the girls to Salt Lake City and arranged for Lizzie to take a course in millinery, and Louise, in dressmaking.

Louise and Lyman

In 1882, when Louise turned sixteen, her formal education ended abruptly when Joseph Lyman Robison returned to Millard County from a mission to England and attended stake conference with his father, a member of the stake presidency. This was the first time stake conference had been held in their town hall, and all the Church members in Scipio turned out to give the building a thorough cleaning. They were proud of the spiffed-up hall except for the calcimined ceiling, which no amount of scrubbing could improve. Louise said, "There was nothing to do about it except to pray that the 'city visitors' would not notice the ceiling and upper walls, but we were sensitive over the mottled appearance."

Louise thought the young men in Scipio were "fine, but when this boy [Lyman Robison] came with his dashing sideburns, a derby hat and caned umbrella, latest clothes—well . . . " However, she observed that the first thing he did during the conference was notice the ceiling. "My high estimation dropped immediately," she said, "and I was hopping mad." Their next meeting occurred early one morning after Louise had stayed up all night sewing burial clothes. Her father called her to the kitchen and there she met Lyman face to face, embarrassed that he saw her "in such a mess."

Nonetheless, Lyman and Louise's relationship developed through the spring and summer months, and they were married October 11, 1883. Their first child, Lyman Harold Robison, was born eleven months later, followed over the next several years by the births of Florence, Rulon, Winifred, Gladys, and Dorothy.

For six years, Louise and Lyman and their growing family resided in Fillmore. Then they moved to Provo for a short time before settling in Salt Lake City. Although a hard worker and a devoted family man, Lyman was not a businessman. He was, by nature, a philosopher who read widely and thought deeply. Because his dreams to become a doctor were stifled by his strict New England father, Lyman ended up as a traveling corset salesman, an occupation he neither enjoyed nor prospered in.

Lyman and Louise had a warm, loving relationship throughout their marriage. Whenever Lyman's work took him out of town, he wrote cheerful and tender letters to her and also to his children as they began to leave home. He loved poetry and often included a poem or two in his letters.

Although financially hard-pressed, the Robisons provided a happy home environment for their children, who claimed they never noticed a lack of material goods, due, in part, to Louise's creativity in making holidays festive occasions. She continued the tradition of celebrating birthdays with the birthday child doing no work and choosing the dinner menu and manner of celebration. At Easter time, Louise created elaborate eggs, painting faces on empty egg shells—a baby in a baby bonnet, a Chinese man with a long black pigtail, a Floradora doll with an elegant hat.

Christmas brought its traditional festivities to the Robison household, although they seldom had a Christmas tree because Lyman admired trees so much he thought it a terrible sin to cut one down. He often told his children, "The groves were God's first temples." The children's homemade decorations adorned the house. They traditionally hung their stockings until adulthood, and Louise always set out two kinds of pie for Santa Claus on Christmas Eve. Her daughter Gladys R. Winter recalled, "Oh, those pies! I wonder if all children grow up as we did, with the firm assurance that Mama was the one best cook in the world. Her pies were superlative and generous."

Gladys also recalled the clever ways Louise devised to present the gifts: "I remember one Christmas morning, there was a myriad of colored ribbons with one end attached to the center light fixture in the dining room. There was a different color for each child, and when we'd follow the ribbon we'd find a gift. They went all over, upstairs, the back porch, under a sofa, until the whole morning was spent in retrieving them. Another time when we were older, every gift had to be accompanied by a bit of poetry or a rhyming jingle. Often, we didn't have the fancy things that most of our friends had, but our home was always full of understanding, happiness, and love."

Louise manifested that love especially when the children were sick Rulon recalled his mother bending over him when he awakened from one of his illnesses, "with the sweet, warm kindness that was so much a part of her." During Gladys's frequent bouts with tonsillitis, Louise would pick rose petals from the garden and press them against her hot face, then scatter more petals on the pillow to leave a pleasant fragrance. When the fever subsided and Gladys began to feel better, her mother made her comfortable in mounds of pillows, kept her warm with the best quilts, and served her "the daintiest, most appetizing trays with special linen and china." In fact, Gladys wondered how any child ever wanted to get well with Louise's pampering.

Louise was a cheerful person, often singing as she worked, and she had a sense of humor. Her method of discipline was very mild, and her children soon found that a disappointed look or an "I'm grieved to have my little girl [or boy] act like that!" was punishment more effective than a spanking.

She frequently recited poetry to her children. A typical verse was:

God give me sympathy and sense And help to keep my courage high, God give me calm and confidence And, please, a twinkle in my eye.

Her children also heard her repeat maxims, such as:

"Never put a nickel so close to your eye that you cannot see a dollar beyond it."

"Live above petty things; don't descend to their level."

"Welcome the task that takes you beyond yourself."

One of the philosophies Louise also lived by was to always accept a call in the Church and, even though it might be difficult at times to fulfill, to do her best. Rulon said: "I remember when we were growing up, [Mother] would leave the younger children in the charge of those who were older, and every week, through rain, snow or sleet, walk the 2 1/2 or 3 miles each way to take care of the Mutual Improvement duties. . . . She was alone and I knew she was afraid crossing the (then) empty fields and streets in the dark, but she never hesitated. . . . With such determination, one would expect a rather harsh, insensitive, uncompromising personality, but this was by no means the case. She was warm and sympathetic, self-forgetful, but thoughtful of others; demanding much from herself, she asked little of others. . . . She had a knack of thawing cold hearts; and those who talked with her, almost always went away with a smile and a lighter heart."

Despite her humble circumstances, Louise continued to appreciate the finer things of life. She loved nature, especially trees and flowers, which she planted in abundance everywhere she lived. Jennie Brimhall Knight, a friend of Louise's, admired the maple trees she planted in Provo. At Louise's suggestion, a Churchwide home beautification campaign was introduced. In the 1940s, a Daughters of the Utah Pioneers post in California honored Louise with a plaque in a eucalyptus grove commemorating her beautification efforts.

Although early marriage interrupted her schooling, Louise never quit learning. As each of her children went to school, she went through school with them, studying their lessons as she helped them with their homework. Rulon explained:

"By the time the youngest child was through school, Mother was better in his studies than any of us. I remember her discussing with us the various points of German, history, grammar, and mathematics. Not content with all this, when her children were grown, she enrolled in university extension courses, and during the time she spent seven or eight hours a day in the Burial Clothes department of the Relief Society, she would arise at 4:00 each morning and work two hours on this extension work, doing her housekeeping and the work she loved in the garden between 6:00 and 7:30 A.M., and again in the evening after work. This program went on, not for a few weeks, but for years. This is surely remarkable for its energy, and desire for improvement, and the ability to hold fast to such a program in spite of difficulties."

While Louise and her family were living in Provo, she noticed a large sore growing on her face, which her doctor diagnosed as cancer. Louise's bishop sent the stake patriarch, who asked if he could give Louise a patriarchal blessing before administering to her. In this blessing, he told her that her voice would be heard in many parts of the world. It was an extraordinary blessing under the circumstances, for until she moved to Provo, Louise had not held a church position, and at the time of the blessing she was secretary of the Mutual in her ward. Her face healed without a scar and without surgery, and through her forthcoming service the patriarchal blessing would be literally fulfilled—despite the fact that she was by nature, according to Gladys, "the shyest and most self-effacing of women, with little education and no wealth nor social position."

Louise was very shy, Gladys said. "I have never known a woman who was more eager to avoid the limelight. For instance, I worked in a large office, and for some time my health was not good, and when it was possible, Father would come in the car to pick me up, and often would ask Mother to come into the office to tell me he was ready. Although all the workers there were her good friends, it seemed physically impossible for her to face that big expanse of desks, with eyes looking at her. So I can imagine what courage and trust in her Father in Heaven it took for her to preside over and conduct a large conference of women or meet with the highest officials of the state and nation and represent them throughout the world."

The Robisons moved to Logan and then to Salt Lake City. Louise continued working in the MIA and learned a valuable lesson while serving as YWMIA president. She wanted two friends for her counselors, but the bishop called two other women instead. As they worked together in the presidency, Louise found these women to be ideal counselors, and they became the dearest of friends. She also endeared herself to the Mutual girls, who enlisted her help when the bishop, a strict man, objected to young people dancing the new round dances, including the waltz. At least once during an evening dance, Louise got the bishop in a corner of the room, with his back to the dance floor, and earnestly discussed problems so that he would not notice the young people doing the daring waltz. The bishop thought Louise a conscientious executive, while the MIA members thought she was an understanding leader.

Louise saw many opportunities to serve in both the Church and the community. During World War I, she took a Red Cross training course and prepared surgical dressings. An expert seamstress, she taught courses in gauze preparation and headed the Red Cross volunteers who worked at the Gardo House, the old home of Brigham Young's wife Amelia. She also volunteered with Travelers' Aid and gathered old clothes for refugees in the Near East. Gladys remarked about her mother's service:

"In later years, I have realized the tremendous amount of energy and time that Mother used in the various activities, for she never used a committee for honor or prestige, but she would volunteer for the hardest, grubbiest work, as in assembling and distributing old clothes, or in meeting the earliest and latest trains in serving with the Traveler's Aid. I can still see her in the middle of mounds of old clothes and old shoes, sorting and matching pairs and selecting and packing piles of clothing to be sent to those unfortunate refugees.

"Although her children were nearly grown when she was the busiest in these organizations, we were never conscious of her responsibilities and accomplishments because somehow she kept the home running smoothly with very few late meals, and the cake we wanted to take to a party, or a special dress that was needed, was always ready."

Relief Society Service

In 1914, Louise began her service in Relief Society, first as a stake board member and then as first counselor in the presidency in the Granite Stake Relief Society. At the general Relief Society general conference in October 1928, President Heber J. Grant released Emmeline B. Wells as president and announced the calling of Clarissa Smith Williams, with whom Louise had become good friends during their World War I Red Cross work. Then President Grant announced Jennie Knight as first counselor and Louise Robison as second counselor. Louise raised her hand in approval, surprised that the second counselor had a name so similar to hers. "I had never heard of her but I voted for her," Louise later said. "When I realized it was myself, I was so upset." She did not think she had the ability or the background to fulfill this calling, and she worried for days. But the words of her good friend Anna Musser gave her comfort and courage: "True, many people have money, but it is the poor and humble people that make up the Church."

Louise enjoyed her association with the other members of the presidency and with the Relief Society sisters they met in their visits to wards and stakes. Public speaking was difficult for her, but it helped her to overcome her inherent shyness. She extended her warmth and wit to everyone she served. "I enjoyed every minute that we spent in visiting the different wards and stakes, and going with the president to visit at conferences," she said. "We had many contraptions to travel in, such as a Ford without any brakes. That made President Williams very nervous."

Seven years later, on October 7, 1928, President Grant extended a call to Louise to serve as the seventh general president of the Relief Society. She chose Amy Brown Lyman as first counselor, Julia A. Child as second counselor, and Julia A. F. Lund as secretary-treasurer. Kate M. Barker succeeded Julia Child in April 1935.

Sustained on the eve of the Depression, Louise was a woman for her time. Acutely aware of her own lack of formal education and of material wealth, she focused her concern on those in similar circumstances. One of her significant accomplishments was the establishment of the Mormon Handicraft Shop in 1937. The economic stresses of the Depression forced many women to work, but Louise felt strongly that wherever possible, mothers should be at home with their children rather than in the workplace. The Mormon Handicraft Shop thus provided an outlet for women to market their home crafts. Such a concept was not entirely new to Louise, for her father had operated a co-op in Scipio for many years. Relief Society co-ops had also existed when a number of Relief Societies had their own halls in the early settlements, but these had gradually been discontinued. The Mormon Handicraft Shop located near Relief Society headquarters was the most successful of these cooperative ventures. The shop would continue to be operated by the Relief Society until 1986, when, because it no longer fit the needs of the worldwide church, it was turned over to Deseret Book Company.

Another of Louise's programs was the Singing Mothers Chorus. In 1934 the Relief Society sought a name for the choruses that sang at Relief Society general conferences and in the wards and stakes. One of Louise's favorite quotations, "A singing mother makes a happy home," inspired the selection of the name Singing Mothers. Always keeping women of modest means in mind, Louise insisted on a uniform of dark skirts and white blouses because she believed that most women would own a skirt and blouse and thus would not have to spend money on new outfits.

Although Louise held a position of influence and prestige, she never lost the common touch, according to Dorothy R. Bosquet, her youngest daughter. Dorothy and her sisters used to joke that they could never walk down Main Street if they were in a hurry because their mother would always stop and talk with everyone they met. Louise, warm and sympathetic in spite of her shyness, reached out to people, endearing herself to them by remembering the details of their lives. She remembered people's names as well as the names of their children and spouses. Rulon believed that such warmth and consideration made her "one of the most widely beloved women in the Church."

Once a young woman, away from home, pregnant, and unmarried, came to Louise's office—her door was never closed. While Louise listened to the woman's problems, she mended and cleaned her visitor's jacket, then arranged for interviews with several businesses and gave her money to buy a new dress and to have her hair done.

Louise also suggested that the general board adopt blue and gold as the official Relief Society colors. As early as 1896, general board minutes referred to Relief Society colors, but they were not made the official colors until Louise's administration.

Just as Louise reprimanded her children gently, when the Relief Society sisters needed a little nudging she did so with good humor and gentleness. Although General Authorities suggested that women remove their fashionably large hats during meetings, many women kept them on rather than disturb their hair or appearance. At the beginning of one Relief Society conference, Louise announced to the congregation, "Sisters, we are going to remain seated while we sing our first song. I'm sure you have books and papers and your hats on your laps, and I'm afraid it would be hard for you to hold all of them if you stand." There were smiles and surprise in the congregation as the embarrassed ladies quickly removed their hats.

As president of the Relief Society, Louise participated in the one-hundredth anniversary of the founding of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in April 1930. One of the celebration events was the opening of the Relief Society jubilee box, which contained letters, photographs, and memorabilia that had been gathered five decades earlier by Sarah M. Kimball, general secretary of the Relief Society. President Heber J. Grant, Church Historian Joseph Fielding Smith, the Relief Society presidency, members of the general board, and descendants of Sarah M. Kimball and other early Relief Society leaders opened the box. In it was a letter addressed to the secretary of the Relief Society in 1930:

Hon. Secretary: This is dedicated to you with the fond hope and firm belief you are enjoying many advantages and blessings that were not enjoyed by your predecessors.

May God abundantly bless you and your labors.

(Signed) Sarah M. Kimball

Sec, Relief Society

Salt Lake City

April 1st, 1881

In 1933, the First Presidency dedicated a monument at the site of the Joseph Smith store in Nauvoo, Illinois, commemorating the organization of the Relief Society at that site on March 17, 1842. General Authorities, Relief Society board members, descendants of Joseph and Emma Hale Smith, leaders of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, and officials from the state of Illinois and surrounding communities attended the dedicatory ceremonies. Twenty years later, the monument was moved to a new location, the site of the Nauvoo Temple.

Worldwide Influence

Louise fulfilled the promise in her patriarchal blessing that her voice would be heard in many parts of the world. She was the first general Relief Society president to visit branches and districts of the Church in England and Europe. She went to Hawaii, which she described as "paradise." She also attended a national conference of social workers in Toronto and visited Boston, Philadelphia, and Valley Forge.

By virtue of her position as Relief Society president, Louise was a member of the National Council of Women. In that capacity, she traveled to Washington, D.C., for an NCW conference and was entertained at the White House. When the NCW planned an international convention and invited women from all over the world to attend, Louise was asked to take charge of one of the meetings. At first, she felt that she simply could not do it. "Then," she said, "the thought came to my mind to make the best of all opportunities. The names I had to pronounce were terrible, most of them being foreigners. But it was a wonderful experience." She also traveled to Paris for an International Council of Women conference and worked on the Equal Moral Standards Committee.

Louise's husband, Lyman, who willingly and cheerfully encouraged his wife to serve in her various capacities, died in October 1935 at the age of seventy-six. On New Year's Eve, 1939, Louise was released after eleven years of service as general Relief Society president. She then moved to California to live with her daughter and son-in-law, Gladys and Stephen Winter. Ill for the last few months of her life, Sarah Louisa Yates Robison died on March 30, 1946, at the age of seventy-nine. Fittingly, the Singing Mothers sang at her funeral, which was held in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square in Salt Lake City.

Louise Y. Robison lived by the motto "Welcome the task that takes you beyond yourself." An unschooled, "common" woman, she had such strong faith in the Lord that she overcame extreme shyness and fear of public speaking to address audiences throughout the world. Called to the presidency at a stressful economic time, she established programs that helped lift the financial burdens of many Relief Society sisters. Her practical spirituality and refined humility made her an effective president for the era in which she served.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Amy Brown Lyman, In Retrospect: Autobiography of Amy Brown Lyman (Salt Lake City: General Board of Relief Society, 1945), p. 9.
[^2] Ibid., p. 166.
[^3] Ibid., p. 167.
