Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

8

Amy Brown Lyman

1940 - 1945

Amy Brown Lyman, general president of the Relief Society, sat at the honored guests' table in the Lafayette Ballroom of the Hotel Utah, it was the evening of March 20, 1943, and the Salt Lake City Council of Women had prepared a large banquet to honor seven women, including Amy. After dinner, the lights dimmed and a miniature drama opened on the stage. The spotlight focused on a young girl dressed in pale pink chiffon, Amy Kathryn Lyman, granddaughter of Amy Brown Lyman.

Amy Kathryn opened a book representing the autobiography of her grandmother and read: "Our home, a one and one-half story adobe house, was lighted with kerosene lamps and candles—lamps for downstairs and candles for upstairs. The candles were molded by my mother's own hands. As we ascended the stairs each evening, a mark on the candle indicated how long we could study or visit or play before we retired." [^1]

As Amy Kathryn read, Amy Brown Lyman's daughter, Margaret Lyman Schreiner, walked onto the stage dressed as Amy's mother and sat in a chair by an old-fashioned table. Four children came in and gathered around Mother Brown, who went through the motions of lighting a candle. In pantomime, she explained the mark on the candle, kissed each child good night, and sent all four up a set of rag-carpeted stairs.

Memories no doubt flooded Amy's mind as she watched the spotlight return to Amy Kathryn, who closed the book and then said to the audience: "The idea intrigued me. I visualized my grandmother as a little girl, in a gray linsey-wool dress, her dark hair combed smoothly from her face. In my mind I could see her eyes fastened on the mark her mother had made on the candle she carried, and I know she was hoping it would burn slowly that she might get as much reading done as possible. Again and again I thought of her letting a brother or sister light a candle from hers, and of the uncountable times she has let others light theirs also. I thought of the dark corners into which she carried her lighted candle. Then suddenly I knew it was because she carried a 'candle,' because she shared her 'light' with thousands of others that she is a great and noble woman." [^2]

Picking up a white candle set in an old-fashioned candlestick decorated with fresh, pastel-colored flowers, Amy Kathryn continued, "She is my grandmother and I should be modest, but she lighted my candle too, and I am grateful. So now, dear Grandmother, I return the light to you, the giver, that you may go on sharing it with others!" [^3] She carried the candle the full length of the ballroom and presented it to her grandmother. As applause filled the room, tears filled Amy Brown Lyman's eyes.

Amy Brown Lyman's brilliant mind and humanitarian efforts did indeed provide a light during the dark years of World War I, the Great Depression of the 1930s, and World War II. A pioneer in the field of social services, she was also a teacher, a master of organization, and a loving wife, mother, and friend. Her energy was as boundless as her willingness to serve.

A Compassionate Child

Amy was born on a cold, brisk morning, February 7, 1872, in Pleasant Grove, Utah. Her father, John Brown, an early Utah pioneer, served as city mayor for twenty years, as ward bishop for twenty-eight years, and as state legislator for nineteen years. To stimulate his love of learning and his fine intellect, he spent a considerable amount of money on books and built up a fine library in his home. He believed that all his children should receive an education, including the girls.

Not only did John's educational philosophy become an integral part of Amy's personality, so did his precepts of self-discipline. A gentle man, he believed that emotional upsets and temper tantrums were infantile reactions that people later regretted and should always avoid. He taught his children to control themselves and master unpleasant situations.

Amy was the twenty-third of John's twenty-five children, a daughter of Margaret Zimmerman, his third wife. Together, they had ten children: Julianna, Harriet, twins Josephine and Joseph, Lydia, Margaret, Susan, Amy, John, and Lawrence. Margaret was always proud of her German ancestors, especially her parents, who joined the Church in Pennsylvania and moved to Utah in 1851. And, like her husband, she placed a high value on education, creating in her home an atmosphere of learning where her children's minds could thrive.

Though Pleasant Grove was a small town, Amy thought of it as a delightful, interesting, and even sacred place. She thrilled to the stories of many early Utah pioneers who lived there, stories of the Mormon Battalion, Zion's Camp, the persecutions in Missouri, and the Indian Wars in Utah. Converts from Scandinavia, England, Ireland, Wales, Scotland, and Germany added a touch of the Old World. There was little evidence of wealth or elegance, but high educational, moral, and spiritual standards prevailed. As Amy remarked, "We had plain living, but high thinking." [^4]

Amy's intellectual development was balanced by a concern for others, which grew and matured as she followed her mother's example. She reminisced in her autobiography, In Retrospect, that although her mother was a partial invalid as the result of improper care during childbirth, she not only directed the affairs of her household but also helped solve the social and economic problems of many of her friends and neighbors. Amy noted that her mother "was forceful, dynamic, and efficient, yet she was tender and sympathetic. A strict disciplinarian, she kept both her children and her house 'in order.' Some might have thought that she dominated the lives of her children and required too much of them, and probably this was the case, but she was so wise and farseeing, and her judgment was so good, that we had more confidence in her ideas than we had in our own, and usually were willing to accept any plan she had for us without much argument." [^5] Amy possessed many of her mother's characteristics.

Margaret's example showed Amy that one person with initiative can make a difference in the community. For example, when contagious diseases threatened, Margaret studied Doctor Gunn's Medical Book and learned the various symptoms and treatments, after which she advised and treated the whole neighborhood. During one epidemic of smallpox, she secured a piece of scab from a sore on the arm of a relative in Lehi who had been vaccinated. Following Doctor Gunn's advice, she dipped a needle in alcohol, then on the scab, and proceeded to vaccinate all her children.

Serious disease was a part of daily life in those years. During one outbreak of diphtheria, three of the five children in a neighbor's family died. Amy remembered seeing the black, homemade coffins passed through a bedroom window and placed on the bed of a farm wagon to be taken to the cemetery. In another family, in which five out of eight children contracted diphtheria, Amy watched the frightened parents set fire to their own home. She knew of children who lost their hearing from scarlet fever and others who suffered from the measles. Such experiences struck a responsive chord in young Amy, but the strongest impact came from the death and disease that hovered over her own family.

When Amy was ten, her half-sister Laura and five other women in Pleasant Grove died from childbed fever. A midwife had innocently transmitted the disease, leaving six newborn babies motherless. A woman of action, Margaret Brown secured a teacher and organized a class in obstetrics and nursing for the benefit of young women in Pleasant Grove. Amy learned from her mother's example, and throughout her life she organized many social-service classes and agencies.

Eliza R. Snow and Zina D. H. Young came on several occasions to bless and comfort Amy's semi-invalid mother. Their visits impressed Amy, who wrote: "On one occasion we children were permitted in the room and were allowed to kneel in prayer with these sisters, and later to hear their fervent appeals for mother's recovery. They placed their hands upon her head and promised that through our united faith she would be spared to her family. This was an impressive spiritual experience for us, and the fulfillment of this promise was a testimony." [^6]

Not only did Margaret Brown live to raise her family, but she lived a total of ninety-three years, a generous fulfillment of the blessing.

Education and Marriage

The high expectations of her parents motivated Amy to seek an education, She attended classes first in the old United Order Hall in Pleasant Grove, then in the community schoolhouse. Six teachers, including one of her older sisters, taught her during her school years. Two of these teachers had attended Brigham Young Academy in Provo, and Amy decided to follow their example. More young people attended Brigham Young Academy from Pleasant Grove than from any other town of its size. Amy wrote of her experience there:

"To me the school was a surprise, a marvel, and a delight. It did not matter that the building was a plain, ordinary warehouse, nor that the desks were long, crude, table affairs, with chairs of the kitchen variety. It was the spirit and atmosphere of the institution which were so fascinating and satisfying. I had heard a great deal from my brothers and sisters and other former students about how fine the school was, how the spirit of the gospel permeated every quarter, and how the students regarded religion as the most important subject in the whole curriculum. I had anticipated much, but the reality exceeded my expectations, and I found that the wonders of the school had not half been told. That year seemed to me to be the happiest of my life, and the world such a fascinating place in which to live. It was during this period that I met and fell in love with my future husband, Richard R. Lyman—so why shouldn't it be the happiest time of my life?" [^7]

Richard came from a prominent pioneer family. His father, Francis M. Lyman, was an apostle in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and his great-grandfather, Amasa Mason Lyman, served at one time as a counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Tall and handsome, Richard possessed a brilliant mind and high ambitions, and he was pleased to find an intellectual equal in Amy Brown. They enjoyed long, stimulating discussions of ideas and issues and shared deep religious beliefs. Their wedding plans were delayed, however, because Richard had been accepted for admission to the University of Michigan. Since only single students could pursue undergraduate studies, Amy patiently remained behind while Richard moved to Ann Arbor. Marriage would have to wait until after his graduation.

While Richard was away at school, Amy continued her studies at Brigham Young Academy, where Dr. Karl G. Maeser became her mentor. She said of his tutelage: "Next to my own parents, Brother Maeser influenced my life. He stood at the head and was really the soul of the institution. Tall and thin, dressed in a Prince Albert coat, he personified the idea of the old professor, and ruled the school like a general. Trained for his work in Old-World education centers, he was an educator of the first rank, a fine scholar, and a finished teacher." [^8]

Amy graduated from the academy's Normal School in June 1890, giving a speech at the commencement exercises. A few weeks later, Dr. Maeser asked her to come back to the academy and take charge of the Primary Department. She accepted the position, at a salary of forty dollars a month. During the next three years, she boarded in the Maeser home, where she was treated as a daughter. Though she enjoyed her work, at times she "felt that teaching in a Church school had its handicaps, especially for young women who loved fun, parties, and dancing as I did." [^9] On one occasion Brother Maeser advised her not to attend a masquerade ball. She argued the point with him but she gave in and sat on "the bald-headed row" with the older people and watched her friends dance.

In 1894, Amy decided to leave the academy and found a job teaching in the Salt Lake City schools. The end of that school year marked the end of the long wait for Amy and Richard. In the summer of 1895, she traveled with her future father-in-law, Francis M. Lyman, to Ann Arbor for Richard's graduation. A popular student on campus, he had served as president of his class during both his sophomore and his senior years. His sense of humor and optimistic outlook won him many friends.

Richard's friends were also impressed by his fiancÃ©e. A friend, Alice Louise Reynolds, described Amy at that time: "The beauty of her hair and the exceptional loveliness of her brown eyes typified the unusualness of her intellectual and spiritual qualities. Her charm as a girl made her attractive in all circles. She was the most popular young person I have ever known. Back of her joyousness in life and its unfolding was the character developed in her pioneer home. 'Whatever she did, she sought to do well, and she succeeded." [^10]

On September 9, 1896, Richard and Amy were married in the Salt Lake Temple by President Joseph F. Smith. The couple moved to a home near the University of Utah, which was then located in downtown Salt Lake City, where Richard taught in the engineering department. Eventually he surveyed property along Salt Lake City's east bench for the present University of Utah campus. On December 8, 1897, Amy and Richard welcomed their first child, Wendell Brown Lyman.

By the summer of 1901 the Lymans needed a change, and Richard decided to take a leave of absence from the university for graduate studies at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York. While waiting for school to start there, he attended summer school at the University of Chicago.

Living in Chicago proved to be a turning point in Amy's life, A class in sociology opened a new world for her, and before the end of the quarter, she had made a commitment to help raise human life to a higher level through the expanding field of social work. She did volunteer work for various Chicago charities, including the famous social settlement Hull House, where she met its founder, Jane Addams. They became lifelong friends. Amy wrote of these experiences: "While my summer at Chicago University was only incidental to my husband's work there and was therefore of minor concern, it proved to be one of the very valuable periods of my school life." [^11] It was with reluctance that she left Chicago for Ithaca.

During their two-and-a-half-year stay at Cornell University, Amy again took classes while Richard earned a master's degree in civil engineering and a doctorate of philosophy. On September 15, 1901, their daughter Margaret was born. Meanwhile, Ithaca struggled with an epidemic of typhoid fever that infected more than a thousand victims within a few weeks and took many lives. Observing such suffering strengthened Amy's resolve to help others. Upon their return to Salt Lake City, the Lymans moved back to their home near the old University of Utah campus, and Richard returned to teaching. Over the years Amy also continued to take university classes.

On the Relief Society Board

In October 1909, Amy received a call to serve on the Relief Society general board. This came as a surprise, because she previously served in the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association and the Primary, but never Relief Society. Her first board meeting prompted her to write: "As I timidly entered the room I faced what seemed to me the most imposing group of women I had ever seen at such close range, I was well acquainted with only a few of them." [^12]

She had reason to feel intimidated. At the head of the table sat Bathsheba W. Smith, the only living member of the original Relief Society in Nauvoo and the fourth general Relief Society president. Emmeline B. Wells, editor of the Woman's Exponent and future president of the Relief Society, sat nearby. Among other prominent women gathered around the table were Clarissa Williams, also a future Relief Society president; Julina L. Smith, wife of President Joseph F. Smith; and Emma S. Woodruff, widow of President Wilford Woodruff.

That meeting foreshadowed Amy's position as a link between two generations of Relief Society leaders. She personally knew every president of the Relief Society from Eliza R. Snow to Belle S. Spafford. She served only one year with Bathsheba W. Smith, whom she described as "a large, fine-appearing woman with dignity and charm, balance and poise. She was direct and positive in her speech, however, and fearless in her actions." [^13]

When Bathsheba died in 1910, Emmeline B. Wells became president, and a close and cherished association developed between her and Amy that lasted more than a decade. Amy wrote, "Aunt Em was small in stature, dainty in person, very attractive personally, and naturally drew people to her." [^14] Amy served as Emmeline's assistant secretary from 1911 to 1913. She then served as general secretary until Emmeline's death in 1921 and throughout the presidency of Clarissa S. Williams.

During Clarissa's administration, President Joseph F. Smith commissioned Amy to modernize the Relief Society offices. He encouraged her to use as many people as necessary and to install the most modern equipment, including typewriters, filing cases, adding machines, and mimeograph equipment. She added secretaries and bookkeepers to the office staff, collected and compiled past records of the Relief Society, and improved reporting procedures by providing uniform record books for ward and stake Relief Societies.

Amy traveled extensively with both Emmeline B. Wells and Clarissa S. Williams. She described Sister Williams as "intelligent, well-read, and well-traveled. She was a large, fine-looking, dignified, motherly woman—cultured, kindly, gentle, and lovable." [^15] Amy believed that Sister Williams's attention to detail was her outstanding contribution to Relief Society work and that she was a thorough businesswoman and an able executive.

In 1913, Amy was involved as the Relief Society established a temple and burial clothes department and founded a Relief Society Home for the temporary lodging of women and girls seeking employment in Salt Lake City. In the fall of that year, the general board also began to publish a uniform course of study for the sisters. Susa Young Gates served as editor and Amy as one of the business managers of this monthly periodical, which was titled the Bulletin. Two years later the Bulletin was expanded and became the Relief Society Magazine. Amy worked in the business department of the magazine and served for two years as the editor. She referred to it as her "dearly beloved child."

Dedicated Humanitarian

Despite these many activities, welfare work remained the most interesting and important feature of Relief Society to Amy. She noticed that the Relief Society's early existence coincided with an especially productive period in the history and development of social welfare work. "There has been more progress in this field in this century than in all the centuries which preceded it," she wrote. "Prevention of poverty, disease, and crime is much better and much cheaper than relief or cure. Modern welfare calls for getting at the very roots of the trouble. The suggestive steps in family welfare are relief of existing distress, prevention of new distress, and the raising of human life to its highest level." [^16]

Amy contended that the Relief Society functioned as a catalyst for the relief of human suffering, and she was grateful that her positions allowed her to use the knowledge and training she had received. As general secretary, she served as one of a four-woman Utah delegation selected to take a special course in family welfare work at the University of Colorado during the fall and winter of 1917. The purpose of this course was to assist the Church in serving the needs of Latter-day Saint servicemen and their families. All four of the women returned to Utah and eventually became leaders in social work. Amy served as chairman of family consultation for the Salt Lake County chapter of the Red Cross and as supervisor of Red Cross Relief Society family work. In the fall of 1918, she returned to Colorado for additional training.

In January 1919, President Joseph F. Smith established a social welfare department and named Amy as the first director, a position she held until 1934, in addition to serving as general secretary and later as counselor in the Relief Society presidency. To expand the work of the department, she created a training program in which prospective caseworkers received six weeks of training in family welfare work at Brigham Young University. Stake delegates from throughout the Church took this course, then taught similar classes in their local communities. Over the next few years a total of 4,155 women were trained. Not only did they aid their bishops in the charitable work of the Church, but many of them also provided vital assistance to local officials who found themselves confronted with federal relief responsibilities in the midst of the Great Depression of the 1930s.

In 1922, Amy was nominated for a seat in the Utah legislature, an honor she recognized as an opportunity to further her humanitarian desires. Her platform was simple: "Legislative bodies should not be made up entirely of men; there should be enough women to foster and secure the necessary humanitarian social action." [^17] She won a seat in the legislature and was appointed chairman of the public health committee. Her responsibilities included gaining Utahns' support for the federal Sheppard-Towner Bill, which provided for maternity and infant care throughout the country. In support of this bill, the general board in 1923 urged local Relief Societies to prepare ready-to-use maternity bundles and layettes. The Relief Society also built two maternity hospitals and authorized the use of interest generated from wheat-storage funds for local clinics in the interest of maternity care and child health.

Amy's concerns also included humane treatment of the mentally ill and retarded. Through the Relief Society, she helped the women of Utah become instrumental in passing a bill in 1929 providing for an institution for the retarded. To give women firsthand experience with the conditions of the mentally ill, she rented a bus and regularly took Relief Society presidents to visit the State Mental Hospital in Provo. During the bus ride, she taught the presidents about mental illness and urged them to write letters to their legislators to make them aware of the need for better facilities.

Also in 1929, the governor of Utah selected Amy to work with a newly formed committee whose goal was to select a site for a new training school for the retarded. The resulting school in American Fork remained one of Amy's favorite projects. She served on the board of trustees for twelve years, from 1930 to 1942.

In all, Amy served on more than twenty-six local, national, and international boards and became acquainted with many prominent and influential people. On three occasions she was a delegate of the National Council of Women at sessions of the International Council of Women—in Washington, D.C., in 1925; in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, in 1936; and in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1938—and for ten years (1925 to 1934) she served as an executive officer of the International Council. She was entertained by royalty in several European countries, and many eminent people honored her for her leadership ability and humanitarian activities. She also represented Utah and the National Council of Women at the 1940 Women's Centennial Congress in New York, an event that celebrated one hundred years of organized women's activities.

Amy managed her personal life with the same flair for organization and high energy that characterized her public service. An excellent homemaker, she bottled some four hundred jars of fruit every year so that her family could have fruit every morning. She was especially proud of her grape jelly. A good cook, she enjoyed formal evening meals in the dining room, not only with her family, but often with friends, important visitors, or perhaps someone in need. The virtually invisible stitches on her hand-hemmed linens and her beautiful tatting attested to her abilities as a seamstress. She cleaned her home in an intense but well-organized week of annual spring cleaning.

To take good care of her health, Amy loved brisk, daily walks and sun baths. Coming home tired from a day's work at the office, she would rejuvenate herself for the evening by taking a bath, then lying on her bed for a while. She often welcomed friends and chatted with them while she rested.

The Lyman household was always a hub of activity as Amy and Richard pursued their various interests. Richard, serving as consulting engineer on three great water projects, enjoyed national prominence in hydraulic engineering. He also developed a well-known street-numbering plan, referred to as the Lyman Plan, used in Utah and other western states. His Church service included membership on general boards of the Young Men and the Sunday School, culminating in a call in 1919 to serve as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

New Family Challenges

In late 1925, with their son Wendell married and daughter Margaret in France studying music, Richard and Amy decided to close up their home. Richard was serving as a General Authority and Amy was busy with Relief Society and social work, so they determined that they would spend the winter at the Hotel Utah, on the same block as the Church office buildings. However, their lives changed dramatically on New Year's Eve when Wendell's wife, Rachel, died suddenly, leaving an eight-month-old baby. After Rachel's funeral, Wendell talked to his mother about caring for the child. Amy said, "Wendell, I'm too old to raise a baby." Then she proceeded to move back to their home, taking in Wendell and her granddaughter. Perhaps she remembered the example of her mother, who also raised a grandchild.

Amy Brown Lyman and her granddaughter, Amy Kathryn Lyman, bore similar names, resulting in a confusion that neither minded. Family members called them Big Amy and Little Amy, and the two became best friends. Little Amy always felt that she was at the center of her grandmother's life. Amy read to her granddaughter and taught her to sew, cook, and clean. A housekeeper helped care for the child during the day. After Amy Brown Lyman's call in October 1928 as first counselor to Louise Y. Robison in the Relief Society presidency, her granddaughter went with her to the women's offices in the Bishop's Building. Young Amy pretended to be at work, sitting at a small desk in her grandmother's office. Soon she became a favorite among all the women, not only in the Relief Society office, but in the YWMIA and Primary offices as well.

When Wendell died tragically in 1933, Amy comforted eight-year-old Amy Kathryn, quoting the philosophy of her own father, John Brown, on the importance of drawing on inner strength. She passed on to Amy Kathryn his belief that one should always be in control and master unpleasant situations.

In 1936, Richard was called to preside over the European Mission, which was responsible for all of the Church's missions in Continental Europe and the British Isles. Amy was set apart to take charge of the auxiliaries that served the women and children throughout the mission. They set sail on their fortieth wedding anniversary with Amy Kathryn and their housekeeper, Gladys Jenkins.

Amy enjoyed life in the mission field and developed a deep love for missionary work, for the mission presidents and their wives, for the missionaries, and for Latter-day Saint women in Europe. Through articles and editorials in the Millennial Star, she also taught the sisters in the mission. But letters—more in the form of conversations than business letters—served as the main line of communication between Amy and the various female leaders.

The Eighth General President

Impending war brought an early release for the Lymans in September 1938, but Amy's bonds of love and concern for the women she met in Europe only increased, especially when America later became involved in World War II. She carried this empathy for a worldwide sisterhood of Relief Society into her administration as eighth general president of the Relief Society, a calling she received on January 1, 1940, at age sixty-seven. She chose as her counselors Marcia K. Howells and Donna D. Sorensen, and as secretary Vera S. Pohlman. Belle S. Spafford followed Sister Sorensen as second counselor in late 1942.

Amy's immediate goals as president were to increase aid to those suffering from the war and to prepare for the 1942 centennial anniversary of the Relief Society. World War II, however, forced simplification of Relief Society programs. The presidency responded with such measures as discontinuing the Singing Mothers on a general level but encouraging ward and stake groups to continue; shortening the Relief Society educational year from nine months to eight months; limiting the size of stake boards; and eliminating general board travel to stakes and maintaining contact with the field through instructional publications.

The centennial celebrations, too, were scaled down but were nevertheless significant. Hundreds of yards of gold and blue satin were purchased to drape the interior of the Tabernacle and subsequently sold to women who wanted to make centennial quilts. The Relief Society also introduced a new official seal, with its "Charity Never Faileth" motto, and produced a Relief Society pin, a commemorative plate, and a book of selected poems by Relief Society women entitled Our Legacy. On March 17, 1942, the presidency planted a hardwood tree on Temple Square and encouraged the wards and stakes to plant trees in their own areas in honor of the centennial. President Heber J. Grant and Amy Brown Lyman broadcast a centennial radio program in the Salt Lake City area on March 17 and March 22 and sent a copy of the recording to every English-speaking Relief Society in North America.

Plans to house the Nauvoo Bell in a campanile on Temple Square as a centennial gift to the Church were also postponed because of the war. Sections of the campanile ended up in storage. After the war, construction of the Relief Society building took priority, and it wasn't until September 29, 1966, that the campanile was finally completed.

One facet of Relief Society, that of welfare service, continued to expand because of increasing wartime needs. Sisters donated more than three thousand pieces of clothing to the Central Bishops' Storehouse in Salt Lake City as the result of a sewing project managed by Donna Sorensen. Women also knitted clothing for the war effort, and ward Relief Societies sewed hospital gowns in their work meetings. Relief Society members taught Red Cross classes and assembled first-aid kits. The Relief Society Magazine carried frequent announcements and articles about wartime problems of both youth and adults.

The Church Welfare Committee, then in its early stages of development, also included the Relief Society presidency in its meetings. Amy actively supported this program, working closely with Elders Harold B. Lee and Marion G. Romney.

During Amy's term as president, she received numerous honors, including election to the Social Science Honor Society of America, the Distinguished Alumnus Award from Brigham Young University, honorary membership in the American Association of Mental Deficiency, and the Honorary Life Membership Award from the Utah State Conference of Social Work (which she helped organize in 1925).

Changing Seasons

In November 1943 Amy suffered a terrible personal tragedy when her husband, Richard, was released from the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and excommunicated from the Church, Although Amy was devastated by these events, she kept her personal feelings to herself. Following the counsel of her father to master unpleasant situations, she continued her daily activities and reminded her family not to look back but to go forward as much as possible. She continued to serve as general president of the Relief Society and performed her duties as the stress mounted within her. In September 1944 she asked to be released, and President Grant complied the following spring.

Richard and Amy worked through their private problems, made more difficult by their service in such public positions, and their marriage survived. Five years before Amy's death, Richard was rebaptized. His full priesthood blessings were restored posthumously in 1970.

Amy's strong testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ guided her life and helped her surmount the family tragedies she faced. "My testimony has been my anchor and my stay, my satisfaction in times of joy and gladness, my comfort in times of sorrow and discouragement," she wrote. "I am grateful for the opportunity of serving, . . . particularly in Relief Society where during most of my mature life I have worked so happily and contentedly with its thousands of members. I have visited in their homes, slept in their beds, and eaten at their tables and have thus learned of their beauty of character, their unselfishness, their understanding hearts, their faithfulness, and their sacrifices. I honor beyond my power of expression this great sisterhood of service." [^18]

Familiar activities filled the last fifteen years of Amy's life. Originally a founder of the University Women's Club, she joined with the group again and continued her activity in the Friendship Circle and the Author's Club. The Alice Louise Reynolds Club asked Amy to write a biography of Alice. The book, entitled A Lighter of Lamps, was published in 1947. In 1958 she had the honor of unveiling a memorial statue of Dr. Karl G. Maeser on the Brigham Young University campus. Amy also continued to serve in numerous social-services organizations, taught the literature lessons in her ward Relief Society, sewed, bottled fruit, and cared for friends and family members.

On December 5, 1959, while convalescing from a fall, Amy died at age eighty-seven at the home of her daughter, Margaret. Soon afterward, Richard commissioned Vera W. Pohlman, Amy's longtime secretary and friend, to write a biography of his "marvelous and matchless companion for sixty-two years." [^19] The book, In Memoriam, was published in 1960.

Amy Brown Lyman served as an officer of the Relief Society for a total of thirty-two years, including two years as a member of the general board, two years as assistant secretary, fifteen years as general secretary-treasurer, eight years as first counselor to Louise Y. Robison, and five years as eighth general president. The healing efforts of this dedicated humanitarian brought peace to many who suffered, hope to the despondent, and the charity that "never faileth" to the sisters of the Relief Society.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Telephone interview with Edythe K. Watson, March 30, 1989.
[^2] Belle Spafford Oral History, LDS Archives, p. 1. Hereafter cited as Oral History.
[^3] Oral History, p. 2.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] Ibid., p. 4.
[^7] Ibid., p. 5.
[^8] Ibid., p. 3.
[^9] Ibid., p. 23.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Ibid., p. 22.
[^12] Church News, February 24, 1973, p. 5.
[^13] Janet Nimer, Relief Society Legacy Lecture, March 1982, p. 3.
[^14] "Tribute to Belle S. Spafford by Her Family," scrapbook, in possession of Janet S. Nimer.
[^15] Joann Woodruff Bair, "Belle Spafford: A Sketch," Dialogue, Summer 1971, p. 72.
[^16] Ibid., p. 73.
[^17] Oral History, pp. 11-13.
[^18] Ibid., p. 24.
[^19] Ibid., p. 15.
