Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

9

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle Smith Spafford

PPSpafford, Belle S.1945 - 1974

PPSpafford, Belle S.The president of the National Council of Women, seeing the familiar face of Belle Smith Spafford in the crowd of women awaiting the start of a council meeting in New York City's Waldorf Astoria Hotel, hurried over and asked Belle to sit at the head table. But Belle declined, saying that she had been released as Relief Society general president and from the executive board of the National Council of Women. The president insisted, however, and Belle was seated at the long table of illustrious women from around the world, including a princess and the presidents of several prominent women's organizations.

PPSpafford, Belle S.As the meeting began, the president introduced each of the women by name, country, and organization; but when she came to Belle, she simply said, "You all know our dear Belle."

The women at the table rose to give Belle a standing ovation. [^1] They knew her indeed—as a woman, a sister, and a friend who truly belonged to the world.

PPSpafford, Belle S.The three decades that Belle Spafford served as Relief Society general president, from 1945 to 1974, saw sweeping changes in the world and in the status of women. She was a constant and steady guide through this turbulent era, both in the Church and in the national and international world of women. During her administration, the Relief Society grew from a largely English-speaking organization of one hundred thousand members to a worldwide organization of nearly a million sisters in sixty-five countries. As a young woman, however, she had to be converted to Relief Society herself.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle was born on October 8, 1895, the seventh and last child of Hester Sims and John Gibson Smith. Hester named her Marion Isabelle Sims Smith, but she was always known simply as Belle. Seven months earlier, Hester was enjoying a happy marriage, security in John's business, and six children with another on the way. She felt that her "cup of joy was full." Then suddenly John had died, and Hester went through her pregnancy without his love and support. Though she had many struggles, she managed to raise her family with faith and courage. A friend of hers said, "I don't think I've ever encountered a woman who knew better where she was going or who had greater strength in controlling her sense of direction. She always appeared to me as a woman who was at peace with herself." [^2]

PPSpafford, Belle S."Mother never allowed us to feel that we were without a father," Belle said. "She would often say to us (and all of us remember this), 'Why, you're not without a father. You have a father. He's not with us, but he is taking care of us, I'm sure. And you have a Heavenly Father, and you have the father of the ward who is the bishop.'" [^3] The oldest son was sixteen and held the Aaronic Priesthood when John died. Hester asked him to sit at the head of the table in "Pa's chair," then told her children, "We do have the priesthood in our home. And he sits at the head of the table." [^4]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Although Hester received a monthly income from John's business and did not have to work outside her home, money was generally in short supply. She taught Belle and her other children to work and to be careful with money, but she also told them, "I don't want you to be stingy. I want you to be thrifty, and there's a difference between thrift and stinginess." [^5]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle learned that Hester's philosophy toward money did not necessarily mean spending it on the most practical thing, but on the most significant. When Belle was in high school, the student body president invited her to the junior prom. Excited about the date, Belle talked to her mother about a new dress. Hester replied that she did have four dollars, enough to buy satin for a party dress, but she reminded Belle that a textbook she needed at school also cost four dollars. When she asked her daughter to choose between the dress and the book, teenaged Belle chose the dress. Hester enthusiastically made a pink satin dress and bought pink slippers to match.

PPSpafford, Belle S."That was a very wise decision," Belle later said, "because for a girl in high school it was important. And then I recall mother very quietly said to me, 'You know that textbook is in the school library.' So she was a wise mother." [^6]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle recalled another important lesson her mother taught her. One of Belle's childhood friends was the daughter of the president of a neighboring stake. One night when Belle joined the family for dinner, the conversation focused on some of the General Authorities. Family members told amusing, but uncomplimentary, stories. When Belle repeated the stories to her mother, Hester exclaimed, "Oh, don't we feel sorry for those children, that their parents would allow them to tell stories like that about the General Authorities? Tonight in our family prayer we must remember to pray for those children." [^7]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Hester shared with her children her love of music, art, and good books and firmly implanted in their minds the importance of education. Belle and her brothers and sisters took music lessons, served missions, and earned college degrees. They also learned practical lessons from the sayings their mother often quoted:

PPSpafford, Belle S."Never speak or act out of the wealth of your ambition and ego and the poverty of your knowledge and experience."

PPSpafford, Belle S."An eighth of an inch makes a difference, especially if it's at the end of your nose."

PPSpafford, Belle S."Never point out your own faults. Others recognize them soon enough."

PPSpafford, Belle S."Take what God gives and build a house of happiness."

PPSpafford, Belle S."No investment pays dividends as high as kindness."

PPSpafford, Belle S."Many a man who is too weak to climb to the mountaintop can point the way for another man to reach it."

PPSpafford, Belle S."Never fight a mad dog. You will lose."

PPSpafford, Belle S."Accept people as you find them, not as others represent them to be." [^8]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Hester's Scottish mother, Isabella McMurrin Sims, for whom Belle was named, significantly influenced Belle's life. She lived with the Smiths after Belle's father died, A very strong personality, Grandmother Sims was the final word in advice or counsel. She often told her grandchildren that whenever they received praise or a compliment, they were to "see that ye're desairvin'."

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle could not remember a time when her grandmother did not wear a black silk dress to church meetings, and as a young girl she used to sit and look at her in Sunday School and think she was the most elegant woman in the Church. [^9] Isabella often pinned to her dress a gold watch, which Belle always admired. One day she approached her and said, "Grandmother, when you die will you will me your beautiful watch?" Isabella replied, "By the time I'm gone the watch will be gone also. I want to leave you something far more precious that I brought from Scotland. I want to leave you my testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel." [^10]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Although Isabella had a firm testimony of the gospel, her testimony of the Word of Wisdom did not develop until she was nearly eighty, when she finally gave up drinking tea each morning with her bowl of Scottish oats. Afterward, someone reminded her that she had heard the Brethren preaching observance of the Word of Wisdom since the time of Brigham Young. Belle said that her grandmother had taught her a great lesson when she replied, "I know, but now I'm converted." [^11]

PPSpafford, Belle S.The Smith family lived in the Pioneer Stake on the west side of Salt Lake City until Belle graduated from the Latter-day Saint High School and finished a two-year Normal School course at the University of Utah. During the influenza epidemic of 1918, the wife of Belle's brother John died while pregnant with her third child. Hester moved to Provo to care for the children and John, and Belle moved with her, continuing her studies at the Brigham Young University Training School.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Courtship and Marriage

PPSpafford, Belle S.The Smiths' move to Provo profoundly affected Belle's life, for there she met Willis Earl Spafford, who had just returned from service in World War I and enrolled at Brigham Young University. Handsome and athletic, Earl played basketball at the university and enjoyed tennis and ice skating. He and Belle met at a school social function and soon found that they had much in common. They were married on March 23, 1921, in the Salt Lake Temple.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Early in her marriage, Belle taught courses at Brigham Young University in remedial work for retarded children—what would later be known as special education. This experience laid the foundation for her deep interest in social work and her ongoing concern for human needs.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle and Earl had two children: a daughter, Mary, born in 1923; and a son, Earl Smith, born in 1926. The year that young Earl was born, the family moved to Salt Lake City, where they bought a home on Fifth East and Garfield Avenue. Earl was employed by New York Life Insurance Company and later became a deputy collector for the Internal Revenue Service.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Mary and Earl grew up in a home where their mother believed that "the most valuable contribution that a woman can make to society is to rear children who have internalized a sense of worthwhile values through the family teaching that would enable them to function as responsible citizens." [^12] Mary became a teacher and social worker. She and her husband, Clarence W. Kemp, resided in Chicago and were the parents of five sons. Earl graduated from the University of Utah School of Law and practiced law in Salt Lake City. He and his wife, Iris Montague, had three sons and two daughters.

PPSpafford, Belle S.When their children were small, Earl suggested that Belle take classes at the University of Utah. He hired help for her at home, which gave her time to pursue her studies in social work. Whether formally or informally, she continued to learn throughout her life. Whenever she received a new call or assignment that she felt unprepared for, she took classes to learn what she needed to know. For example, when she became editor of the Relief Society Magazine, she enrolled in English composition; and while serving as chairman of a Church history curriculum committee, she took a class at the University of Utah on the westward movement. Her friends and family members knew they should not telephone after nine o'clock in the evening, for that was her study time. She read the scriptures and books on whatever subject she was currently interested in. When asked why she formed this nightly study habit, she replied: "One, because it is a commandment, and two, because when I get to the other side I want to have something to talk about with some of the prominent men and women in history." [^13]

PPSpafford, Belle S.When her grandchildren came along, Belle established "scholar night," a one-on-one night with each of them. She would invite a grandchild to dinner, and then they would study or play together, depending on her perception of the child's needs. Each of the grandchildren felt that he or she was the favorite grandchild. They all knew they could call their grandmother at any time, even during important meetings, and she would take time for them.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Her son, Earl, recalled Belle's devotion to her family as her most important assignment. "Throughout my life mother has enjoyed a position of prominence and respect in both the church and world community," he said, "but those of us who are close to her, her children, her grandchildren, and her husband, when living, have always viewed her not in the light of prominence, but as a warm and affectionate woman who always seemed to have time for the little things. She has cooked with her daughters and granddaughters, she has taught us social graces, she has been our tutor, our comforter, our counselor and our confidant." [^14]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle's warmth and affection were also apparent in her keen sense of humor. She enjoyed telling humorous stories, and she and her son particularly liked exchanging jokes. One of her grandsons commented, "Grandma is the only person I know that could tell the same old joke over and over again and get a laugh every time." She even got the last laugh by attaching a humorous poem to her will.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle's sense of humor not only brightened her family life but also helped her to cope with the many demands placed upon her and to put others at ease. Often when she received a compliment for something she accomplished, she jokingly replied, "I've done pretty well for a little girl who lived on the wrong side of the railroad tracks." Once at a women's club luncheon as she began to speak, loud music issued from the intercom. When the music stopped, she started her speech again; but almost on cue, the music sounded out again, and no one knew how to turn it off. When her talk was interrupted for the third time, she said, "Don't let this trouble you. I'm used to giving musical readings; many people prefer them, so I will just go on." [^15]

PPSpafford, Belle S.A Relief Society Convert

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle's conversion to Relief Society began when the Spaffords moved to Salt Lake City in 1926. As a young woman she taught Sunday School and a religion class, a forerunner of seminary, and at age seventeen, she was president of a ward YWMIA. She was thirty when she settled into the Belvedere Ward in Salt Lake City, and participating in an "old women's organization" like Relief Society was the farthest thing from her mind. She was more interested in accepting an invitation she had received to join a literary club. When her visiting teachers invited her to Relief Society, however, she remembered her own mother's devotion to the organization and agreed to go to the Tuesday morning meetings. [^16]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Though Belle attend the meetings regularly, she was shocked when Bishop George Bowles called her to be a counselor in the Relief Society presidency. She responded by saying, "That organization is for my mother, not for me." She told him that she had no experience for the calling and said, furthermore, that she had "no desire to learn."

PPSpafford, Belle S.Although she accepted the call, her experiences did not soften her feelings toward Relief Society. Because the chapel was being remodeled, weekday Relief Society was held in the furnace room in the basement. After three weeks of taking her children to Relief Society in the cold, drafty, cement-floored room, she decided to quit, saying, "Never, never will I come another day." She asked the bishop to release her. He listened patiently to her complaints and then said, "Sister Spafford, you know I somehow don't feel impressed to release you. I wish you would try a little longer, and eventually we'll have our meetinghouse finished and the furnace fixed. And I just don't feel to respond to your request." Belle agreed to stay on.

PPSpafford, Belle S.She agreed, that is, until her accident. When the Spaffords' car hit a telephone pole, Belle's face was severely cut by shattered glass. The pain from the resulting infection was so intense one Sunday evening that Earl called a doctor to come to the house, but because the abscess was too close to her facial nerves, the doctor could not lance it. Bishop Bowles stopped to see Belle that evening and gave her a blessing. Belle asked, "Bishop, now will you release me from Relief Society?" He told her he would pray about it. A few days later he returned and said, "I'm not impressed to release you from Relief Society. You stay." Belle conceded, saying, "Well, if that's your feeling under these circumstances, I'll stay and I'll quit complaining and I'll do my best." [^17]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle continued to serve in her ward Relief Society presidency. Then the stake president indicated that he wanted to issue a call for her to serve on the stake Relief Society board, but her ward Relief Society president wouldn't agree to Belle's release. Sometime later, however, the ward president suddenly changed her mind, telling Belle that one day she would explain why. Just before her death, the ward president asked Belle to visit her and related a dream that had prompted her change of mind. "In it," Belle recalled, "she said she saw me try to climb the stairs. She had been holding me back. And she saw I couldn't climb till she let go. At length she let go and I climbed the stairs and then she saw me one step from the top. And she said, 'I knew as well as I knew anything that that's where you would be, at the top in the Relief Society work.'" [^18]

PPSpafford, Belle S.After Belle received a call to the Relief Society general board in 1935, her former bishop, George Bowles, who was serving as a stake patriarch in California, telephoned her when he came to Salt Lake City for general conference and said he wanted to give her a blessing. In the blessing she was told, "I would use the night for the purposes for which the Lord designed it—for sleep, for rest, for restoration of my body—so that I would waken in the morning refreshed and ready to undertake the labors of the day." [^19] She enjoyed that blessing all her life.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Called to the general board during Louise Y. Robison's presidency, Belle was much surprised with her specific assignment. "Sister Robison immediately assigned me to the one division of work for which I was not qualified—homemaking," she later recalled. "I used to go to the quiltings in my own ward and the sisters wouldn't let me quilt. So when Sister Robison asked me which committee I would prefer to be on I said, 'Any but the homemaking. They won't let me quilt and I'm not a good seamstress, and I'd rather be on one of the educational committees.' So I was assigned to serve on the homemaking committee. What a wise president to give me that opportunity to catch the vision and the importance of the homemaking program. I worked very hard to make a contribution on this committee. I think the Lord prepares us every step of the way for our callings. He puts the opportunity before us, and if we take it and make the most of it we see the time when it was important for us to have it." [^20]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Two years later Belle became editor of the Relief Society Magazine, a position she held for eight years. She went to her mother for advice and reassurance, and Hester said: "Well, I'll tell you what your experience will be. The big problems and the big obstacles in the way won't bother you. The big trees on the path will not deter you. You will go around them, you will climb over them, or you will hack them down. But the vines will trip you. Watch for the vines." [^21]

PPSpafford, Belle S.a-Benson, Ezra TaftTPBelle wanted to improve the quality of the magazine and make it more readable. Hester, who had worked for a book publisher before marriage, advised her to select good paper and an appropriate typeface for the magazine. Belle chose a type large enough for the older sisters to read easily. With regard to content, Belle believed that the magazine should be an outlet for the literary efforts of the sisters and should contain the history of the Relief Society. Often through her editorials she taught lessons on such topics as graciousness and composure. Under her editorship, the magazine doubled its circulation.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Amy Brown Lyman became general president in January 1940, and two and a half years later, in October 1942, Belle became a counselor in the presidency. She also continued to serve as editor of the magazine.

PPSpafford, Belle S.Ninth Relief Society President

PPSpafford, Belle S.When Belle was asked to come to the office of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in April 1945, she expected to be released as a counselor. To her surprise, however, she was called to be the ninth general president of the Relief Society. Prior to her call, she had heard a rumor that the auxiliaries would be reorganized and that presidencies would serve for a term of five years. When she asked President Clark about the rumor, he peered at her over the rim of his eyeglasses and said, "You may not last that long, Sister." Then he added, "We hope that as you administer the affairs of the Relief Society, you will do so with the concept that the Relief Society is a companion organization to the Priesthood." [^22]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Belle chose as first counselor Marianne C. Sharp, a daughter of President Clark and Belle's closest friend. She remained as first counselor for Belle's entire term of office. As second counselor Belle selected Gertrude R. Garff. Velma Simonsen succeeded Sister Garff in September 1947, followed by Helen W. Anderson in January 1957 and Louise W. Madsen in August 1958.

PPSpafford, Belle S.At the Relief Society conference in October 1945, the first conference over which Belle presided and the first to be held in three years due to World War II, President George Albert Smith spoke on the purpose and blessing of Relief Society. Belle was emotionally stirred by his prophecy that in a few years women from Europe, South Africa, China, and the South Seas would attend Relief Society conference in the Tabernacle and that they would come by airplane in just a few hours. Belle asked President Smith after the meeting if he thought this could happen during her administration. When President Smith replied, "It very well could happen during your administration," Belle asked how women could possibly come to Salt Lake City from various parts of the world in just a few hours. President Smith responded, "I don't know that you need to worry about that. The Lord will take care of that." [^23]

PPSpafford, Belle S.Three years later, the Relief Society presidency hosted a special session for international sisters during general conference. Belle noted that every part of the world President Smith had mentioned in his prophecy was represented.

Spafford, Belle S.PPOne of Belle's significant and most tangible accomplishments as president was the construction of the Relief Society Building. Nineteenth-century Relief Society sisters had dreamed of having their own building in the shadow of the temple. In 1901, the First Presidency donated a building site, but that land was used instead for the Presiding Bishop's Office. At the 1945 Relief Society conference, the First Presidency approved a home for the Relief Society across the street from the Salt Lake Temple, literally in its shadow. Belle, with her board, suggested that every member of the Relief Society in the Church, which then numbered one hundred thousand, donate five dollars to the building fund. She also encouraged men to make gifts to honor their wives, mothers, or sisters. With sacrifice and effort, the Relief Society reached its half-million-dollar goal, and construction began in 1953. At the dedication on October 3, 1956, Belle spoke of "the beauty of its artistic decor, the simple elegance of classic design, the beauty of the bronze, marbles, and woods, and its spirit of love and peace. . . . The building is a magnificent symbol of faith, diligence, and devotion of all women." [^24]

Spafford, Belle S.PPAlong with her work in Relief Society, Belle became an influential leader in women's organizations throughout the world—most notably the National Council of Women and the International Council of Women, organizations established in 1888 to promote women's suffrage, to examine current women's issues and problems, and to protect the interests of women and children.

Spafford, Belle S.PPBelle's first experience with the National Council of Women was not a pleasant one, however. As a general board member, she represented the Relief Society at meetings of the council at its headquarters in New York City. At a luncheon, Belle attempted to find a seat at several tables where there were empty chairs, but at each table, the women, knowing she was a Mormon from Utah, told her the seats were taken. After being refused a seat at every available table, Belle approached the council president and said, "Where would you like me to sit? It seems that all the chairs are taken." The president, assessing the situation, graciously asked Belle to sit next to her at the head table. [^25]

Spafford, Belle S.PPBelle had been skeptical of the value to the Relief Society of membership in the council, so when she became the Relief Society president, she recommended to President George Albert Smith that the Relief Society withdraw. "President Smith thoughtfully read through our statements," she recalled. "In defense of our actions, I added, 'President Smith, it's costly for us to go to New York to attend their annual meetings and we really get nothing from the councils, either the National or International Council.'. . .

Spafford, Belle S.PP"He said, 'You surprise me. Do you always think in terms of what you get? Don't you think it's well at times to think in terms of what you have to give? Now I feel that Mormon women have something to give to women of the world and I believe also that you may learn from them. Rather than to terminate your membership, I suggest you take two or three of your ablest board members and attend the meetings and continue your membership in these organizations. . . . ' As I arose to leave, he extended his hand across the desk and grasping my hand firmly he said in a positive voice, 'Attend the forthcoming meetings and make your influence felt in those organizations.'" [^26]

Spafford, Belle S.PPBelle followed his counsel and made her influence felt. She was a member of the National Council of Women for forty-two years, serving on the executive committee and as vice-president from 1948 to 1956. She was also a delegate to the International Council of Women triennial meetings at Philadelphia in 1947, Montreal in 1957, and Washington, D.C., in 1963, and chairman of the U.S. delegation to the ICW triennial meetings at Helsinki, 1954; Teheran, 1966; and Bangkok, 1969.

Spafford, Belle S.PPIn 1968 Belle was nominated to be president of the National Council of Women. She turned the nomination down, believing that she could not serve effectively as president of both the council and the Relief Society. The council refused to accept her answer and asked Belle to talk with the president of her church about the matter. When she discussed the matter with President David O. McKay, he counseled her to accept the nomination and promised her more help with her Relief Society work, adding that his door would always be open to her. Belle was unanimously elected and served as president from 1968 to 1970, the first Latter-day Saint to hold that position.

Spafford, Belle S.PPIn all her spheres of influence, Belle was skillful in handling differences of opinion without compromising her standards and beliefs. Elder Marvin J. Ashton of the Council of the Twelve said of her, "She knew how to disagree without being disagreeable. She wore a velvet glove yet her grip was of steel." [^27]

Spafford, Belle S.PPMayola R. Miltenberger, who served as Relief Society general secretary for many years, noted how Belle's influence was felt in the National Council of Women: "I recall being with Sister Spafford in a large Eastern city at a meeting [when] she was a member of the executive committee. The room was filled with distinguished women, each of whom was a strong, articulate leader in her own right. A particularly thorny and difficult issue was being debated heatedly. Finally, the presiding officer turned to President Spafford and asked her to voice an opinion on the problem. In her thoughtful, measured way, Sister Spafford analyzed the matter, stating the issue fairly, without rancor or confrontation, and offering, at the same time, reasonable options that could be accepted by all present. After a few moments' silence, one of those present rose and in a subdued voice said, 'What Mrs. Spafford has just proposed calls to my mind our insignia [a lighted candle with the words "Lead Kindly Light" written in the smoke trail]. We have today been led by the "kindly light" of Belle S. Spafford.'" [^28]

Spafford, Belle S.PPA special interest of Belle's during these years was social service. As Relief Society president, she directed social-service agencies in Utah, Arizona, Nevada, and Idaho, and supervised programs for abused children and unwed mothers, adoptive services, youth guidance services, and Indian foster-care services. She was instrumental in getting legislation passed in the state of Utah to establish university programs to educate social workers, legislation that became a model for other western states. For her pioneering efforts in social services, the Utah State Conference of Social Work awarded her an honorary life membership and the University of Utah established the Belle S. Spafford Endowed Chair in Social Work.

Spafford, Belle S.PPHer community service included a wide range of organizations. She was a member of the National Advisory Committee to the White House Conference on Aging and served as vice-president of the American Mothers Committee and Advisory Board. She was the first female member of the Board of Governors of LDS Hospital and of the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University, a member and then an officer of the board of directors of the National Association for Practical Nurses, and a special lecturer at the School of Social Work at the University of Utah. Her numerous honors included honorary degrees and service citations from Brigham Young University, Ricks College, and the University of Utah; the Distinguished Service Award for the Crusade for Freedom; and the Pursuit of Excellence Award from the LDS Student Association. She was one of ten outstanding women from Utah cited in Famous Mothers in American History, 1776-1976, and one of seven named to the Salt Lake Council Women's Hall of Fame. While she was grateful for such honors, she was quick to attribute them to those who gave her so much behind-the-scenes support, especially her co-workers in the Relief Society and her family.

Spafford, Belle S.PPWhen Belle assumed her responsibilities as general president of the Relief Society, she determined that she would maintain a close and happy relationship with her family (Mary was twenty-two and Earl nineteen at the time). Her husband, Earl, suggested that she meet him every day for lunch, and over the years the Spaffords claimed they "found every eating place in town, both good and bad." [^29] Earl was completely supportive of his wife's Church and community work and freed her from worrying about many home details. Marianne C. Sharp said, "Without the tender care with which he has guarded her, without his unselfish acceptance of the calls which have been made upon her time, increasing with the passing of the years, without his full support and wholehearted cooperation, it would not have been possible for President Spafford to have continued her Church duties and at the same time to have cared for her family." [^30]

Spafford, Belle S.PPIn 1963, Belle's beloved husband, Earl, died of a heart attack, and within a year her daughter, Mary, also died. Belle was deeply grieved by these deaths, yet she adapted courageously to her change in lifestyle. Earl had taken care of so many details for her that as a widow she found it hard to remember to do such things as filling her car with gas. But she knew that adjusting to loss was part of living. She took an active part in raising Mary's five boys and became even more immersed in Relief Society.

Spafford, Belle S.PPIn 1970, the Relief Society Magazine was discontinued as part of the revision of the Church magazine system. In the future, all adult members of the Church would be encouraged to read the Ensign, which would incorporate features for women as well as the kinds of articles and features found in the Improvement Era. The Children's Friend was renamed the Friend, and a new magazine for youth, the New Era, was established. When Belle reported the discontinuance of the Relief Society Magazine to her general board, she said, "I've always been sure of two things: death and taxes. Now I'm sure of three things: death, taxes, and change." [^31] Though she regretted that the women had lost their magazine, she supported the decision to consolidate the Church's periodicals, commenting, "Adjustment is painful in changing an old pattern into a new one, but we must make the new pattern fit." [^32]

Spafford, Belle S.PPIn addition to writing articles and editorials for the Relief Society Magazine, Belle co-authored with Marianne C. Sharp A Centenary of Relief Society, a history of the first hundred years of Relief Society. She also wrote numerous articles for other Church publications and national women's magazines and in the 1970s published two books: Woman in Today's World (1971) and A Woman's Reach (1974).

Spafford, Belle S.PPAnother change the Relief Society adjusted to was the loss of its financial independence when the priesthood correlation program was established in the 1970s. Belle agreed with the General Authorities that Relief Society members would be able to devote more time to compassionate service and teaching the gospel if they were no longer concerned about generating and managing their own funds, She said, "This life is a life of choices. We sometimes don't like to get out of the groove that's been pleasant for us and step into a new groove that might present a few adjustments for us. We have to consider which in the ultimate is going to be the greatest benefit for the greatest number. Always I find that the decisions of the Brethren are right." [^33]

Spafford, Belle S.PPUnprecedented Changes

Spafford, Belle S.PPThe three decades of Belle Spafford's administration were years of unprecedented change in the world and in the lives of women. A few months before to her release, she said in an interview in the Ensign:

Spafford, Belle S.PP"Tremendous changes . . . have taken place in the social, economic, industrial, and educational life of most countries in the world since Relief Society was founded. And I don't think any change in the world has been more significant than the change in the status of women. At the time the Relief Society was founded, a woman's world was her home, her family, and perhaps a little community service. Today a woman's world is as broad as the universe. There's scarcely an area of human endeavor that a woman cannot enter if she has the will and preparation to do so.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"Yet, in the midst of all this change, the organizational structure of the Relief Society, the basic purposes for which it was established have remained constant, and the Church programs that have implemented these purposes have been adaptable to the needs of women in each succeeding era. Through the years, Relief Society has been just as constant in its purpose as truth is constant. The purposes that were important for a handful of women in Nauvoo are still important to women world-wide. That is the miracle of Relief Society. I've worked in Relief Society many years, and I'm just beginning to get an insight into its greatness." [^34]

Spafford, Belle S.PPPresident Spencer W. Kimball, the sixth prophet under whom Belle served, announced her release at the Relief Society conference on October 3, 1974. He said of her presidency, "It is most difficult to find words to express to these sisters our admiration for them and our gratitude to them." Of Belle Spafford, he noted that she was "a beautiful Latter-day Saint wife and mother. Her voice has been heard in places where it has taken insight, courage, and forthrightness at times when she has stood almost alone." [^35]

Spafford, Belle S.PPThe evening she was released, Belle wrote in her midnight letter to herself:

Spafford, Belle S.PP"Twenty-nine and a half years have passed since that day, during which I have served under six of the Prophet-Presidents of the Church: Presidents Heber J. Grant, George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, Harold B. Lee, and Spencer W. Kimball and their great and inspired counselors. What a rare and marvelous blessing!

Spafford, Belle S.PP"These have been busy, demanding, challenging years, yet rewarding beyond my powers to measure. The members of each of the First Presidencies, the Twelve and other General Authorities have been good to me. The Lord has been good to me! Many, many times he has put ideas into my mind and even words into my mouth that have enabled me to meet difficult situations or remove resistant obstacles that otherwise might have impaired the work of the Society for which I had been given responsibility.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"Today this office and calling was terminated by a Prophet-President of the church. A deep-seated feeling of gratitude engulfs me that I have been blessed and honored to have had such a glorious calling; that now my great mission is honorably completed, as attested by the Lord's prophet. A sweet feeling of relief and joy pervades my being that the responsibilities of this exacting calling have been placed on younger shoulders but whose calling is from the same divine source. There is within my soul a feeling of peace and good promise for the future—my personal future and that of my beloved Relief Society." [^36]

Spafford, Belle S.PPAfter her release, Belle continued to serve as an advisor for several major enterprises of the Church. She also remained active in the National Council of Women and the American Regional Council of the International Council of Women until 1979. When she retired from her positions with the NCW, the council designated October 23, 1979, as "Belle S. Spafford Day" in honor of "her capable, influential, and gracious leadership." The council also endowed a fellowship at New York University that was later called the Belle S. Spafford Archival Research Program Fund at the New York Public Library. In 1988, the National Council of Women also presented a posthumous award for her work in establishing the American Regional Council of the International Council of Women.

Spafford, Belle S.PPOn her eighty-first birthday, October 8, 1976, Belle wrote the following in response to her son Earl's question, "Mother, what you have learned during these eighty-one years?"

Spafford, Belle S.PP"During the four score and one years of my life I have learned . . .

Spafford, Belle S.PP"That life is very short.

Spafford, Belle S.PP "That time is extremely valuable and should not be dissipated.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"That the teachings of the Church are sound and reasonable. Obedience to them brings sure rewards. Disobedience brings naught but sorrow.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"That the body is a fine precision instrument designed for accomplishment. It is folly, indeed, to neglect or abuse it.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"That adversity is the common lot of everyone. Life's testing lies in whether or not one is able to overcome and rise above it.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"That family ties are sacred. No effort is too great to safeguard them.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"That friends are the savor that brings flavor and sweet refreshment to life.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"That liberty is a priceless heritage. It should not be allowed to perish from this earth.

Spafford, Belle S.PP"These things I know of a certainty." [^37]

Spafford, Belle S.PPAs she approached her eighty-second birthday, Belle became fearful about her health. Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Council of the Twelve related the following experience:

Spafford, Belle S.PP"On Sunday morning, September 19, 1977, I awakened in the early hours of the morning greatly troubled over a dream that concerned Sister Spafford. My wife also awakened and asked why I was so restless. 'Sister Spafford is in trouble,' I told her. 'She needs a blessing.' When morning came, I called her. She was deeply troubled indeed. I told her I had a blessing for her. She wept and said it came as an answer to her fervent prayer the night long. She had not been well. There had been tests. The day before, the doctor told her the results. They were frightening—ominous indeed. There was a tumor and other complications. Steven Johnson, an attentive young neighbor, assisted me in the blessing. It was most unusual. Her life was not over. Her days were to be prolonged for a most important purpose. Promises, special promises were given; among them that her mind would be sharp and alert as long as she lived. There would be no diminution of her mental capacities. . . . When further tests were made that next week, the tumor was not there." [^38]

Spafford, Belle S.PPBelle lived another four and a half years and was not only alert until the day she died, but also maintained her warm humor. The last two months of her life she lived with her granddaughter's family, Mel and Janet Spafford Nimer and their three children. Mel redecorated a bedroom in their home to match Belle's own bedroom, so that she was never really moved out of her home—her home was simply moved to another location. Two-year-old Janelle Nimer often climbed up the rails of Belle's hospital bed so she and her grandmother could nap together or share stories. When she couldn't go to church, church was brought to her. Aaronic Priesthood members would come to the home to serve her the sacrament, after which she would say, "Now, you young men, will you preach to me?"

Spafford, Belle S.PPBelle gradually became weaker and finally asked to be taken to a hospital. She died on February 2, 1982, within hours of her admittance.

Spafford, Belle S.PPBelle had often said of people, "There are no strangers, only friends we have yet to meet." After her death, many women came to visit her family, each saying that Belle was her best friend. They echoed the sentiments of a nonmember friend, who once wrote to her: "Many claim you in your church and in your family, but my dear Belle, you belong to the world." [^39] At her funeral Elder Packer said, "When all of the tomorrows have passed, Belle S. Spafford will stand as one of the greatest women of this dispensation." [^40]

Spafford, Belle S.PPBelle Smith Spafford, once converted to Relief Society, immeasurably influenced its course for more than half a century. She led women, in both the Church and national and international society, through an era of tremendous change. A dynamic leader, she was always understanding and tactful, but forthright on principles and issues. A woman, a sister, a friend, and a church leader, she truly belonged to the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Barbara B. Smith Oral History, interviews by Jessie L. Embry, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1977, The James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Archives, p. 59. Hereafter cited as Oral History.
[^2] Oral History, p. 63.
[^3] Ibid., p. 6.
[^4] Barbara B. Smith interview with Sheri L. Dew, January 24, 1984. Hereafter cited as Interview with Dew. Also Oral History, p. 1.
[^5] Ibid., p. 6.
[^6] Ibid., p. 7.
[^7] Carolyn Strong interview with Sheri L. Dew, May 9, 1984.
[^8] Oral History, p. 9.
[^9] Statement from Douglas Hill Smith, October 10, 1988, in possession of LaRene Gaunt.
[^10] Carolyn Strong interview.
[^11] Barbara Smith to LaRene Gaunt, April 27, 1988.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] Lillian Alldredge interview with Sheri L. Dew, May 11, 1984.
[^14] Barbara B. Smith, A Fruitful Season (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), pp. 19-20.
[^15] Lillian Alldredge interview.
[^16] Oral History, p. 65.
[^17] Editing by Barbara Smith on first draft of this chapter, October 1988, in possession of LaRene Gaunt.
[^18] Oral History, p. 67.
[^19] Barbara B. Smith interview with LaRene Gaunt and Janet Peterson, October 5, 1988. Hereafter cited as Barbara Smith interview.
[^20] Janet Thomas; "Barbara B. Smith: Woman for the World," This People, Summer 1980, pp. 13-14.
[^21] Oral History, p. 85.
[^22] "Women Should Be Cautious About Military," Church News, February 21, 1976, p. 13.
[^23] Barbara Smith interview.
[^24] Sheri L. Dew, "A Woman for Her Time," This People, June/July 1984, p. 22.
[^25] Douglas H. Smith to LaRene Gaunt, October 10, 1988.
[^26] Barbara Smith interview.
[^27] Barbara Smith notes in possession of Sheri L. Dew.
[^28] Ibid.; also Mayola Miltenberger, A Decade of Relief Society 1974-1984 (Salt Lake City: Relief Society General Board, 1984), p. 22.
[^29] Interview with Dew.
[^30] Barbara Smith interview.
[^31] Mayola Miltenberger interview with LaRene Gaunt, September 20, 1988.
[^32] Dew, "A Woman for Her Time," p. 21.
[^33] Phyllis Marriott interview with Sheri L. Dew, May 11, 1988.
[^34] Dew, "A Woman for Her Time," p. 23.
[^35] Carol Clark interview with Sheri L. Dew, May 14, 1984.
[^36] LaRene Gaunt telephone interview with Ann Reese, September 5, 1988.
[^37] Ann Reese to LaRene Gaunt, September 5, 1988.
[^38] Douglas H. Smith interview with Sheri L. Dew, February 3, 1984.
[^39] Dew, "A Woman for Her Time," p. 26.
[^40] Douglas H. Smith interview with Sheri L. Dew, February 3, 1984.
