Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

10

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara B. Smith

Smith, BarbaraPP1974 - 1984

Smith, BarbaraPPI have come to call you, Sister Smith, to be the new general president of the Relief Society of the Church worldwide," said President Spencer W. Kimball as he sat in Barbara Smith's living room. Barbara felt overwhelmed, in spite of the feeling she had had for three weeks prior to this visit that she would be called to serve as general Relief Society president and that President Kimball would come to her home.

"I couldn't believe that such a thing would happen," Barbara later said, "because I thought even if there were a remote chance that President Kimball would call me, the prophet of the Lord wouldn't come to my home; he would ask me to come to his office. But here he was at my home. I think the Lord must have done that for me so that I would know that he wanted me to serve, because I certainly didn't feel capable. I was grateful for that affirmation." [^1]

Smith, BarbaraPPEven with this personal confirmation, Barbara felt nervous as she sat in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on an autumn day in October 1974 and tried to prepare for the reaction of the congregation to the announcement that Belle S. Spafford, who had served as president for almost thirty years, was to be released. "When President Kimball said that he had come to make a change in the general presidency of the Relief Society, the whole audience said, 'Oh, no.' When they said that," Barbara recalled, "my heart sank, because I knew they would feel that way. I felt that way myself. I started to cry. Then the words to 'How Firm a Foundation' came to mind, especially the verse that says, 'Fear not, I am with thee; oh, be not dismayed, for I am thy God and will still give thee aid. I'll strengthen thee, help thee, and cause thee to stand, upheld by my righteous, omnipotent hand.' Those words gave me courage and I was able to stand and speak." [^2]

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara Smith did stand and speak at that conference, the first of innumerable times she would stand and speak to and for the women of the Church. With Barbara, the first president born in the twentieth century, a new era of Relief Society had begun.

Smith, BarbaraPPMembers of the Relief Society would find in Barbara Bradshaw Smith an extraordinary advocate during the crucial years of unrest as the United States debated, and eventually defeated, the proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution. Her success in this role can be attributed to the forceful combination of her integrity, courage, faith, energy, and optimism—traits she would hasten to attribute to the influence of her family, especially her mother and grandmother.

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara's grandmother, Caroline Daniels Mills, possessed similar traits. When she decided to return to school and become a doctor, Caroline took her three children with her to Iowa City, Iowa, where she attended medical school. She tried to care for the children and carry on her work as a student, but after the first year she realized it was too difficult. With the support of her mother, who came and cared for the children, and her husband, who remained home and earned enough money to keep her in school, Caroline received a degree in medicine, specializing in surgery. Her life served as an example of independence and interdependence to Barbara.

Smith, BarbaraPPA Happy Childhood

Smith, BarbaraPPDr. Caroline Mills was the attending physician at Barbara's birth on January 26, 1922, in Salt Lake City, Utah. Though it was midwinter, the weather was as mild and sunny as in springtime. Barbara has enjoyed retelling the events of that day, which have been the source of good-natured laughter over the years: "My father came home from work and asked my mother, 'What's the matter? Don't you feel good?' My mother said, 'No, I haven't been feeling too well today.' He then leaned over to kiss her and there I was. I began to cry. That was the first time he realized that I had been born." [^3]

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara was the third of six children born to Dorothy Mills and Dan Delos Bradshaw: Carolyn, Robert, Barbara, George, Frank, and Thomas. Her mother was a woman of rare optimism. If she saw any of her children climbing a ladder, instead of shouting at them to come down, Dorothy encouraged them to climb carefully and see how high they could reach. Her optimism transferred into the practical areas of the Bradshaw family. "I knew we didn't have a lot, but my mother just seemed to make the money stretch," said Barbara. "I remember going to the pantry and saying, 'What are we going to have for dinner? There's nothing here.' Mother would say, 'Don't worry about that, dear. Anyone can fix a wonderful meal if they have everything to begin with, but it's the sign of a good cook if you can start with nothing and then prepare a delicious meal.' So it was fun to watch her as she made biscuits, hot bread, scones or other good food for us for dinner." [^4]

Smith, BarbaraPPDee Bradshaw, Barbara's father, was a barber. "Those were days of the Depression," said Barbara. "He would cut the hair of whole families for a dollar, so he would often work all day long cutting hair and much of his night, too." [^5]

Smith, BarbaraPPWhile Barbara learned optimism and independence from her mother and grandmother, she gained an important perspective on life from an experience with her father. Once, as she ran into his barber shop and started looking for him, she became confused by the large mirrors. No matter which way she moved, he seemed to get farther away from her instead of closer. Fear and frustration grew in her until her father called out to her. Immediately she knew which way to turn—just as one learns how to turn to the Father by listening to the voice of the Spirit. "I have often thought of that frightening experience I had as a child and recalled the significant lesson I learned from it concerning the eternal processes of life," said Barbara. [^6]

Smith, BarbaraPPAs a young girl, Barbara was selected as one of the models for a small bronze statue of a boy and girl, a statue that now stands in front of the Salt Lake City and County Building; and during her teens, her silhouette appeared on the cover of one of the Mutual Improvement Association manuals. These events appropriately coincided with Barbara's life as she set an example for others during her school years and foreshadowed the day when she would become an example for millions of women.

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara's sister, Carolyn, recollected that "Barbara was always an obedient girl. I remember she loved to achieve and excel in things. Because of this, she had many friends. I think Barbara takes after Mother, who was very talented and often busy with roadshows and one-act plays. Barbara has always loved to plan things and then carry out the plans." [^7]

Smith, BarbaraPPPopular and confident at both Lincoln junior High School and South High School in Salt Lake City, Barbara served as a student-body officer in both schools. She credited a health teacher in junior high school with helping her realize the importance of a smile, later one of Barbara's trademarks. This teacher pointed out to her that she should smile more. "I remember putting forth additional effort," said Barbara. "Because of her I became more outgoing." [^8]

Smith, BarbaraPPMarriage and Family Life

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara met Douglas Hill Smith while she was on the debate team at South High School. He was attending the University of Utah and had been asked to judge a debate meet in which she participated. He was impressed not only with her beauty but also with her maturity and a special spiritual quality about her.

Smith, BarbaraPP"When I first met Barbara," said Douglas, "her mother told me she was someone very special. Throughout our life together I have come to know that Mother Bradshaw's statement to me was far more than parental pride." [^9]

Smith, BarbaraPPAfter a two-year courtship, Douglas and Barbara were married on June 16, 1941, in the Salt Lake Temple. They spent the energy of their early years of marriage establishing a home and rearing a family. They were the parents of seven children: Sandra, Lillian, Barton, Lowell, Blaine, Catherine, and Sherilynn. Once Barbara overheard a friend of their young son Blaine ask, "Is your mother and dad rich?" Blaine answered, "Yeah, we're rich in kids." [^10]

Smith, BarbaraPPWhen the children were small, Barbara and Douglas divided the night into two four-hour segments to guarantee each of them at least four hours of sleep without interruption while the other took care of any child who might wake up crying.

Smith, BarbaraPPCreative in her discipline, Barbara described her years of rearing her children as "a constant path of being on an even keel. There were sicknesses and problems that came from time to time but I wasn't up in the clouds nor down in the dumps." [^11] She remembered once overhearing a Primary teacher say that her son was the worst child in her class. For a short time Barbara was hurt and decided not to send her son to Primary anymore, but that didn't last. "I realized that unless I did something to help him be better, he would continue to be difficult to manage," she said. "I determined that I would send a report card with him to Primary and I called and told the teacher I wanted her to mark it honestly and then give it back to him to bring home. Then, I thought as long as I was giving one to him I would send report cards with his two brothers too. The next thing I heard was that he was good in class and that the other members of the group were better too. . . . I had been hurt and offended but I knew it was my responsibility to do something constructive to take care of the problem." [^12]

Smith, BarbaraPPWhenever Barbara was away from home, she tried to leave things in order. She wanted her children to learn that although she sacrificed for the Church, she was also willing to sacrifice for them. She wanted them to realize that she trusted them, and she typically left them with chores and assignments to be completed. Her daughter Lillian remembers that both her mother and her father were busy with church, business, and community responsibilities. "However, my memories of my mother are of her always being home, not of her always going. She always had friends and people who wanted to talk to her. It was very common to have someone out on the porch at night visiting with her. Listening to others and giving them the desire to go on and be better than they have been is probably mother's greatest talent. Somehow she has the gift to be able to see the good in others and to help them to see the best in themselves. Mother taught us to always do our best and that we were not competing with other people, only ourselves. I think her attitude was why should you be less than you are? Why not develop your talents and yourself to the very fullest? We learned to work hard and not waste our time." [^13]

Smith, BarbaraPPAs a young mother, Barbara gained a strong testimony of Relief Society. After she received a call as social relations teacher, she determined to do her best in spite of her feelings of inadequacy. Many years later, she wrote about the experience in her book A Fruitful Season:

Smith, BarbaraPPI knelt down in my kitchen, and as the sun streamed through the window I prayed for a strong testimony of the lesson I was to teach and for directions as I prepared and presented the material. I will never forget the powerful feeling of warmth and light that came to me. The sun's rays were as naught compared to that warm sensation that filled my whole being. There I was, on my knees, . . . and finding myself in tears, knowing that the lesson I was to teach really had the ratification of my Heavenly Father.

Smith, BarbaraPP"My commitment was sure. I wanted to seek for me and mine that godly seed; Relief Society was for me. I knew it—deep inside me. I wanted to be an active, involved Relief Society sister and have my service ascend to the Lord and be a cause for eternal glory. I wanted with all my heart to have the graces of rare womanhood and glorious motherhood radiate from me." [^14]

Smith, BarbaraPP"It didn't surprise me when my mother was called to be the president of the Relief Society," said Lillian, "because all my life I have felt her spirit lifting others. Her only desire her whole life has been to do good." [^15]

Smith, BarbaraPPSoon after her call as president, Barbara received a blessing from President Kimball in which she was promised that she would be able to lead the women of the Church and have an influence upon the women of the world. The fulfillment of this blessing would unfold as Barbara became a strong advocate for women both in the Church and in the world.

Smith, BarbaraPPAdvocate for Women

Smith, BarbaraPPThe first seven years of her presidency, 1974 to 1981, were filled with media attention, due to interest in the Equal Rights Amendment. Few women in the United States were left untouched by the ERA controversy. Many struggled to define their roles as women and to decide whether they were treated with equality in their varied responsibilities. Inner turmoil often resulted from this introspection—sometimes temporary, sometimes permanent. The result was growing diversity and disparity among women, including many Latter-day Saints.

Smith, BarbaraPPIn November 1975, Barbara met with Phyllis Schlafly, then the most prominent and articulate voice in the battle against the ERA nationwide. "We talked about the ERA," Barbara recalled, "and I told her that I didn't think the Church would make a public statement against the ERA because it only took a position on moral issues. She said to me she felt that the ERA was one of the greatest moral issues of our day and that it would be very destructive to the family. If I would just study it, I would understand how destructive it could be." [^16]

Smith, BarbaraPPAs Barbara studied the Equal Rights Amendment, she gained a clearer understanding of its pros and cons. The time had come for her, as leader of the women of the Church, to announce her position. Her first opportunity, which received full media coverage, was a fireside talk at the institute of religion adjacent to the University of Utah in December 1974. With that fireside address, Barbara B. Smith assumed her role as an advocate for women as she spoke against the ERA.

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara stated on several occasions, "I stand as a representative of an organization that is in favor of women's rights. I may differ with some people, however, on the best way or ways to achieve these rights. The Equal Rights Amendment is not the way. The national ERA is so broad that I am convinced it would bring us much more trouble than has been envisioned by even the most pessimistic of its opponents. In many instances women would be hurt, not helped. A very substantial concern for those of us who care about helping women is that the ERA would, in fact, cause women to lose previously hard-won rights." [^17] She believed, moreover, that the ERA would "lock us into a system that did not provide for the emotional, physical, or biological differences between the sexes." [^18]

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara acknowledged that many forms of discrimination against women did exist, such as unequal opportunity for promotion in paid employment, unequal pay for equal work, unequal job benefits, restrictions in the use of credit, inequalities in property rights, inheritance, and the administration of a child's estate. For all the inequities, though, she believed that drafting specific legislation to correct specific problems offered a better solution than the one broad and vague statement of the proposed amendment.

Smith, BarbaraPPA statement from the First Presidency on October 22, 1976, gave direction and peace to many sisters, but others felt anger and a sense of displacement. Women's issues and the ERA thus became Barbara's greatest challenge as president of the Relief Society, as she walked a fine line between supporting women's rights while at the same time speaking against the Equal Rights Amendment.

Smith, BarbaraPPThe Church's anti-ERA viewpoint was a point of controversy for several years. When Sonia Johnson, formerly an active Latter-day Saint, was excommunicated, the media focused particular attention on the Church. This led to an appearance on ABC television's Donahue show for Barbara. Beverly Campbell, also a Latter-day Saint and a leader of the anti-ERA effort in Virginia, appeared with her.

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara considered the television appearance one of the most unforgettable experiences in her term as general president of the Relief Society. Just prior to leaving for Chicago, where the show was to originate, she learned that her pregnant daughter, Catherine, had been taken to the hospital with toxemia. In Barbara's hurry to get to the hospital, she slipped on icy steps at her home and fell down the entire flight of stairs. Miraculously, she was uninjured and able to make it to the airport on time after visiting her daughter. Later that evening, she received word that her daughter and new grandchild were fine.

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara's anxiety was further relieved the next morning when Phil Donahue explained that the show was to be taped instead of broadcast live. She was pleased because "we didn't have calls from people we couldn't see. We could look at and respond directly to every person that questioned us from the audience. I was grateful for that." [^19] She was disappointed, however, that in the course of the interview she had little opportunity to say anything specific about the role of women in the Church. At the conclusion of the program she started to name five points of emphasis that make Mormon women different from other women, but time ran out and she was unable to give them all.

Smith, BarbaraPPReaction to the show was immediate. Back home in Salt Lake City, Barbara received thousands of letters from people requesting those five points, wanting to know more about the Church, and feeling grateful that questions had been met honestly. [^20] The five points she intended to give were: first, the importance of Relief Society visiting teaching; second, no tobacco, tea, coffee, or alcohol; third, a year's supply of food; fourth, family home evening; and fifth, the Book of Mormon.

Smith, BarbaraPPIn connection with her willingness to speak out against the Equal Rights Amendment, Barbara also spoke out against young women joining the military. Recruitment tactics at the time were urging more and more women to enlist. Using "equal pay for equal work" as one incentive, the military tied itself to the women's movement and benefited from its momentum.

Smith, BarbaraPPBarbara was asked to speak on the hazards of women joining the military at Brigham Young University on February 17, 1976. Military personnel associated with BYU would be in the audience, so BYU President Dallin H. Oaks asked for a copy of the talk in order to prepare them for her message. However, when she arrived, she learned that President Oaks had not been able to get advance copies to them. She felt heartsick as she thought of the shock awaiting them. [^21]

Smith, BarbaraPPAlthough she was directly facing high-level military officers, Barbara spoke forthrightly. "I would not encourage any young Latter-day Saint woman, especially one just out of high school, to become a military enlistee," she counseled. "I feel that the regimentation of military life places a great strain upon most women who enlist in the military services. It is difficult for them to live under the pressures of putting their lives so completely into another's charge, resigning their actions to another's discipline." She then acknowledged the great good of the military and the fact that, in times of war, women have always been able to rise to the need. "I hope women will do in the future as they have done over and over again in the past: save families!" [^22]

Smith, BarbaraPPThe speech invoked controversy, and Barbara Smith received numerous letters and telephone calls. Nevertheless, she continued to speak out on that subject as well as the ERA and other women's issues. "It is very hard to have so many people against you," she said. "Once I had a whole group raise signs and parade against me personally when I gave a talk against abortion. I gained much of my strength to face these challenges from my mother, who helped me feel that I could do whatever I had to do. Also, the example of my great-great-grandfather gave me courage. After the Saints had been driven from Missouri, he was asked by the leaders of the Church to go back and sell the land still owned by the Saints. After he'd sold the first piece of property, a mob gathered around him and said, 'Give us the money, give us the deeds to the property, and leave or you're going to be a dead man before night.' My great-great-grandfather said, 'This land has been acquired according to the laws of the state and the country and we have every legal right to sell it. Some who own this land are widows, the handicapped, and the elderly. I am going to do all that I can to sell every piece of property before I leave. If you feel anything different about it, you might just as well shoot me.' Slowly, the mob left and he was free to sell the property. These examples built in my family and they worked together to help me become strong enough to do what needed to be done." [^23]

Smith, BarbaraPPEventually, the national tide turned against the Equal Rights Amendment, and several states started proceedings to rescind their passage of the ERA. The emotional controversy began to die down, but in its wake was a general and individual unrest among women. The ERA had divided women into two groups, both committed more firmly than ever to their own points of view.

Smith, BarbaraPPOne of the highlights of Barbara Smith's presidency and, she felt, one of the most effective means of uniting Latter-day Saint sisters, was the Relief Society's Nauvoo Monument to Women. From conception to dedication, it closely paralleled the stormiest years of the ERA movement.

Smith, BarbaraPPIn 1975 the Relief Society general board decided that the bronze plaque in Nauvoo commemorating the organization of the Relief Society in 1842 should be replaced and invited sculptors to present ideas for a new monument. Dennis Smith was one of the sculptors who accepted that invitation. The Relief Society chose his proposal of eleven figures in a garden setting, and in addition they selected two statues to be done by Florence Hansen. Latter-day Saint women throughout the world donated money for this monument to honor the many facets of a woman's life, and in the process, they became united in a common cause.

Smith, BarbaraPPThe Nauvoo Monument to Women was dedicated in the early summer of 1978. Marian Boyer, one of Barbara's counselors, remembered the occasion: "After Barbara and I arrived in Nauvoo for the dedication, we walked down to the garden, just the two of us. We had worked so hard to accomplish this huge undertaking. . . . We walked down over the hill just as the sun was going down behind the Mississippi River. We sat on a bench, and neither of us could speak. We just looked at each other and started to cry with joy. After seeing that beautiful garden, we realized what it represented and what it could mean to the women of the Church if they would only catch its message. The garden represented what Barbara wanted for each woman of the Church." [^24]

Smith, BarbaraPPWhile the ERA and work on the Nauvoo Monument to Women took much of her time during Barbara Smith's ten years as Relief Society president, other facets of the work blossomed during her administration as well.

Smith, BarbaraPPA Worldwide View

Smith, BarbaraPPIn 1975, members of the Relief Society presidency were invited to participate in Church area conferences held in various parts of the world. They traveled with the First Presidency and their wives to Asia, Canada, Europe, and areas in the United States. With this beginning, Barbara became the most widely traveled of all the general Relief Society presidents. Over the years of her administration, she visited many countries on nearly every continent, from Australia to South America, Europe, Asia, and North America. According to her husband, "Her travels were filled with special feelings of divine guidance and understanding. She was constantly in the arms of the sisters, loving them and crying with them as they were overcome by the Holy Spirit." [^25] As a result of what Barbara saw and learned in her travels, the Relief Society began providing training for health and welfare missionaries and for the wives of mission presidents. In that way, many others could learn from these faithful women how to bestow the tender ministrations of the Relief Society.

Smith, BarbaraPPIn 1976, the Relief Society participated in the celebration of the bicentennial of the United States. The Relief Society Building was filled with displays and was referred to as "The Spirit of '76 North Main" (a play on words, referring to its street address), and a reader's theater presentation, Melt Down My Pewter, was performed in many wards and stakes.

Smith, BarbaraPPInvolvement in the International Women's Year (1977), the White House Conference on Families (1978), the International Year of the Child (1979), the National and International Councils of Women, and the American Mothers Committee immersed Barbara Smith in meaningful projects for children, in helping the aged to productively meet their challenges, and in teaching women how to be more influential as citizens. Barbara felt proud to sit on these committees and observe how other committee members reacted when they recognized that Latter-day Saint women really did care about what they were doing. [^26]

Smith, BarbaraPPThe Relief Society wheat storage program ended in 1978, concluding a "sacred trust" that had been given the sisters more than a century before. It was a tender moment for Relief Society women when, on September 30, 1978, President Barbara B. Smith called for and received a sustaining vote of the sisters in a welfare session of general conference to give the Relief Society wheat and the wheat trust funds to the Church.

Smith, BarbaraPPIn 1983, Barbara was invited to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to witness the space shuttle launch, which included Sally Ride, the first woman astronaut. "It was a thrilling experience and probably the most perfect launching up to that time," Barbara remembered. She was among the guests invited to the buildings where the space shuttle was prepared for launch; there they listened to the directors of the space program and mingled with the astronauts. [^27] Later Barbara had an opportunity to explain her views on women's rights and the ERA to Sally Ride.

Smith, BarbaraPPOn several occasions Barbara was invited to the White House in Washington, D.C. The first visit was in 1978. "I felt the hospitality of the old south as I met with First Lady Rosalynn Carter in her office at the White House," she said. "During our half-hour visit, she had an opportunity to explain her views on women's issues and I invited her to the dedication of the Nauvoo Monument to Women." [^28] Mrs. Carter was unable to attend the dedication, but she sent a representative, Bethine Church, the wife of Senator Frank Church of Idaho.

Smith, BarbaraPPAs a result of her meeting with Mrs. Carter, Barbara was invited to join distinguished women from various religious and ethnic groups in a seminar to discuss employment for women. "We were all supposed to come with ideas," she recalled. "I, of course, took our welfare program, and information about our employment specialists who could help individuals seek jobs, and help them with their self-esteem." [^29] Her ideas were well received, but the group could not see any way to implement them.

Smith, BarbaraPPThe establishment of a consolidated meeting schedule by the Church in 1980 had a far-reaching effect for the Relief Society. Auxiliary meetings that had been held on weekdays were moved to Sundays to share a single block of time with priesthood, Sunday School, and sacrament meetings. Consequently, the Relief Society curriculum and the visiting teaching plan were simplified so that more women could participate.

Smith, BarbaraPPThe Relief Society observed the Church's sesquicentennial in 1980 by presenting to the Church life-size replicas of four of the bronze statues from the Nauvoo Monument to Women. These statues were subsequently placed on the plaza of the Church Office Building in Salt Lake City. In addition, the general board planted thirty-five redbud trees on the plaza grounds. A jubilee box, patterned after the one made by Sarah M. Kimball in 1881, was also assembled, to be opened in the year 2030.

Smith, BarbaraPPIn conjunction with the 1980 World Conference on Records in Salt Lake City, the Relief Society created a display entitled "Histories Made Fresh Daily." Family memorabilia as a means of enhancing family history was stressed, and fresh-baked homemade cookies were passed out to the thousands who visited the display.

Smith, BarbaraPPIn 1982, a "learn, then teach" program was introduced, emphasizing the need for women to share with others the education and learning experiences provided in Relief Society. As part of this program, women throughout the Church celebrated 140 years of Relief Society with concerts, lectures, and other special observances. The theme for the celebration was "Legacy—Remembered and Renewed," and concerts spotlighting outstanding LDS female musicians were presented in Dallas, Texas; Oakland and Los Angeles, California; Salt Lake City, Utah; and Washington, D.C. Outstanding art was displayed at the Salt Lake Art Center, and a series of lectures by women was given in Salt Lake City, with many of these talks later published in a book, A Woman's Choices. Also published in connection with the celebration was a book entitled A Legacy Remembered: The Relief Society Magazine, 1914-1970.

Smith, BarbaraPPAn emphasis on correlating the past and present in Relief Society continued with the dedication of the fully restored Sarah M. Kimball home in Nauvoo in 1982; and in 1984, work was begun on an official, updated history of the Relief Society. With the growth of the Relief Society into a worldwide organization, Barbara Smith wanted the Relief Society Building in Salt Lake City to become a resource center for sisters from around the world. Under her direction, displays were set up in empty rooms and even offices so that women could visit the Relief Society Building and learn not only about their ecclesiastical callings but also about how to develop their talents.

Smith, BarbaraPPHer policy of openness and sharing reflected the relationship Barbara wanted with the sisters of the Relief Society. "I always left my door open," she said. "Many, many women came because they were troubled. I suppose the discussions on the ERA triggered some of those feelings and so they would phone me or come in." [^30] "Barbara's spirit of hospitality was reflected by her open office," remembered Mayola Miltenberger, general secretary. "She belonged to the women of the world." [^31]

Smith, BarbaraPPIndeed, many of the women who worked with Barbara over the years have recognized her strengths. "Barbara Smith is a visionary woman," said Carol L. Clark, a member of the general board for ten years. "She has a vision of womanhood and of Relief Society and has brought a depth to LDS womanhood. We may not yet understand the significance of some of the things she set in place. I believe in years to come her administration will be marked by and remembered for her vision." [^32]

Smith, BarbaraPPPhyllis Marriott was president of the American Mothers Committee when Barbara served as an AMC board member. "Barbara was extremely knowledgeable," she said. "I've never known a woman who gained such universal respect. She was a perfectionist, and people came to admire her for the way in which she carried out assignments." [^33] "I used to think I could beat Sister Smith to the office, but I never did," said Mayola Miltenberger. "She has incredible vigor." [^34] Carol Clark agreed. "Barbara is tireless, and practically wore us [the general board members] out," she said. "She has remarkable energy." [^35]

Smith, BarbaraPP"Barbara expected the best of her board members and got it," said Ann S. Reese, Barbara's counselor from November 1983 to April 1984. "We felt good after a project because we knew we had given it our all." [^36]

Smith, BarbaraPPAnn recalled a committee meeting where the members discussed a proposed mother education course of study. "I drove Barbara home from the Relief Society Building," she said. "It had been a busy, mentally tiring day and I was emotionally and physically exhausted. As Barbara got out of the car, she turned to me and said, 'Isn't this the most exciting calling? I feel so blessed to be a part of the Relief Society curriculum planning. I can hardly wait for each day to begin—it is so thrilling to be a part of this work.' I found this a typical reaction of a woman whom friends and family describe as having remarkable energy and desire to serve her Heavenly Father." [^37]

Smith, BarbaraPPEven with her remarkable energy, Barbara would not have been able to serve as she did without her family's support. "When President Kimball came to our home and asked Barbara to serve as president of the Relief Society," recalled Douglas Smith, "he turned to me and asked if I would sustain and support her. I've been in church positions for thirty years of our marriage, and she has fully sustained me. I just determined this would be the time when I would fully sustain her." [^38]

Smith, BarbaraPPFrom shopping and ironing to housecleaning, Douglas did support his wife. He joked that he could make chicken noodle soup as "well as any man in the Church." [^39] He also enjoyed driving Barbara to many of her meetings. "I have never felt I was playing second fiddle," he said. "I've always felt this was my opportunity to return to Barbara that which she has given to me, and I've had great spiritual blessings from it." [^40]

Smith, BarbaraPPAll but two of Barbara's seven children were married when she was called as Relief Society president. "We didn't go without her mothering, love, and support," said daughter Sherilyn, the youngest child. "We knew she would always be there for us. And she included us as much as possible in the things she did." [^41]

Smith, BarbaraPPAn Honorable Release

Smith, BarbaraPPAfter ten years of service, Barbara B. Smith was released as general president of the Relief Society on April 7, 1984. Membership in the organization had increased from 837,253 sisters speaking seventeen different languages in 1974 to 1,600,000 speaking eighty different languages in 1984.

Smith, BarbaraPPAs she prepared to turn her office over to her successor, Barbara W. Winder, Barbara Smith found herself reminiscing: "Emptying out my desk, taking that last look around my office, I thought of all the events that had taken place in the beautiful Relief Society Building, events again so fresh in my mind as part of a soul-searing, soul-soaring experience. I wanted with all my heart to make the last ten years mine forever, with their innumerable, priceless moments I had shared with my counselors, the board, our staff, and women from near and far." [^42]

Smith, BarbaraPP"So many people feel hurt when they are released from a position," she explained. "I came to the conclusion when I was released that I could either be hurt or I could feel the blessings of those years. I chose to feel the blessings." [^43]

Smith, BarbaraPPDouglas Smith wrote, "I saw the hand of the Lord in Barbara's hand leading and guiding her and on many occasions giving her great inspiration and direction. The period of her service as the general president of the Relief Society was filled with challenges beyond any mortal expectation. We frequently prayed together supplicating the Lord to inspire her with His Spirit that she might know the will of the Master and go forth to it with all her vigor. Often we would feel and see his Holy Spirit fall upon her in ways of magnificence. She knew the Lord wanted her to love his children and to help the sisters of the Church to understand their importance in the sight of the Lord and their duty to serve him in the offices to which they had been appointed with all diligence." [^44]

Smith, BarbaraPPAfter Barbara's release, she relaxed and spent time with her family. Drawing upon the knowledge and spirit of her own growth and experiences as president, she also found time to write several books: The Love That Never Faileth (1984), The Light of Christmas (1985), Growth in Grandmothering (1986), and A Fruitful Season (1988).

Smith, BarbaraPPIn 1987, Douglas H. Smith was called to serve as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, and the following year he was named area president in Asia. Barbara accompanied him to the Far East on this new assignment, and, under a new program established shortly after her release from Relief Society, one of her responsibilities would be to represent the general boards of Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary and to help train leaders in her area. "This new calling is one of the most challenging experiences of my life," says Barbara, "especially because I do not speak any of their languages. Even though my husband's assignment includes almost half of the population of the earth, I know the work will go forward in a very significant way. I traveled in the Orient during my years as Relief Society president, but now I'm back on a different basis. I try to remember what I have learned through my Relief Society service so that I will be able to use it in a way that will be a blessing to these wonderful people whom I have come to love so much." [^45]

Smith, BarbaraPPSince that morning when Barbara B. Smith knelt in her sunlit kitchen to seek help with her Relief Society lesson, she has endeavored to remember what she has learned through her Relief Society service and to share it with others. Reflecting on her service as president she said, "The very first thing that the Lord made known to me after I became the general president of the Relief Society was that the Lord loves every son and every daughter and that he has given them each talents and abilities." [^46]

Smith, BarbaraPP"I really believe that those years of my administration, when women's issues were so prominent, were very critical in the history of the world," she said. "The women who lived through those years of turmoil need to know that how they lived their lives was important and to recognize their place in history. Women today also need to feel the importance of Relief Society in their lives and to recognize that they are creating their own place in history so that they will be able to pass this great heritage on to their daughters." [^47]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Jan U. Pinborough, "Barbara Woodhead Winder: A Gift of Loving," Ensign, October 1985, p. 29.
[^2] Janet Peterson, "Friend to Friend," The Friend, May 1985, 7.
[^3] Interview with Barbara W. Winder, May 31, 1989.
[^4] Interview with Marguerite H. Woodhead, June 8, 1988.
[^5] Barbara W. Winder, A Joyful Mother (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1988), p. 5.
[^6] Interview with Barbara W. Winder, June 3, 1988. Hereafter cited as Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Pinborough, "Barbara Woodhead Winder: A Gift of Loving," p. 29.
[^9] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Gerry Avant, "A Woman with Purpose," Church News, May 6, 1984, p. 14.
[^12] Telephone interview with Richard W. Winder, Jr., July 1988.
[^13] Pinborough, "Barbara W. Winder: A Gift of Loving," p. 29.
[^14] Avant, "A Woman with Purpose."
[^15] "Barbara W. Winder: Relief Society General President," Ensign, May 1984, p. 97.
[^16] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^17] Minutes of Relief Society General Board Retreat, August 1984, in possession of Barbara W. Winder.
[^18] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^19] Minutes, June 9, 1842.
[^20] Spencer W. Kimball, "Living the Gospel in the Home," Ensign, May 1978, p. 101.
[^21] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^22] Telephone interview with Joanne B. Doxey, August 22, 1988.
[^23] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^24] "Relief Society Organization Simplified," Ensign, November 1986, p. 100.
[^25] "Visiting Teaching Policy Clarified," Church News, November 26, 1988, p. 6.
[^26] Telephone interview with Joan B. Spencer, August 1988.
[^27] Pinborough, "Barbara W. Winder: A Gift of Loving," p. 31.
[^28] Telephone interview with Joanne B. Doxey, August 22, 1988.
[^29] Statement of Joy F. Evans, August 27, 1988.
[^30] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^31] Mayola Miltenberger interview with LaRene Gaunt, September 20, 1988.
[^32] Dew, "A Woman for Her Time," p. 21.
[^33] Phyllis Marriott interview with Sheri L. Dew, May 11, 1988.
[^34] Dew, "A Woman for Her Time," p. 23.
[^35] Carol Clark interview with Sheri L. Dew, May 14, 1984.
[^36] LaRene Gaunt telephone interview with Ann Reese, September 5, 1988.
[^37] Ann Reese to LaRene Gaunt, September 5, 1988.
[^38] Douglas H. Smith interview with Sheri L. Dew, February 3, 1984.
[^39] Dew, "A Woman for Her Time," p. 26.
[^40] Douglas H. Smith interview with Sheri L. Dew, February 3, 1984.
[^41] Sherilynn Alba, interview with LaRene Gaunt, April 5, 1989.
[^42] Smith, A Fruitful Season, p. 213.
[^43] Barbara Smith interview.
[^44] Douglas H. Smith to LaRene Gaunt, October 10, 1988.
[^45] Barbara Smith interview.
[^46] Oral History, p. 84.
[^47] Barbara Smith interview.
