Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

11

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara W. Winder

Winder, BarbaraPP1984 - 1990

When Barbara Woodhead Winder was in the second grade, a boy—the class bully—came to school one morning in a torn pair of pants held together with a safety pin. The teacher, Louella Dover, took him home, then returned to class and explained that the boy did not have a mother and had only one pair of pants. "I remember feeling empathy for him," Barbara recalled. "How hard to have no mother!" [^1] It was experiences such as this, combined with the influence of teachers, parents, and grandparents who spent their lives in the service of others, that helped Barbara develop the compassion that has been so characteristic of her leadership of Relief Society members worldwide.

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara's great-grandfather, George E. Hand, began the family tradition of service and sacrifice as a seventeen-year-old convert to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The only member of his family to leave England in 1865, George was sent by his parents to Utah to earn money for the rest of the family to emigrate. Although his parents and several of his nine brothers and sisters died before he could send for them, George worked for thirty-nine years to fulfill his parents' mandate to help his family gather to Zion.

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara's maternal grandmother, Susie Stewart Hand, served as a counselor and then for nine years as president of the Third Ward Relief Society in Sandy, Utah. Sandy was a mining town in the southeast part of the Salt Lake Valley, and because of the high death toll among miners, many widows had no pensions or insurance benefits. As Relief Society president, Susie took care of their needs, with her own children helping to distribute food and clothing. She would often set extra places at the dinner table for visitors. Since the railroad ran through the center of town, tramps would frequently come to her door for a meal. Susie's daughters said that for many years after her death they heard people tell of their mother's unselfish service to others. Dave Hand, a barber by profession and a gardener by avocation, gave free haircuts and shaves, as well as dahlias and cannas from his prize-winning garden, to the sick and needy.

Winder, BarbaraPPAlthough Susie Hand died when Barbara was a little girl, Barbara remembered "the warm feeling of love at her home and the wonderful food she always prepared. She had eight children and baked everything—pies, for example, and loaves of bread—by the dozen. Her home was always open to everyone." [^2] Barbara also had the opportunity to learn from her Grandfather and Grandmother Woodhead. Her father's mother, Ruby May Stubbs Woodhead, who had also served as a Relief Society president, came to live with Barbara's family near the end of her life. Through many stories about her early life and her experiences with her husband and children, Ruby passed on her values to her grandchildren. For example, she often told of answering the door one evening and finding a stranger standing there. He said, "I don't know if you know what kind of a man your husband is, Mrs. Woodhead, but my family would not have had food or heat this winter if it hadn't been for him." [^3]

Winder, BarbaraPPBecause of her age and ill health, Ruby needed to have someone sleep in the same room with her at night, so fifteen-year-old Barbara decided that she would be that person. Because Ruby's need for constant care tended to keep Barbara's parents homebound, Barbara often said to them on a Friday night when she was planning to get together with friends or a date, "Mother, we'll stay here and play games. You and Dad go somewhere and enjoy yourselves." [^4]

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara's parents, Marguerite Hand and Willard Verl Woodhead, were also fine examples of service to others. "My mother and father are some of the most compassionate people I know," she said. "We always had someone living with us." These included Barbara's aunts on occasion, as well as her grandmother Woodhead. The Woodheads were also willing to make sacrifices to help others. When Susie Hand died of a heart attack in her early fifties, three of her eight children were still at home, so the Woodheads left their home and moved in with Marguerite's father in Sandy to take care of him and the children.

Winder, BarbaraPPLessons of Childhood

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara, the eldest child in the Woodhead family, was born on May 9, 1931, in Midvale, Utah, She was eighteen months old when her brother Willard was born, six and a half years old when Nancy was born, and sixteen when David was born. Because Marguerite needed to work outside the home, Barbara often had to care for the younger children. As she grew up, therefore, she learned many lessons—of work, of family relationships, and of pain and patience.

Winder, BarbaraPPWhen Barbara was in the fourth grade, her family moved to East Millcreek, then a rural area of Salt Lake County. Barbara worked every summer in the strawberry and raspberry patches and the orchards until she was old enough to get a job in the ice cream parlor around the corner from her home. The Woodheads had a large garden, and Barbara had opportunities to help with that also.

Winder, BarbaraPP"I am grateful now for our family garden—though I wasn't always grateful for it while I was growing up," she has written. "Mother taught me how to pull the weeds with the root included so the weed would not grow back again—at least not that particular one. And as if the continuous weeding process were not enough work, early each spring we had to 'de-rock' our garden, which was developed on top of an old creekbed. 'De-rocking' took the combined effort of the entire family and consisted of gathering and collecting the baseball-size or larger rocks that seemed to proliferate during the winter while the rest of nature slept. Then, having cleared the land enough to prepare the soil for planting, I helped Dad load the rocks into our little trailer to take them to the dump.

Winder, BarbaraPPI didn't know then, as we shelled the peas and snapped the beans preparatory for canning, that more than a winter's storehouse of food was being preserved. We were laying foundations for family relationships that would be much greater than our year's supply. In fact, we are still being richly fed from those seeds planted many years ago." [^5]

Winder, BarbaraPPAlthough the Woodheads had a loving family relationship, Barbara wanted her family to be strong in the Church and to be sealed in the temple. Marguerite and Verl were not married in the temple and did not participate often in Church activities during Barbara's childhood. "However, I was encouraged to go to church, and always did," Barbara said. "I chose friends who were active in the Church. We had neighbors who were close to the Church, and I can remember one Sunday evening going next door. Mother said, 'Why do you always go over there?' I enjoyed the spirit there and the gospel discussions. I was learning; I was seeking to be edified. I remember clearly the Sunday evening the father in that home taught about the three degrees of glory in a family discussion. I had never heard of this before. It was wonderful how the Spirit bore witness to me of its truthfulness." [^6]

Winder, BarbaraPPA Primary teacher reached out to Barbara and took her to Primary each week, and when she was eight years old, the same teacher took her to be baptized. "About the time of my baptism, I must have been quite unbearable to live with because I was constantly admonishing my parents about what they should be doing," Barbara admitted. "But as I matured, I came to recognize that perhaps my approach to my parents' problem of being less active was not the right one. Through those teen years, I started learning acceptance of other people, and I began to understand why people behave as they do. I came to recognize that Mother and Dad had real financial struggles during the Depression years, and as I was growing up they really had a hard time. Mother worked a good part of the time and Dad worked shift work and on weekends, and as a result they were often very tired. Because of their work schedules, they weren't able to participate with me, but rather encouraged me and cheered me on from the sidelines." [^7]

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara learned another important lesson in maturity and spirituality as a student at Granite High School. When she was elected president of the girls' association, the group's adviser, Ann Pehrson, asked her "to fast and pray with her for girls who were having problems." According to Barbara, "She really taught me the meaning of fasting and prayer." [^8]

Winder, BarbaraPPMiss Pehrson also suggested to Barbara that she attend the University of Utah. Because of the expense involved, Barbara and most of her friends had not planned on college after they graduated from high school. But Miss Pehrson persisted, so Barbara took the entrance examination for the university and was admitted. The shorthand and typing skills she had gained in high school helped her secure a part-time job as a secretary during her freshman year. She often met her father, who was teaching on campus, for lunch.

Winder, BarbaraPPMarriage and a Family

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara decided to major in home economics, and she found that she enjoyed her classes and the other activities in which she was involved. She once commented to her mother that if she were to continue her schooling, she had better not date any returned missionaries because "all they wanted to do was get married." But several weeks before Barbara was to begin her sophomore year, a friend, Ned Winder, persuaded her to go out with just one more returned missionary—his brother Richard, who had recently returned from a mission in Czechoslovakia. Rich took Barbara to a family party and afterward told his mother, "I've met the girl I'm going to marry." Two and a half weeks later, he proposed. Nineteen-year-old Barbara and twenty-six-year-old Richard William Winder were married January 10, 1951, in the Salt Lake Temple.

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara's parents were not able to go the temple with her on her wedding day—a difficult day for her mother especially. Five years later, however, Barbara's lifelong desire was fulfilled. Her parents renewed their interest in the Church and started attending a temple-preparation class arranged by friends and taught by their son-in-law Rich Winder. During the next two years, they became involved in their ward: Verl, a machinist, was excellent with outdoor projects, and Marguerite, an expert cook, helped in the Relief Society with food assignments. Just before Barbara's fourth child was born, Verl and Marguerite and their children were sealed in the temple. Barbara believes that the experience of her parents' inactivity and subsequent return to the Church gave her "empathy and a broader understanding of a wide range of challenges." [^9]

Winder, BarbaraPPThe newlyweds' first home was in a new subdivision in Granger, a suburb southwest of Salt Lake City. With no telephone and Rich needing their car to get to work, Barbara felt quite isolated. That isolation took a serious turn when their first child, Richard W. Winder, Jr., was five days old. Barbara developed a high fever and was even too ill to seek help from her neighbors. However, in one of the small miracles she believes are so typical of Relief Society work, her visiting teachers happened to come to her home and were able to get Barbara and her new baby the help they needed.

Winder, BarbaraPPA year and a half after their marriage, Barbara and Rich moved to Winder Lane, a tree-lined, rural road on the Winder family dairy farm. All up and down Winder Lane were members of the Winder family: Rich's parents, Edwin Kent and Alma Cannon Winder, who had a home next door, and his brother and sisters, who lived on both sides of the lane. Barbara, who said she "never felt like an in-law," was grateful to become part of the Winder family. She found security in her husband's "rich heritage of strong, stalwart Church members." [^10]

Winder, BarbaraPPRich and Barbara's four children arrived within five years: Richard in December 1951, Susan in January 1953, George Woodhead in July 1954, and Robert Woodhead in April 1956. The children had nineteen cousins who also lived on the lane. Barbara said of their familial arrangement, "We raised our children together. Cousins were more like brothers and sisters to our children than cousins. They were free to go into anyone's home and were always welcomed. It was a real source of strength to have each other." [^11]

Winder, BarbaraPPRich and Barbara both love the out-of-doors and found hiking to be a good way to enjoy nature and spend time with their children. Family vacations were planned to such places as Glacier National Park and the Grand Tetons. The children began hiking when they were little and as they grew older, they climbed several of Utah's major peaks, including Mount Olympus, Lone Peak, Twin Peaks, Mount Timpanogos, and Mount Nebo. Barbara has been part of many of those adventures, although Rich and the boys enrolled in a climbing school and ascended the Grand Teton in Wyoming without her.

Winder, BarbaraPPThe Winders have continued the hiking tradition with their now-married children and grandchildren. Their son Rick said that at least once a year the entire family hikes together and views those occasions as "a time to grow together, to learn more about each other, to laugh together, and to share feelings." [^12]

Winder, BarbaraPP"Ice Cream Sunday" became another Winder tradition, especially when the children were teenagers. With the abundant supply of cream available from the dairy, Rich and Barbara churned homemade ice cream every Sunday and invited all the Winder relatives and the children's friends to their home each week.

Winder, BarbaraPPA Compassionate Woman

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara's children experienced her sensitivity for the needs and feelings of others as they grew up. Her daughter, Susan W. Tanner, recalls her first day of kindergarten. She was frightened and clung to her mother, but Barbara noticed another little girl who was just as frightened and suggested to Susan, "Oh, look at that little girl. Go make her happy." Susan said, "After that, I didn't worry about being nervous myself. I've often thought how right that was and how typical of Mother." [^13] Barbara became aware of some children in the neighborhood whose parents were divorced and who, with their mother working, needed extra attention. Even though her own children were teenagers or had left home and gone out on their own, she organized a weekly summer-school class in her home for those children and taught them grooming, cleanliness, and basic cooking and sewing skills.

Winder, BarbaraPPSusan says that she and her brothers learned from their mother's example of generosity and good humor, The kitchen was always available to bring friends in for a snack or to make cookies or a meal to take to someone. One evening just before Halloween, girls from the Granger High School Pep Club strewed toilet paper around the Winders' house and yard, a local custom that was usually done surreptitiously. Much to the girls' surprise, Barbara brought out candied apples to treat them. [^14] Her children also remember her as being the first one to help out when there was a birth of a new baby or a death in the neighborhood. As Relief Society general president, Barbara lamented to her family, "I wish I could have a day off every now and then so that I could give service."

Winder, BarbaraPPRich's work at the Winder family dairy and bakery required long, hard hours. Through the years, the dairy, established by his great-grandfather John R. Winder, had developed into a successful business. For Rich and Barbara, the farm was a wonderful place to raise their children. When the suburbs started encroaching on property around the farm, Rich developed part of the dairy property into a cemetery, so that the farm would remain somewhat isolated.

Winder, BarbaraPPThroughout their marriage, Rich and Barbara have worked together and helped one another. While Rich has served in his Church callings, Barbara has wholeheartedly supported and assisted him. For eighteen years he served either as bishop, counselor in the stake presidency, or stake president of the Jordan North Stake. Rich, in turn, supported Barbara when she became involved in PTA, Cub Scouting, and a dairy council. She also served as international president of Lambda Delta Sigma, the LDS sorority for college girls, along with her various other church callings, such as president of the Primary and of the Young Women and chorister for several organizations. In 1973 she was called to the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA general board, where she served for three and a half years. She then served on the Relief Society general board for five years.

Winder, BarbaraPPWhile Barbara was a member of the Relief Society general board, she sat at a board meeting one afternoon and looked at the pictures of the previous presidents hanging on the wall. In her mind she heard the words "You need to know about those sisters," but she did not know why.

Winder, BarbaraPPIn 1982, Rich was called to preside over the California San Diego Mission, and Barbara became the "mission mother." Serving a mission together was "our sweetest experience," said Barbara, "because we worked so closely together." [^15]

Winder, BarbaraPPIn January 1984, while in the mission field, Barbara had what she described as "some funny feelings." She could not determine what they signified but wondered if perhaps they meant that she should be doing genealogy work, even though her schedule was so busy that she scarcely had time to prepare the numerous talks she had to give. She called her daughter, Susan, who was living in the Winder home, and asked her to locate the genealogy materials. Susan did, but then called her mother back and suggested that the genealogy wait until after the mission; she didn't feel that Barbara should add more to her already full schedule.

Winder, BarbaraPPAbout the same time, Rich experienced more than "funny feelings." He received a strong impression that his wife would be the next general president of the Relief Society. When he described this impression to Barbara, she responded, "Don't even talk to me about it. We have work to do." Still, the telephone call from President Gordon B. Hinckley in April came as a surprise. President Hinckley didn't ask if Barbara would accept the call. He only asked, "Are you worthy?"

Winder, BarbaraPPThe Winders spent a restless, sleepless night. Barbara said, "If you ever wonder what it's going to be like at Judgment Day, that must be it. I lay there and my whole life passed before me. It was not funny—it was scary." [^16] The next day they flew to Salt Lake City, When she met with President Hinckley, he told her that her administration was to be for "a different time." He requested that her counselors be sisters who would be able to create a new pattern and tradition in Relief Society. He also indicated that he would like all of the women's organizations to be housed together.

Winder, BarbaraPPFollowing her meeting with President Hinckley, Barbara, feeling the weight of the responsibilities of the call, found sanctuary in the quiet of the empty boardroom in the Relief Society Building. Again she looked at the portraits of the ten Relief Society presidents. She realized that they had each walked the path she would walk. Although she had not yet selected her counselors and felt very much alone at the moment, she knew she would not be alone in her calling as Relief Society president, for she felt support from the women who preceded her.

Winder, BarbaraPP"A New Time"

Winder, BarbaraPPOn April 7, 1984, Barbara B. Smith was released and Barbara W. Winder was sustained as the eleventh general president of the Relief Society. She selected Joy F. Evans and Joanne B. Doxey as her counselors and Joan B. Spencer as secretary.

Winder, BarbaraPPBetween April and August, when the first meeting of the newly organized presidency and general board would be held, Barbara felt overwhelmed at the thought of her new responsibilities, which were not yet clearly defined. At that first board meeting in August, Elder Dean L. Larsen of the First Quorum of the Seventy echoed President Hinckley's admonition: "This Relief Society presidency and board are coming into service at a landmark time, a time when their role will be to be a resource to and to advise priesthood leadership so that they will be more able to effectively touch the lives of sisters throughout the world." [^17] Elder Larsen defined the role of the Relief Society as "to counsel and to sit in council," suggesting that the new leaders should become skilled in counseling with the priesthood councils and in teaching Relief Society stake and ward officers.

Winder, BarbaraPPThat August, President Hinckley announced the formation of thirteen geographic areas of the Church, with an area president and two counselors, all members of the First Quorum of the Seventy, presiding over each. He emphasized that the Church's rapid growth required flexibility to meet the challenges of such growth.

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara recalled, "The day we went to the meeting when the area presidencies were announced, it was like a light coming on." [^18] She then understood that her role as Relief Society president was to administer the Relief Society program not as an end itself but as a means of accomplishing the mission of the Church—to invite all to come unto Christ by preaching the gospel, perfecting the Saints, and redeeming the dead. The goals of Relief Society in support of this mission were therefore refined, with emphasis on helping women to build faith, to live and share the gospel, to give service with concern for each individual's spiritual and temporal welfare, to strengthen families, and to sustain the priesthood in helping all to receive sacred ordinances and covenants. The Relief Society would have to reduce and simplify wherever possible to more fully accommodate the widely varying needs of Relief Society sisters throughout the Church, particularly in the developing areas. As Joseph Smith shared a vision of the purpose of Relief Society, he said, "The Society is not only to relieve the poor, but to save souls." [^19] Barbara was determined to make these words a reality by focusing on basic needs and basic resources to assist women worldwide.

Winder, BarbaraPPIn 1978, at a Regional Representatives' meeting, President Spencer W. Kimball had defined the priesthood line, explaining, "The Church does not have several organizational lines running from headquarters leaders to their local counterparts. There is only one fundamental organizational channel, and that is the priesthood channel." [^20] Now Barbara received further insight into what President Hinckley meant by a "different time." In order for the auxiliaries to function under President Kimball's guidelines, she said, "There had to be a willingness to let go." The auxiliaries were to be gathered under the umbrella of the priesthood and no longer viewed as independent entities. "Now we see ourselves not as a separate organization telling the sisters what to do, but we see ourselves as Primary, Young Women, and Relief Society organizations counseling with the priesthood line and keeping the Brethren aware of the needs of the children, young women, and women of the Church. The Church is governed and directed by priesthood power. We are there to be a resource, to counsel and to sit in council." [^21]

Winder, BarbaraPPCloser cooperation of the three auxiliaries presided over by women was made possible in 1988 when the Primary and Young Women moved into the Relief Society Building. All three organizations were placed under the same General Authority as managing director instead of having three separate managing directors, and a new General Women's Executive Committee began meeting weekly to discuss the needs of children, young women, women, and families. Further, the presidencies and general board members of the auxiliaries drew closer as they began to travel together to visit stakes.

Winder, BarbaraPPJoanne B. Doxey, second counselor in the Relief Society presidency, said of the new coordination of the auxiliaries, "We are all women working for the same purpose of saving souls, sharing the same concerns for families. We want to become principle-oriented instead of program-oriented. It is our fondest hope that there will be no transitional gap for young women from Primary to Young Women and from Young Women to Relief Society. We all must have the vision, but it takes time for changes to be made. We have felt guided that this is the time."

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara Winder adds, "If there is anything for me to teach at this time, it is working in harmony and in unity. I know that we are to work together and that we are to be supportive of one another and we must learn to work together in councils." [^22]

Winder, BarbaraPPShortly after Barbara became Relief Society president, she traveled to Argentina, Brazil, and Peru and visited sisters in their homes as well as in ward and stake meetings. As she attended Relief Society and saw the sisters struggling with English poetry in cultural refinement lessons, the Spirit told her, "This is not what they need."

Winder, BarbaraPPThe Relief Society presidency announced a new format for Relief Society for the 1987 lesson year. The manual was smaller in size and had a new name—Personal Study Guide. A second spiritual living lesson each month took the place of the cultural refinement lesson; mother education lessons were replaced by home and family education lessons; and the social relations and compassionate service lessons were combined. One of Barbara's concerns was her desire for the sisters of the Church to become more familiar with the scriptures and to see that answers to everyday problems and challenges can be found in them. Beginning with the 1988 Personal Study Guide, which began production in 1985, all of the Sunday lessons for Relief Society became scripturally based and correlated with the gospel doctrine course of study.

Winder, BarbaraPPBeginning January 1, 1987, a major organizational change took place on the stake and ward levels of Relief Society, with the elimination of stake boards and greater flexibility in ward boards. "We're simplifying staffing and making the programs more adaptable to various countries," Barbara explained. "In most areas of the world, it is difficult to staff the stake board. With the added flexibility of the organization, the women of various cultures and age groups can adapt the program to their circumstances. The ward board is structured so it may expand or contract as needed. In large wards, the standard Relief Society organization could be augmented by many positions, such as homemaking specialists, nursery assistants, special events chairmen and enrichment specialists for midweek optional activities. This would give as many sisters as possible a chance to serve. In very small wards or branches, the organization is designed to function with only a president—adding counselors, secretary-treasurer, and teachers and board members as needed and available." [^23]

Winder, BarbaraPPWith the elimination of the stake board, only the Relief Society presidencies and secretary-treasurers attend stake leadership meetings, thus reducing time, expense, and travel for ward board members. Information from quarterly stake meetings is conveyed to ward boards at their monthly board meeting. Another reason for eliminating the attendance of Relief Society teachers at quarterly stake meetings was to motivate teachers to become more self-reliant and more dependent on the Spirit and to adapt the lessons to the particular needs of their classes.

Winder, BarbaraPPAnother need Barbara observed as she traveled throughout the Church was flexibility in the visiting teaching program. For many women in developing areas of the Church, monthly personal visits required tremendous sacrifice. In Kenya, for example, doing visiting teaching cost some sisters a day's pay and a day's time to reach women many miles away. In Europe, too, with the cost of gasoline at several dollars a litre, driving great distances to meet with the assigned sisters imposed a financial burden. Further, Barbara believed that visiting teaching efforts should be concentrated on women who need it most. In September 1988, the Relief Society announced new flexibility in the traditional visiting teaching policy, which had required a monthly personal visit to each sister. The new policy suggested that a personal visit should take place a minimum of once a quarter, and other contacts could be made by telephone call or letter. Barbara said, "We desire to meet the needs of the worldwide Church. We want to help show love and compassion to every sister, particularly where there are special needs, and to make it more possible for visits and contacts that will bless lives." The ultimate goal, she explained, is to "place more emphasis on ministering." [^24]

Winder, BarbaraPPBarbara's compassionate nature is an integral part of her administrative style. Joan B. Spencer, general secretary of the Relief Society, observed, "She comes across quietly, but she has great depth of character. She understands people and is caring, compassionate, and concerned about everyone. Barbara doesn't hesitate in making decisions but in the process weighs the matter carefully in a gentle, tender way and makes the people involved feel good about the decision. She sets aside her own desires and has the interests of others at heart. She would rather be the scapegoat than hurt someone's feelings."

Winder, BarbaraPPJoan noted, too, that Barbara makes every effort to be sure that her family does not suffer because of her heavy responsibilities. Her children feel free to call or drop in to the office. Monday night is open for the family to gather at the Winder home, often for a barbecue or a swim. "Barbara is a wonderful influence on her grandchildren," said Joan. "They just love her—she is so dear." [^25]

Winder, BarbaraPPHer family has responded with total support for her, especially her husband, Rich. Barbara's daughter, Susan, observed that her father is "not a person who needs to be in the limelight." He has done the grocery shopping, often having dinner ready for Barbara after one of her twelve-hour days. Even more significant to Barbara, he has provided emotional support. "When I come home and tell him I'm tired, he will say, 'I'd be surprised if you weren't.' I think he is my greatest asset in handling the pressure." [^26]

Winder, BarbaraPPJoanne B. Doxey, second counselor in the Relief Society presidency, said, "Barbara is a happy person who laughs, lifts, and loves. I see her absolute care for other people on a daily basis. She has such compassion for everyone and does not move the work forward by stepping on someone's toes. When she receives letters from sisters in the Church relating their problems, Barbara's eyes fill with tears because she puts herself in their shoes and really feels empathy for them. She wants to know what we can do to help people feel comfortable about themselves, their situations, and their lives. Although she is very busy, Barbara takes the time to make phone calls or talk with women in person. Quality visiting teaching is one of her great concerns. She wants every sister in the Church to know that someone loves and cares about her. Through working many years in Lambda Delta Sigma, Barbara has a particular love for the Young Adults and relates well to those young women. She is not a competitive leader; rather she is a compassionate leader. In working with the other auxiliaries, she is not protective of her own program nor of any programs, but of people." Joanne has also observed that Barbara is an effective leader because she is a detail person. "Nothing slips between the cracks; she remembers what needs to be done." [^27]

Winder, BarbaraPPJoy F. Evans, Barbara's first counselor, stated: "She has an infectious laugh, a merry smile, a happy disposition; more than that, her personal values are sound and her faith strong. She loves the Lord and seeks in every way to truly follow him—and while doing so, helps all of us to try a little harder. She wants so much for the sisters of the Church to recognize their divine worth and their great potential, and wants to see Relief Society as a sweet, strengthening, helpful organization that assists them to do so. She is and will be a great blessing to the women of the Church and through them to the families of the Church and the communities in which they live. Service and love, caring and concern, faith and courage—these are her bywords." [^28]

Winder, BarbaraPPBeyond the organizational administering of the worldwide Relief Society, Barbara has viewed her responsibility as ministering, "to help with the healing that needs to go on. It is a new time, it is a change of direction, it is a time to heal, a time to bond women to women and women to men. We can have unity in diversity and diversity in unity. We don't have to be like one another to enjoy sisterhood.

Winder, BarbaraPP"One of the important things we must do is to help the daughters of God know who they are and that they have had an important part in building his kingdom throughout all generations of time. Another of the most important things we can do is to learn to be accepting of one another and overcome judging one another, to learn to love each other and build each other more. That's what women are traditionally so good at doing. I recognize that we are all imperfect, but we can be there to help each other and to have understanding. If we don't do that, we're not going to be ready for His coming. We won't be able to tolerate His coming until we can learn some of those kinds of things. We have a lot of work to do." [^29]

Winder, BarbaraPPRichard Winder received a call in February 1990 to return to the area where he had served a mission as a young man, Czechoslovakia—this time to serve as president of the new Czechoslovakia Prague Mission. Thus, Barbara was released as general president of the Relief Society on March 31, 1990.

Winder, BarbaraPPThe examples and experiences Barbara W. Winder had as a young girl have helped her become a compassionate, loving person committed to the gospel of Jesus Christ. As a young woman and mother, she had opportunities, both within the Church and community, to develop leadership skills, As a mature woman and grandmother, she was called at a "new time" to preside over the largest Relief Society in the history of the Church—two and a half million sisters. Her life and her spirit indeed make her a compassionate leader who cares deeply about the one and who has vision for the many.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Information for this chapter has come from interviews with Elaine L. Jack, Joseph E. Jack, David Jack, and Jean Checketts and written statements from Ardeth Greene Kapp.
[^2] Janet Peterson, "Friend to Friend," The Friend, May 1985, 7.
[^3] Interview with Barbara W. Winder, May 31, 1989.
[^4] Interview with Marguerite H. Woodhead, June 8, 1988.
[^5] Barbara W. Winder, A Joyful Mother (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1988), p. 5.
[^6] Interview with Barbara W. Winder, June 3, 1988. Hereafter cited as Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Pinborough, "Barbara Woodhead Winder: A Gift of Loving," p. 29.
[^9] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Gerry Avant, "A Woman with Purpose," Church News, May 6, 1984, p. 14.
[^12] Telephone interview with Richard W. Winder, Jr., July 1988.
[^13] Pinborough, "Barbara W. Winder: A Gift of Loving," p. 29.
[^14] Avant, "A Woman with Purpose."
[^15] "Barbara W. Winder: Relief Society General President," Ensign, May 1984, p. 97.
[^16] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^17] Minutes of Relief Society General Board Retreat, August 1984, in possession of Barbara W. Winder.
[^18] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^19] Minutes, June 9, 1842.
[^20] Spencer W. Kimball, "Living the Gospel in the Home," Ensign, May 1978, p. 101.
[^21] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^22] Telephone interview with Joanne B. Doxey, August 22, 1988.
[^23] Barbara W. Winder interview.
[^24] "Relief Society Organization Simplified," Ensign, November 1986, p. 100.
[^25] "Visiting Teaching Policy Clarified," Church News, November 26, 1988, p. 6.
[^26] Telephone interview with Joan B. Spencer, August 1988.
[^27] Pinborough, "Barbara W. Winder: A Gift of Loving," p. 31.
[^28] Telephone interview with Joanne B. Doxey, August 22, 1988.
[^29] Statement of Joy F. Evans, August 27, 1988.
