Janet Peterson, LaRene Gaunt, Elect Ladies ( 1990)

12

Jack, ElainePPElaine L. Jack

1990 - [^1]

Jack, ElainePPIn 1975 Elaine Low Jack faced one of the most exhilarating but frightening experiences of her life when she rappeled down the face of a cliff in the mountains near Provo, Utah. "I just jumped off the cliff," she recalled. "I tried not to anticipate falling, but to have confidence in my niece, who had tied the rope at the top. I knew I could hang onto the rope. But I liked that feeling. Once I felt I could do it, I wasn't frightened anymore."

Jack, ElainePPElaine's calling as the twelfth general president of the Relief Society has required many of those same traits of optimism, confidence, courage, and love of adventure as that first rappel. "This calling is a challenge to be met joyfully," she says. "I have confidence in the one who is holding the rope, that is, our Heavenly Father. I will just do what I need to do and 'hang on.' "

Jack, ElainePP"I believe Elaine Jack has been raised up for this particular time," comments Ardeth Greene Kapp, general president of Young Women and a long-time friend of Elaine. "She has a work to do to lead the women of the Church at a time when there are many challenges and many opportunities. I have confidence that during her tenure as general president, all that can be done will be done. This period will be marked by one of significant growth among the women of the Church."

Jack, ElainePPGrowing Up in Canada

Jack, ElainePPElaine was born in the small Latter-day Saint community of Cardston, Alberta, Canada, one of four children of Sterling O. and Lovina Anderson Low. She has two brothers, Bruce and David, and one sister, Jean. The family lived a quarter of a block from the Alberta Temple. Like most families in the community, they had a big garden and a cow. Lovina Low often told her children, "You can be anything you want to be when you grow up, if you are willing to work." The effect of this philosophy became evident in the lives of the children as they learned to work hard, set high goals, and help one another.

Jack, ElainePPLovina suffered from a heart condition most of her life, but she was a good manager, and the children did much of the work around the home. By the time Elaine was twelve, she was washing clothes and doing much of the cooking, including baking bread. "I knew what needed to be done," she recalls. "We canned fruits and vegetables in the summer and put carrots and potatoes in the storage pit in the fall. At the time I didn't always enjoy the work, but now I recognize that those extra responsibilities were an advantage."

Jack, ElainePPChurch and school activities helped to give Elaine confidence. She played the organ in Sunday School and learned to lead music. She also served as a student aide in the principal's office in high school. "When someone has confidence in you," she says, "you rise to the level of their expectation. Because many people had a good influence on me in Cardston, I accomplished more than I might have otherwise. I am thankful for teachers and Church leaders who gave me opportunities for growth."

Jack, ElainePPElaine was greatly influenced by her maternal grandparents, John and Mary Ann Ross Anderson, who lived two doors away from the Lows. As young adults, they had emigrated through the Perpetual Emigration Fund from Scotland to America in 1882, but they waited to get married until they arrived in Salt Lake City so they could be married in the Endowment House. John, a stonemason from Aberdeen, helped build both the Salt Lake and Alberta temples. Elaine remembers Mary Ann Anderson as "genteel" and John Anderson as faithful and "solid as the granite of Aberdeen."

Jack, ElainePPJohn Anderson always tried to follow the promptings of the Spirit in decisions affecting his life. He recorded in his journal concerning his decision to move from Utah to Canada, "I prayed for guidance concerning my future. Then one spring morning in March, . . . from a pamphlet which came in my mail, I read of a settlement in Raymond, Canada, and turning to my wife said, 'Mary Ann, I feel impressed to move to Raymond, Canada.' My wife felt as I did that the impression was from the right spirit." They later moved to Cardston.

Jack, ElainePPJohn and Mary Ann served in the Alberta Temple. John also served as a stake patriarch. When Elaine was in high school, she recorded the patriarchal blessings he gave in a small room near the lobby of the temple. "Grandma and Grandpa would stop in almost every day on their way home from the temple," she remembers, "and there was always a warm reception for me at their house. I have fond memories of the aroma of finnan haddie, which they cooked on Fridays, and of their garden, where they grew vegetables and gooseberries and rhubarb. If I wanted a little extra money, I could offer to do some extra work for Grandma."

Jack, ElainePPElaine's paternal grandfather, Sylvester Low, was born in Scotland, where he joined the Church. He then emigrated to Utah and married Mary Smith, who was of English descent. They settled on a farm in the Cardston area, where they demonstrated a combination of the tenacity, strength, and commitment needed to survive on the virgin Canadian prairies. Sylvester died before Elaine was born, and Mary died when Elaine was a young girl.

Jack, ElainePPCollege, Employment, and Romance

Jack, ElainePPElaine graduated from Cardston High School as valedictorian of her graduating class of thirty-five. That fall she left for Salt Lake City to attend the University of Utah, where she majored in English. Homesick at first, she found comfort in the company of her sister, Jean, who was employed in Salt Lake City.

Jack, ElainePPIt wasn't long until Elaine adjusted to school and took a part-time job at a retail credit firm. "I didn't realize how unskilled I was," she recalls, "but I had an understanding boss who trained me. And it paid off for him. By the end of three months I had become proficient. I was a hard worker, too, because of the work ethic my parents, especially my father, instilled in me."

Jack, ElainePPDuring that first year of college, Elaine also met her future husband, a senior medical student named Joseph E. Jack. Joe had taken a trip with some friends the previous summer to attend sessions at the Logan, Idaho Falls, and Alberta temples. In Cardston he met a friend of Elaine's who suggested that he give Elaine a call when she went to the University of Utah. In February he did just that and asked her to the Founder's Day dance. They had a good time, but Elaine didn't see him again until she went to pick up her grades at the end of the winter quarter, and there was Joe, handing out the report cards. As he handed over her card, he asked her out again. They dated steadily until the end of the school year, when Elaine went back to Cardston for the summer.

Jack, ElainePPAfter Joe's graduation from medical school in August, he visited Elaine in Canada and they became engaged. Though her parents had known him only a short time, they sensed his good character and trusted Elaine's judgment. "They let me know they had confidence in my choice," she says, "and that trust became part of the strength they gave me as well."

Jack, ElainePPIn September Joe had to leave for New York to begin his internship at Staten Island Hospital, so Elaine returned to the University of Utah. Over the next year, they wrote to each other every day.

Jack, ElainePPLife in the Mission Field

Jack, ElainePPJoe and Elaine were married in the Alberta Temple on September 16, 1948. They then moved to New York so he could resume his internship at Staten Island Hospital. He decided to go into surgery after his internship and was one of four selected out of sixty-four applicants to do his residency at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan. The Jacks attended the Manhattan Ward, where Elaine served as Junior Sunday School coordinator. It was there that she first realized that she had a testimony. Joe worked every other night and every other weekend so Elaine often had to travel alone from Staten Island to Manhattan, a trip that took an hour and a half by bus, ferry, subway, and on foot. She remembers sitting in church and thinking, "I wouldn't be doing this if I didn't believe it."

Jack, ElainePPTwo years after her marriage, Elaine was eligible to become an American citizen. She remembers well going to the county courthouse on Staten Island to take the test and oath of allegiance. "It was a big step to take," she says, "but I think it was essential since I was going to live in the United States."

Jack, ElainePPAfter completing the first year of his residency at Bellevue, Joe joined the Public Health Service to fulfill his military obligation during the Korean War. The Jacks were sent to Boston, where Joe served in a medical corps for the Coast Guard. There they became members of the Cambridge Branch of the New England Mission, and their first baby, David Bruce, was born on February 7, 1952. That spring, when Joe was assigned to temporary service on the icebreaker East Wind, Elaine took David to Canada so she could care for her mother, who had suffered a heart attack. While in Canada, she received a letter from the president of the Cambridge Branch asking her to serve as a counselor in the branch Relief Society presidency. With a new baby, Elaine didn't think she would have the time, but when she returned to Boston she accepted the call, and her Relief Society service began.

Jack, ElainePPThe boundaries of the branch extended into Maine, and only six to eight sisters regularly attended Relief Society meetings. "The distances were long," remembers Elaine, "but we wanted to visit the sisters, so I just put the baby in the car and drove wherever I needed to. I had a wonderful time. I loved witnessing the growth of our Relief Society and the sisters in it." By the time Elaine was released, sixty-three sisters were attending Relief Society regularly. Joe served for a time in the Cambridge Branch presidency, and the couple were an integral part of the branch. When he completed his military service in Boston and they returned to New York, they took many happy memories with them.

Jack, ElainePPBack in New York, Joe continued his residency in surgery, and the Jacks became parents of a second son, William Erle (Bill), who was born December 1, 1954. Elaine was called to serve in the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association (forerunner of the Young Women) in the Short Hills (New Jersey) Ward. A year later she was called to serve in the New York Stake Relief Society presidency, and for a time she served in both callings. Her Relief Society calling involved considerable travel, since the stake encompassed all five boroughs of New York City and extended east to Long Island, north into Westchester County, and west into several counties of New Jersey. Again her attitude was "this is what we have to do, so let's do it." Fortunately, Joe's work schedule allowed him to watch the boys more often while Elaine carried on her Relief Society assignments.

Jack, ElainePPThe Jacks continued their commitment with the Public Health Service in Mount Edgecumbe, Alaska, moving there in 1956. At that time Alaska was still a U.S. territory, and Mount Edgecumbe had only a handful of Latter-day Saints. However, the first person to visit the Jacks after they arrived was one of the few other Latter-day Saints in town, who brought them a hot huckleberry pie. For the next two years, the Saints met in the Jacks' home. Elaine and Joe remember this as "a time of testimony strengthening." "Those years of relative isolation were a time of family unity for us," says Joe. "With no television, we made our own entertainment by picking berries, biking, picnicking, hiking, and participating in neighborhood activities. At Christmas time, we even took our family out to cut down our own Christmas tree."

Jack, ElainePPSettling in Salt Lake City

Jack, ElainePPIn 1958, the Jacks moved back to Salt Lake City, where Joe established his surgical practice. Two more sons were also born to them: Eric, born June 20, 1958, and Gordon, born March 30, 1962.

Jack, ElainePPThe Utah mountains provided opportunities for activities the family could do together. Although Elaine had never skied before, she learned after her fourth son was born, and she still enjoys days on the ski slopes. In the summers the family often went backpacking. There were trips to the Wind River Mountains in Wyoming, the Sawtooths in Idaho, and Glacier National Park in Montana. One day in the Uintah Mountains in Utah their hiking trail took them over three 12,000-foot mountain passes. As they hiked, Elaine often pointed out the wildflowers by name, a hobby inspired by a Relief Society homemaking lesson. Now a wildflower identification book goes on every trip.

Jack, ElainePP"My mother was always a good sport," says Elaine's eldest son, David. "Sometimes, when we were hiking, we would hide rocks in her backpack. She would discover them after we got to the bottom and laugh right along with us." Even today her sons like to joke about having a mother who wore army boots when they went hiking.

Jack, ElainePPWhen Joe bought golf clubs for himself, he bought some for Elaine, too. As each of the boys got old enough to play golf, they joined Joe and Elaine. Joe even pulled their youngest son, Gordon, around the course on his golf cart before Gordon was old enough to play so he could join the fun too. Golfing is still the family's favorite activity.

Jack, ElainePPElaine enjoys organizing family get-togethers. In the summer of 1989 she and Joe planned a family reunion in Sun Valley, Idaho, for their sons, daughters-in-law, and grandchildren. Days were carefully planned so everyone was involved with such activities as hikes on guided nature trails, heritage nights, slide shows, costumed performances, naps, and ethnic-food assignments. Of course, family golf tournaments were also held.

Jack, ElainePPMusic plays a significant role in Elaine's life. One of her prized possessions is a Steinway piano that a cherished friend willed to her. When the family gets together, Elaine sits down at the piano and the children and grandchildren gather around her and sing. She especially enjoys these times since she remembers well the years she didn't have a piano. Playing the piano is a talent she enjoys developing, and piano lessons have been a part of her life off and on since she was a little girl. She has studied popular music as well as the classics.

Jack, ElainePPElaine likes people—she is gracious, laughs easily, and puts others at ease. She enjoys entertaining friends in her home and cooking for them. She also has worked quietly in private relationships to provide support and help to those in need. Her sons remember the support and encouragement she gave them as they were growing up. She always thanked them when they helped around the house and praised them for their accomplishments at church and at school. When David was in college and working two jobs, he would sometimes come home late at night to find his mother still up and working. "I was impressed that she was willing to help me by typing my thesis and other papers even late at night and when she had other projects she needed to finish," he says.

Jack, ElainePP"Elaine's service comes from a lifelong attitude of sacrificing for others," according to Joe, who is proud of her for her willingness to serve and for many other personal qualities. "She genuinely loves and cares about people. Her poise and confidence make her a real lady, and her sense of humor in raising four boys has been a tremendous asset. She has been a wonderful wife whom I love."

Jack, ElainePP"Elaine is spirited and cheerful," says her sister, Jean Collett. "Her positive attitude and gratitude for her blessings have helped her meet the personal challenges in her life. She is energetic, works fast, and stays ahead of her obligations. In fact, I think work is fun for her. We've had an especially close relationship—she's my best friend."

Jack, ElainePPChurch and Community Service

Jack, ElainePPElaine enjoys her involvement in church and community service. As an American citizen, she feels strongly about her need to be involved in things that improve the community. She has been a lay speaker for the American Cancer Society, showing educational films to many groups; has served in both county and state medical auxiliaries; has been a member of the Utah State Board for Unproven Health Practices; and has served as a delegate to a state political convention. She is also a member of the board of directors of Deseret Book Company.

Jack, ElainePPIn the Church, Elaine's service in Utah has alternated between Young Women and Relief Society, just as it did in New York. (Of course, with four sons she also served often as a den mother in Cub Scouts.) On a ward level she taught Relief Society and was counselor to three ward Relief Society presidents, and on a stake level she was a board member and president of the Holladay South Stake Relief Society. During the years she taught cultural refinement lessons, she really went the extra mile. Two mornings a month she invited women in her neighborhood, including nonmembers, to her home for "mingles"—talks by friends who were experts in such topics as art appreciation, children's literature, and publishing a newspaper.

Jack, ElainePPIn September 1972 Elaine was called to the Relief Society general board by President Belle S. Spafford. When Sister Spafford was released two years later, the new general president, Barbara B. Smith, called Elaine back to the board, and she served in this calling until April 1984, when Sister Smith was released.

Jack, ElainePPIn April 1987 Elaine's service shifted again to Young Women when she was called to serve as second counselor to Ardeth G. Kapp in the Young Women general presidency. Feeling overwhelmed, Elaine called Sister Kapp the next morning and asked, "How could you choose me?" Sister Kapp simply said, "I didn't choose you; the Lord did."

Jack, ElainePPSpeaking of their service together, Sister Kapp said, "It was a great joy for me to have the privilege of working with Elaine. While she can dream of the ideal and set her sights on the stars, she has the ability to be realistic and practical as she keeps her feet on the ground. As a counselor Elaine was faithful, loyal, dedicated, and wonderfully optimistic."

Jack, ElainePPLeading the Worldwide Sisterhood

Jack, ElainePPOn March 31, 1990, Elaine Low Jack was sustained as the twelfth general Relief Society president, succeeding Barbara W. Winder. Chieko N. Okazaki was sustained as first counselor and Aileen Hales Clyde as second counselor. Commenting on the call, Ardeth Kapp stated, "We anticipate an even closer relationship between the Young Women and Relief Society, and trust that the bridge needed for young women to move from one organization to the next will be strengthened through a carefully planned transition."

Jack, ElainePP"I'd like the 1990s to be a decade when women extend themselves, exemplify righteousness, and teach in compassion and love," the new president says of her hopes for Relief Society. "I want each woman to find her own individual happiness as a result of her belief in the gospel. If women are solid and secure in their personal testimonies and live according to what they know is right, they will be blessed individually and will make a difference in the world." Then she adds, "My testimony is my whole life. It is the foundation for my decisions and my judgment. It is simply the standard I live by."

Jack, ElainePPThe general Relief Society presidency is looking forward to the Relief Society sesquicentennial, March 17, 1992, as "a great opportunity for us to acknowledge and recognize women all over the world."

Jack, ElainePP"Women internationally can share faith, values, experiences, and ideas," Elaine explains. "I have respect for the diversity among women and acknowledge the strengths, abilities, and talents they possess. We can relate to all women through the spirit."

Jack, ElainePPA group of Spanish sisters attended general conference and were in the Tabernacle when Elaine was sustained as general Relief Society president. Afterwards Renee Canals, a member of the Young Women general board who speaks Spanish, invited Elaine to meet briefly with these sisters. "We found that we didn't need to rely on language to understand one another," Elaine noted. "The Spirit helped us to communicate."

Jack, ElainePPElaine is concerned about women who are undergoing transitions in their lives, such as moving into a new area, starting a family, losing a husband, changing employment, or experiencing other major changes. One area on which she would like to focus is the transition of eighteen-year-olds as they leave the Young Women program and move into Relief Society. She hopes to "help these sisters feel comfortable during this first major transition in their lives. " Her service in the Young Women presidency has given her a special love for these younger sisters.

Jack, ElainePP"This is an exciting time to be representing Relief Society women worldwide," she declares. "There are great blessings and opportunities available—personal blessings that come through unshakable faith, and opportunities that come through giving Christian service. I have confidence that our Latter-day Saint sisters will continue in their enthusiasm to promote righteousness, both in themselves and in others."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Information for this chapter has come from interviews with Elaine L. Jack, Joseph E. Jack, David Jack, and Jean Checketts and written statements from Ardeth Greene Kapp.
