Ronald D. Dennis, Call of Zion: The Story of the First Welsh Mormon Migration ( 1987)

Gather to Zion

The first Mormon missionaries assigned to Wales were Henry Royle and Frederick Cook, who began to proselyte in North Wales in October 1840. Some months earlier others had been preaching in the English counties which border Wales. These missionaries could well have gone into some of the Welsh villages for a street meeting or two.

The first missionary assigned to the heartland of Wales was William Henshaw. He went directly to cosmopolitan Merthyr Tydfil, a burgeoning town which had recently become the industrial center of Wales. With no knowledge of the Welsh language, Henshaw had to proclaim his message in English and hope some would understand. On 19 February 1843 he baptized his first converts, the William Davis family. During the following three years, Henshaw established several branches in Glamorgan and Monmouth, branches with a membership totaling nearly five hundred members.

In December 1845 Captain Dan Jones was called to preside over all Welsh Mormons. He went down to Merthyr Tydfil after having spent the previous year in an unproductive North Wales. For the next decade this feisty and somewhat flamboyant mariner, having exchanged a ship's deck for a preacher's pulpit, would be the central figure of Welsh Mormondom.

Born in North Wales in 1810, Dan Jones went to sea at age seventeen and for the following ten years spent most of his life away from Wales. Shortly after he married Jane Melling in 1837 he took her to America, where he became an American citizen and operated a steamboat on the Mississippi River. It was while he was captain of the little steamer Maid of Iowa that he first heard of the Mormons. Incredulous at the scurrilous stories then being printed in the Warsaw (Illinois) Signal and elsewhere, Jones sought out the missionaries to obtain firsthand information. The result was his conversion, and in January of 1843 he accepted baptism in the icy waters of the Mississippi. He had not as yet met the Prophet Joseph Smith but did so just a few months later in April after transporting a group of British immigrants from St. Louis to Nauvoo. The friendship that resulted between the Prophet and the Captain continued right up to Joseph's martyrdom at the Carthage Jail in Illinois. Jones was the recipient of Joseph's last prophecy, which was that the Welshman would return to his native land and fulfill the mission to which he had been called some months earlier. After three narrow escapes from death during the next thirty-six hours, Jones proceeded to make preparations to journey back to Britain.

Jones and his wife, Jane, traveling in company with Wilford Woodruff and Hiram Clark, reached Liverpool in January of 1845. First assigned to North Wales, Jones labored nearly all of 1845 but baptized only two or three converts. He was amazed at William Henshaw's success in South Wales and was no doubt disappointed at the lack of his own. His reassignment to South Wales, however, would bring forth more encouraging results. During 1846 there were nearly five hundred Welsh converts; in 1847 just under one thousand; and an astounding 1,700 during 1848, the last year of Jones's first mission.

One of Jones's principal tools in proselyting the Welsh nation was the printing press. Numerous pamphlets in support of Mormonism, together with a monthly periodical called Prophwyd y Jubili (Prophet of the Jubilee) and a 288-page scriptural commentary—all in Welsh—were published between 1845 and 1848 by this energetic Welshman.

Converting his compatriots, however, represented only one of his objectives. Getting them "home to Zion" was the ultimate goal. The location of "Zion" shifted from Nauvoo, Illinois, to the Rocky Mountains during Jones's first mission, but enthusiasm for emigrating continued undiminished.

The Perpetual Emigrating Fund, which would assist many British converts to emigrate, had not as yet been established, and the cost of the voyage was out of reach for most Welsh converts, inasmuch as most of them clung to the lowest rungs of the economic ladder. They were encouraged, however, to rely on faith and save what they could; and the Lord would provide.

A ray of hope shone through the clouds of British Mormon poverty when the Joint Stock Company was established. From its inception in 1845, Jones was an ardent supporter and encouraged his flock to purchase all the shares they could afford. Hope was extinguished about a year later when Reuben Hedlock absconded with over l 400 of the company's funds, l 70 of which had been invested by Welsh Saints. To what extent this fiasco caused investors to abandon Mormonism is difficult to assess, since the Millennial Star printed very little about it and the Prophwyd y Jubili was totally silent. But William Henshaw, William Phillips, and Dan Jones, the three persons whose names are seen most often as contributors, continued firm in the faith after the loss. Also in the fall of 1846 when the company was terminated by the Church, there were fewer than nine hundred Welsh Mormons. That conversions increased and that the other religious periodicals did not make an issue of the company's failure suggest that repercussions were comparatively small.

The official organ of the Welsh Mormons, Prophwyd y Jubili, appeared monthly between July 1846 and December 1848. In nearly every one of the thirty issues there was something about emigrating: such articles as "The Landing of Sam Brannan in California," "Description of California," [^1] "News from the Saints in the Wilderness," "Who Is Ready to Start Homeward?," a letter from Wilford Woodruff while crossing the plains—all these fanned the flames of emigrating fever. A three-page article entitled "Twenty-nine Welshmen Lose Their Jobs in Cwmbychan Because They Are Mormons" added fuel.

In the February 1848 Prophwyd y Jubili (29-31), Jones announced that official approval had been given for the Welsh to begin making definite plans for emigrating in a year's time. All were encouraged to pay off their debts, and the wealthy were asked to be generous in assisting the poor to leave "Babylon" for the promised land.

In the June 1848 Prophwyd y Jubili (92-95), Jones printed Thomas Bullock's account of the trek from Council Bluffs to Utah so future emigrants would have a better idea of what lay in store for them. And in October Jones announced that he, himself, had been granted permission to go with the first shipload of Welsh Saints. Thus he would "get the pleasant company and heavenly teaching of the sons of Zion instead of defending the truth against the malicious tales, false assertions, and the poison and slime of this perverse and obstinate nation" (Prophwyd y Jubili, October 1848, 153, trans.).

Also in the October issue appeared a new song, "Hail to California," to be sung by the Welsh as they sailed away (no credit is given to the composer of the song; consequently, one would suppose that the editor, Dan Jones, had written it):

When pestilence is harvesting the countries—

Harvesting man like the grass of the field;

When its foul breeze blows

Laying waste the green earth, California,

Yonder across the distant seas, for me.

When the sharp shining sword

Is bathed in blood;

Yes, blood—the warm blood of men,

In the worst battles ever fought, California—

Yonder to the Rocky Mountains I shall go.

(Prophwyd y Jubili, October 1848, 158. Appendix E, Translated Documents, item 1. Hereafter translated documents will be indicated by TD.)

Two months later in Seren Gomer (Star of Gomer), a Baptist periodical, appeared a lengthy parody of "Hail to California" entitled "An lnvitation to California." The following two verses are typical of the scornful tone throughout:

We can get corn without sowing or harrowing,

Everyone believe, everyone believe.

And bread without baking it,

Everyone believe,

Houses will grow for us from the earth,

Lovely and attractive palaces,

Oh, this is an alluring place,

Everyone believe, everyone believe,

A place where pain or sorrow will not come,

Everyone believe.

There are fat oxen there,

This is heaven, this is heaven,

And thousands of fat pigs,

This is heaven,

Are waiting by the doors,

With the knives in their throats,

Ready, morning and night,

This is heaven, this is heaven,

There is no one with a sparse table,

This is heaven.

(Seren Gomer, December 1848, 373-74, TD4; the parody is signed "A Small Seer.")

The song that was sung, however, as the Welsh left Liverpool was yet another one, entitled "The Saints' Farewell":

Farewell now to everyone;

We shall sail the great ocean,

In complete longing for God's Zion,

For it is better to go to the land

Given to us by our Father;

We have lived captive far too long.

Freedom has come to us in the wake of adversity,

We have been called out of Babel;

At the call, our intention is to go—

To go in spite of the cruel enemy:

Our God, through His great grace,

Will bring us safely to His seemly Zion.

(Prophwyd y Jubili, December 1848, 186, TD3; the song was signed "J. D.," a pseudonym for John Davis, successor to Dan Jones in the printing office.)

The Reverend H. W. Jones, publisher of Seren Gomer and former employer of John Davis, was not enthusiastic at the prospect of so many Welsh men and women—many former Baptists—turning their backs on their homeland. In his periodical he warned the Welsh Mormons with an ominous prophecy:

After receiving enough money to get a ship or ships to voyage to California, their Chief-President [Dan Jones] will sail them to Cuba, or some place like it, and will sell them as slaves, every jack one of them. It would serve them right for having such little respect for the book of Christ and giving it up for the books of Mormon. (Seren Gomer, October 1848, 305, trans.; the article was signed "Anti-Humbug," identified by John Davis as H. W. Jones.)

Through Prophwyd y Jubili a call was made for the names and ages of all who intended to emigrate. A deposit of one pound sterling per person had to be paid no later than 31 December to secure passage. Detailed instructions concerning essentials such as food, clothing, trunks, and tools were printed in the November 1848 Prophwyd y Jubili (165-69, TD2). The itinerary was described and final counsel concerning indebtedness was given. Over three hundred Welsh Saints declared themselves candidates for the first emigrating party.

The opponents of Mormonism in Wales were incensed at these enticements and claimed that their compatriots were victims of a grand and wicked scheme. Anti-Mormon publications, articles, lectures, and campaigns grew in number and intensity. Over a year before the emigration, Dan Jones assessed the situation in the Merthyr area in a 29 September 1847 letter to Orson Spencer, president of the missionary effort in Great Britain:

They have exhausted all their ammunition at poor Joseph, and have of late beset poor Captain Jones, "his imp," and "arch impostor of Wales;" and it is truly amusing to witness the exertions of these Nothingarians, in ransacking the vocabulary of Billingsgate itself for titles with which to crown me! Some say, they have proven me even worse than Joe Smith! Others say, "He is not quite so bad, but soon will be!" The scenes here are very like the continental rabbles of Missouri, etc., and still raging worse and hotter daily. You need not be surprised should you hear of Carthage tragedies in Wales, ere long. The whole towns and works hereabouts, containing over 60,000 people, are actually drunken with infatuation, and rage for or against Mormonism. (Millennial Star, 15 October 1847, 318-19)

Some of Jones's fellow emigrants also wrote of the severe opposition just prior to their departure from Merthyr Tydfil to Swansea en route to Liverpool:

The life of our dear Brother Captain Jones was in such danger that his house was attacked almost every night for weeks before his leaving Merthyr, so that his godly life was not safe in sleeping except between guards from among his brethren; and there were scoundrels so inhuman who had been paid to kill him as he left, so that he had to leave secretly the day before. (Udgorn Seion [Zion's Trumpet], March 1849, 57, TD5)

From Swansea to Liverpool

The plan for emigrating called for all Welsh Saints to meet in Liverpool by 15 February. Those who lived in North Wales would go as individuals or in small groups; those from South Wales would meet in Swansea on the thirteenth and would make the thirty-four-hour voyage together by steamer. The gathering in Swansea caused a great sensation among the residents and was even described in considerable detail in the local newspaper, The Cambrian. The tone is one of amazement intermixed with pity:

Emigration to California.—The Latter Day Saints.—On Tuesday last, Swansea was quite enlivened in consequence of the arrival of several waggons loaded with luggage, attended by some scores of the "bold peasantry" of Carmarthenshire, and almost an equal number of the inhabitants of Merthyr and the surrounding districts, together with their families. The formidable party were nearly all "Latter Day Saints," and came to this town for the purpose of proceeding to Liverpool in the Troubador steamer, where a ship is in readiness to transport them next week to the glittering regions of California. This goodly company is under the command of a popular Saint, known as Captain Dan Jones, a hardy traveller, and a brother of the well-known John Jones, Llangollen, the able disputant on the subject of "Baptism." He arrived in the town on Tuesday evening, and seems to enjoy the respect and confidence of his faithful band. He entered the town amidst the gaze of hundreds of spectators, and in the evening he delivered his valedictory address at the Trades' Hall, to a numerous audience, the majority of whom were led by curiosity to heat his doctrines, which are quite novel in this town. Amongst the group were many substantial farmers from the neighbourhoods of Brechfa and Llanybydder, Carmarthenshire; and although they were well to do, they disposed of their possessions, to get to California, their New Jerusalem as they deem it, where their fanaticism teaches them to believe they will escape from the general destruction and conflagration that is shortly to envelop this earth. It is due to them, however, to state, that they are far from being smitten by that mania for gold, the discovery of which has imparted to the modern El Dorado such notoriety of late. They seem animated only with the most devout feelings and aspirations, which seem to flow from no other source (judging from their conversation) than a sincere belief that the End of the World is at hand, and that their great Captain of Salvation is soon to visit his "bobl yn ngwlad y Saint" [people in the country of the Saints]. It is their intention, we are informed, not to visit the gold regions, but the agricultural districts, where they intend, they say, by helping one another, to reside in peace and harmony, and to exemplify the truth of "brotherly love," not in name, but in practice. Amongst the number who came here were several aged men, varing from 70 to 90 years of age, and "whose hoary locks" not only proclaimed their "lengthened years," but render it very improbable they will live to see America; yet so deluded are the poor and simple Saints, that they believe that every one amongst them, however infirm and old they may be, will as surely land in California safely, as they started from Wales. Their faith is most extraordinary. On Wednesday morning, after being addressed by their leader, all repaired on board in admirable order, and with extraordinary resignation. Their departure was witnessed by hundreds of spectators, and whilst the steamer gaily passed down the river, the Saints commenced singing a favourite hymn. On entering the piers, however, they abruptly stopped singing, and lustily responded to the cheering with which they were greeted by the inhabitants. (The Cambrian, 16 February 1849)

The departure from Swansea was at 9 o'clock Wednesday morning, 14 February 1849; the arrival at Liverpool was the following day at 3:30 P.M. The journey, according to William Phillips, Dan Jones's successor, was shorter than usual by four hours. Phillips accompanied the emigrants during the two-week period prior to their departure from Liverpool, not only to see them off but also to gain firsthand knowledge to share with future emigrants. In the March 1849 Udgorn Seion he published a brief account of their experiences.

In a fashion that was standard with other letter writers about the journey, William Phillips accentuated the positive aspects of the emigration and downplayed anything of a contrary or discouraging nature: "Everyone was healthy and content during the entire voyage, except that a little seasickness troubled some" (Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 59, TD6). The "little seasickness" was described in somewhat different terms by David D. Bowen, an experienced seaman who was also on board the Troubador: "All the passengers with few exceptions was very sick on the passage, by the pitching and rocking of the steamer, and no one on board except Dan Jones and myself could do any help to the sick. Everybody had plenty to take care of them selfs" (Bowen, 19). For the majority of the emigrants, this was their first time aboard a ship; thus, sea legs were slow to develop. But there is no record of any having turned back. This short voyage from Swansea to Liverpool, however, was merely a prelude to fifty days of Atlantic waves en route to New Orleans.

Mid-nineteenth-century Liverpool was a bustling port city, much larger than any the Welsh had seen in Wales. Because so many neophytes passed through Liverpool on their way to parts all over the world, a group of fast-talking "sharpers" cropped up. Many a careless emigrant would find himself relieved of his baggage and his currency by these shrewd dealers. The Welsh, however, were given fair warning by their leader in his printed instructions to them (Prophwyd y Jubili, November 1848, 167, TD2). Those on board the Troubador received additional help from the ship's captain by his landing at a place where there were no such shysters waiting. William Phillips reported later that "through listening to their leaders' warning to take care of their possessions, all the Saints kept everything safe so that all the cunning of the predators of the place did them no harm in any way" (Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 59, TD6).

Brothers and sisters of the faith were encouraged to assist one another at every opportunity. Just as pioneers crossing the plains of America would plant crops along their way for the benefit of those who followed, the Saints in Liverpool assisted their Welsh comrades, despite a centuries-old suspicion between England and Wales. They had rented the "Music Hall," a large, six-story building which had sufficient rooms for the entire company to take lodging in. At the rate of one shilling sixpence per night per person, the Welsh spent five nights there.

In the harbor, final preparations were being made for the vessel which would transport the company to New Orleans. At 547 tons the Buena Vista was among the smaller ships used in Mormon emigration. She measured 141 x 29 x 14.5 feet and had been built just the year before at Newburyport, Massachusetts. Her captain was Ebenezer Linnell. [^2]

After five nights in the Music Hall, the Welsh emigrants were instructed to go on board the ship. David D. Bowen and a few other families were already on the ship, no doubt to conserve their money supply. Bowen described the spectacle of the emigrants as they went from one place to another in the town: "All the passingers where [sic] marching along the streets of Liverpool in one body like a regiment of solders. I thought it was the biggest sight that the Liverpool people ever seen by the way they where looking at us" (19).

Three unexpected developments took place once the entire group congregated on board the Buena Vista: first, the departure was delayed for another six days for unexplained reasons; second, seventy-seven of those who had counted on sailing on the Buena Vista would have to wait another week and sail on the Hartley along with 161 English and Scottish converts; third, Welsh-speaking ministers from Liverpool went on board to dissuade the emigrants from going.

Many stories, some very strange, indeed, had been circulated all over Wales about the Mormons. In addition to the prophecy about the sale of the emigrants into slavery in Cuba, there was also a strong rumor that widows from South Wales on board had "prepared clothes to put on their departed husbands in California and shoes to put on their feet" (Phillips, Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 60, TD6).

The Reverend Henry Rees and "some of the sectarian preachers of the town" made inquiry concerning this and other information which they had received from their colleagues in South Wales. Dan Jones and William Phillips, spokesmen for the group, replied that it was a "barefaced lie" and offered the following explanation: "There are on the ship some widows who have kept some things of their husbands out of respect, but not to greet them with in California" (Phillips, Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 60, TD6).

These reverends failed to convert any of the Mormons to the idea of staying in Great Britain, but it was not for lack of effort. One can readily sense the animosity of the Welsh Mormons toward the ministers by these comments in an article entitled "Last greeting of the emigrating Saints," signed by twenty-five of the departing brethren:

Many preachers of the different sects, after slandering us and smearing our characters through the Welsh publications and condemning our dear religion from their pulpits, and doing everything they could to disgrace us and to shatter our feelings are even here, when we are on board the ship, and as if they had one foot out of Babylon, they are trying to frighten the Saints about the sea voyage, about the country and about everything which is good, trying to persuade them to everything except that which they should do. (Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 58, TD5)

Sacrifices had not been small for many of these emigrants to become Mormons. For them to be disowned by their families, shunned by friends, and persecuted by former ministers and fellow parishioners was not uncommon. They had been constantly graced with such epithets as "deceivers, false prophets, weakheaded and unprincipled liars, idlers, the dregs of everything which stinks in the nostrils of everyone" (Davis, 6 October 1848, 3, trans.). The label which really caused the Mormons to breathe fire was one applied to them by the Reverend W. R. Davies, Baptist minister from Dowlais; he called them Latter-day "Satanists." It is little wonder, then, that the emigrants stood their ground on board the Buena Vista and gave prayers of thanksgiving that they would soon be free of such pernicious influences as the Welsh reverends.

Even before the ministers went on board, President William Phillips, there to see everyone off, decided to put the Saints to the test to see if he could convince some of the more homesick ones to turn back with him. The answer he generally received was "'However much we love you, we cannot love you so much as to wish to turn back with you. Leave us in peace; it is forward that all of us want to go'" (Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 60, TD6).

The desire of every missionary had been to baptize entire families into the Church. Many times, however, only the wife or the husband would become a believer. Such situations became particularly divisive when the call came to emigrate. Accusations were launched that men were deserting their wives and children by going to Zion without them. And it is true that there were several men on board who were leaving their families behind, some with no intention of ever seeing them again. The emigrants felt justified, however, and placed the blame on the "Babylonians":

They were so bad, some of them, that they influenced our own families, yes, our dear wives and children! so as to frighten them against coming with us! yes, to cause contention between husband and wife, between parents and dear children. What worse could they have done? They will have much to answer for! (Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 57, TD5)

The attraction to proceed to Zion was greater than the sense of duty to stay behind in "Babylon" with intractable wives and children, and the converts denounced their families as well as those who had caused their families to refuse to accompany husbands and fathers:

Yet, no doubt these themselves [the "Babylonians"] will raise their voices highest to condemn a man for leaving his disobedient, peevish and cruel wife behind when she refuses every offer to come. We assure you that there are no men in our midst who have not tried their utmost to get their wives to come with them and their children also. Do not the laws of men and God assure to the husband, as the head of his family, the choice of his country? And if they refuse to follow him, his wife or children are the ones who are leaving him, and it is not he who is leaving them! (Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 57, TD5)

Other stories had been spread about wives on board who were emigrating against the wishes of their husbands. Such stories were summarily dismissed by the signers of the "Last greeting" as baseless lies.

William Phillips reported with great enthusiasm the wondrous things which took place on board ship prior to departure: "I saw some of the Saints at times taken sick; but no sooner were hands laid on them than they were restored immediately; and I can bear witness that I have never seen more of the power of God than I saw on the ship" (Udgorn Seion, March 1849, 60, TD6). One of these manifestations of divine intervention came when Betsy David, nineteen-year-old daughter of Morgan and Elizabeth David, fell from the top deck to the bottom of the hold. Cut, bruised, and unconscious, she was taken to a hospital. When she regained consciousness the next day, no one thought she would live. But through the blessings and prayers of the elders, she experienced a full recovery and lived for another four decades (Chambers).

The nine children under the age of one were nonpaying passengers. Those between the ages of one and fourteen cost their parents each, and all above the age of fourteen paid l 3 12s 6d, a reasonable price considering l 5 was not uncommon for such a voyage. The price also included the needed provisions. All the fares having been collected and the ship put into a state of readiness, the only two things left to complete were to organize the emigrants into different sections and set sail.

The 249 persons on board the Buena Vista were assigned to be in one of eight sections. An elder was appointed to supervise each section "to see that everyone acted properly and received justice impartially, to foster and nurture love and unity, and especially to see that all kept the places clean and healthful" (Jones, 18 April 1849, 5, TD7). To keep the ship clean, two men were assigned to arise each morning before all the others in their group to wash and dry the deck. Captain Dan Jones, very much at home back on board ship after four years on land, was the president of the emigrating company. He was assisted by the triad of William Morgan, a forty-six-year-old engineer from Merthyr Tydfil; Rice Williams, a forty-five-year-old farmer from Rhymni; and William Davis, a forty-three-year-old tailor from Rhymni. These constituted a "council" which was to organize all temporal and spiritual matters.

After a nine-day wait and after one-fourth of the group had been reassigned to sail a few days later, the Buena Vista was ready to be dragged out to sea; two large steamers performed the task. Tears of joy, excitement, and anxiety rolled down the passengers' cheeks. Tears of sadness were in the eyes of William Phillips, Abel Evans, Elieser Edwards, John Davies, David Jeremy, and Daniel Evans, brethren who had come to bid farewell to the emigrants. Tears of disappointment were on the faces of the seventy-seven who had paid to be on the Buena Vista but who still had another week of waiting in Liverpool. Dan Jones described the departure:

On Monday, the 26th of February about two o'clock in the afternoon, we set sail from the port, and all the Saints, accompanied by the harp, sang "The Saints' Farewell" as we left the dock. Their sweet voices resounded throughout the city, attracting the attention of and causing amazement to thousands of spectators who followed us along the shore as if charmed. (18 April 1849, 6, TD7) [^3]

Phillips and the others had purchased oranges to hurl to the outstretched hands of the passengers as the ship was being dragged from the Waterloo Dock. Fresh fruit was expensive in Britain, and the Saints were poor; consequently, appreciation was all the greater. When the ship had gone out of reach for throwing the oranges, handkerchiefs were then waved as a final farewell and "the winds of February . . . turned into summer breezes" (Jones, 18 April 1849, 6, TD7).

Thomas Jeremy became very nostalgic at the prospect of being separated, perhaps permanently, from his brethren in the gospel:

Oh, how lovely was the association I had with some of these brethren on numerous occasions in Wales. Sometimes the day was too short for us to talk about the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and we would frequently take the night as an extention to it. And sleep would stand in the distance from us while others would be abundantly comfortable in its grasp. At that time it came to my mind, "When will I see them again?" I imagined hearing something in answer that it would not be long before seeing them over in Zion. And at that I took courage. (18 April 1849, 21, TD8)

The opposition back in Wales had by no means ceased with the departure of this first group of Welsh Saints. In fact, the departure was used as a reason for further agitation. The date of 27 February 1849, just one day after the Buena Vista had left Liverpool, was applied to a letter sent to John Davis, editor of Udgorn Seion. Signed "Capt. Dan Jones," it contained some rather startling declarations:

My dear brother in the Lord—I am pleased to be able to inform you that we have landed safely in New Orleans, after a short and comfortable voyage. There is evident care in our behalf, clear proof to the world of the truthfulness of our faith, in spite of so much talk against it by the numerous false religions of the world; and perhaps this letter also will come to your hand rather miraculously; if so, proclaim it before the public, and proclaim in Gath and Ashkelon about the providential care of our Heavenly Father over us. We are going from here to Nauvoo, on the banks of the Mississippi River, in the State of Illinois, and from there to Council Bluffs in the State of Missouri. An angel showed to you in a dream the directions; inform everyone of this also. Tell all the brethren that we are well and comfortable, and convincing the world as we go forward; our numbers will be thousands by the time we reach the end of our journey, and before long we shall overthrow all the kingdoms of the earth, and we shall live one thousand two hundred and sixty years after that happens. I do not have time to write much to you, for I have much to do. I am yours affectionately, Your father in the Lord, Capt. Dan Jones. (Davis, Preface, iii-iv, trans.)

One could disregard, perhaps, the placing of Council Bluffs in Missouri, but to have the immigrants go first to Nauvoo en route to Council Bluffs three years after the Saints' exodus from Nauvoo was more than Davis could accept. In addition, he noticed the emblem of the Odd Fellows on the stationery and declared the letter a clumsy forgery. He printed it in his foreword to the pamphlet containing Jones's and Jeremy's "authentic" accounts of the Buena Vista crossing (TD7, TD8), as a further caution to the already cautious Welsh Saints to beware of the continued efforts to hamper the progress of Mormonism.

On Board the Buena Vista

Many of the Welsh Saints were so poor that even after liquidating all their meager assets they still did not have sufficient money to pay the fare of l 3 12s 6d for each member of their families. This amount is equivalent to about $18 or perhaps $100 by today's standards. And although that may sound quite reasonable, one must bear in mind that over one-third of a laborer's annual wages was required to transport himself, his wife, and a few children across the Atlantic. Once he reached New Orleans he would have to pay another ten shillings per person to go by steamer upstream to St. Louis. Yet another l 1 sterling each would be required for the steamer from St. Louis to Council Bluffs. And the immigrant would need to purchase food for his family while on the Mississippi and Missouri rivers. Once he arrived in Council Bluffs he would face the expense of buying a wagon and oxen plus more provisions for the thousand-mile, three-month journey to the Great Salt Lake Valley. All these considerations in addition to the prospect of about eight months with no income made emigrating a sobering challenge.

The Perpetual Emigrating Fund was established later in 1849 and would be used by many Welsh Mormons. But those on board the Buena Vista and the Hartley had to use other means. Some intended from the outset to proceed only as far as Council Bluffs, where they would work and save until they could buy themselves a "fitout" to continue westward. Some had just enough to go the full distance. And some made arrangements to earn their way by going as maid or servant to a family that could afford to pay for their services. Elizabeth Lewis, a wealthy convert from Kidwelly, states in a brief autobiographical sketch that she paid passage across the ocean of forty persons and provided expenses of thirty-two persons from Council Bluffs to Salt Lake City (Tullidge, 461-62). Not all of these were maids or servants; there appears to have been an agreement of eventual reimbursement with some.

Of the 249 passengers on the Buena Vista, 52 percent (130) were male and 48 percent (119) were female. Table 1 shows the distribution of age groups:

TABLE 1

Age Distribution of Buena Vista Passengers

Age Total Percentage

0-10 59 23.7

11-17 36 14.5

18-30 71 28.5

31-50 62 24.9

51 + 21 8.4

—— ——

249 100.0

Most of the 249 were part of complete or partial family units as shown by table 2:

TABLE 2

Family Units among Buena Vista Passengers

Total Percentage

Part of a complete family unit 179 71.9

(husband, wife, and children [if any])

Part of an incomplete family unit 37 14.8

(father or mother and children)

No apparent family attachment 33 13.3

—— ——

249 100.0

Nearly 87 percent were emigrating as part of a complete or an incomplete family unit. Eleven of the thirty-three with no apparent family attachment were listed as servants or maids, thus putting them under the supervision of a family head. Only twenty-two individuals on board were "on their own."

A wide variety of occupations was listed under the column "Occupation, Trade or Profession." Family members usually received a ditto mark in this column under the occupation indicated for the family head. [^4] An occasional "widow" or "son" was written in this space, and for Sarah Davis and Eliza Williams, the two who died on board the Buena Vista, the New Orleans clerk entered "deceased." All the other passengers, in varying numbers, had earned their way in life by performing one of the following occupations:

Blacksmith

Butcher

Carpenter

Clerk

Collier

Dressmaker

Engineer

Farmer

Joiner

Laborer

Lime burner

Locksmith

Maid

Mason

Milliner

Miner

Moulder

Nailer

Pattern maker

Plasterer

Puddler

Saddler

Servant

Schoolmaster

Schoolteacher

Shoemaker

Stone cutter

Tailor

Wheelright

Whitesmith Only a few of these occupations required classroom training or literacy. Most of the Welsh, including women, were literate, however, thanks to the "circulating schools" from the previous century. These schools consisted of brief training in reading skills from various nonconformist ministers who traveled the countryside out of an intense desire to get people to read the Bible. [^5] Their idea was to teach small groups of individuals who in turn would instruct others in their newfound skill. Little attention was given to writing, since the major thrust had to do with reading. Consequently, many of the Welsh could read or quote the scriptures, while at the same time being totally incapable of writing their names. Formal schooling of any kind in the early nineteenth century was deemed a luxury enjoyed only by the well-to-do. Children of the working class nearly always stayed within that class. Occasionally a young lad would be apprenticed to learn a trade and thus was able to rise a notch or two above his father's level, but social mobility was very unusual. The idea of becoming a landowner staggered the imagination. Since this prospect was held out to converts, one would have to assume that it constituted at least part of their motivation for joining the Church and going to the Rocky Mountains. [^6]

Initial enthusiasm for the adventure combined with devotion to their newly acquired beliefs perhaps kept some of the emigrants from turning back at Liverpool. Only a few had ever been out to sea before, and had they possessed a clear concept of what was involved in not walking on terra firma for seven weeks, they might well have had second thoughts. Although described in idyllic terms by the letter writers, a crossing of the Atlantic was fraught with numerous inconveniences and hardships which would try the patience of even the most stalwart. Not that the Welsh were strangers to hardship—they had had long years of experience. But the hardships encountered on board a ship were of a variety most had never before dealt with.

Cramped conditions would become a way of life for the next fifty days:

Four to six persons were packed into berths of wooden slats measuring six feet square. Two people might share a berth six feet long and three feet wide. The berths were arranged along both sides of the ship in double or triple tiers. The passenger would sleep with his feet towards the center aisle, where provisions for the voyage, hand luggage, and items too fragile for the hold would be stored. Tin utensils and other light items would hang on the sides of the berths and the beams above. The hatches had to be closed during storms, but it might be wet below even in less violent weather, particularly if the cargo consisted of iron rails, which might cause greater rolling. The berths were sometimes made of green wood and would creak horrendously as the ship rolled. In a storm, temporary berths were known to come tumbling down. (Pratt, 5)

Jim Warner, an emigrant on board another ship, complained:

Their is not room in the beds only for 2. We must mind our heads when we crawl in our "dogkennels" for you must go [in] headfirst and out the same or you will knock your head against the top. A botom hamock is the best. . . . We have to get lamp and oil. The place is very dark. We can't see to read only by the small light that comes in the door. . . . The single folks have a curtain, goes over 8 births. We go to dress and undress. (Warner) [^7]

Under these conditions privacy was an unknown luxury. Nowhere on the ship could two people really be by themselves, no doubt a genuine concern to Caleb and Catherine Parry, who were married on the day of departure. Fortunately, the Buena Vista passengers had church and country in common and were nearly all attached to a family. These circumstances combined to diminish somewhat the shortage of personal space during the fifty days of togetherness.

Stench and sanitation were ever-present challenges, especially at the outset when seasickness was rampant. William Clayton on board the North America in 1840 observed: "The wind blew hard the vessel rock and many were sick all night. This was a new scene. Such sickness, vomiting, groaning and bad smells I never witnessed before and added to this the closeness of the births [berths] almost suffocated us for want of air" (Clayton, 173). Even the best of modern-day imaginations strain at conjuring up such scenes.

Seven weeks of being without fresh foods or means of refrigeration made preparation of appetizing meals particularly difficult. The law specified that each passenger over the age of twelve months be furnished with the following items:

Good navy bread 33 lbs.

Rice 10 lbs.

Oatmeal 10 lbs.

Wheat flour 10 lbs.

Peas and beans 10 lbs.

Potatoes 35 lbs.

Vinegar 1 pint

Fresh water 60 gals.

Good salted pork 10 lbs.

Sufficient supply of

fuel for cooking

(Prophwyd y Jubili,October 1848, 151, trans.)

Lest these quantities should prove inadequate during the voyage, Dan Jones recommended they be supplemented for all over the age of fourteen with the following provisions:

10 pounds of hard bread at 3 pence a pound

2 pounds of rice at 3 pence a pound

4 pounds of sugar at 3 1/2 pence a pound

1/4 pound of tea at 2 shillings a pound

2 pounds of coffee at 6 pence a pound

4 pounds of treacle at 2 1/2 pence a pound

4 pounds of raisins or currants at 4 1/2 pence a pound

3 pounds of butter at 1 shilling a pound

3 pounds of cheese at 8 pence a pound

At the quantity-buying prices in Liverpool these provisions would cost the emigrants about 13 shillings. Captain Jones gave a further suggestion about food: "To those who can prepare oat bread, good butter of their own, cheese, preserves, pickles, or other things they may desire, it will be very good for them to take such things with them from home" (Prophwyd y Jubili,November 1848, 166, TD2). These were words of wisdom from "an old tar," as Jones often called himself, who had spent many years on the sea, and the variety such additional commodities would provide was no doubt a welcome relief after a steady diet of the rather unexciting staples provided by the shipping line.

All these supplies were kept at the back of the ship in a storeroom which was dubbed "The Company Shop." Jones and his three assistants—William Morgan, Rice Williams, and William Davis-were assigned the important task of apportioning allotments to each family. The family or groups of families then prepared and cooked the food by using the cooking facilities in shifts.

Aside from the normal problems germane to being restricted to the microcosm of a sailing vessel for several weeks, much of the time passed rather uneventfully. On board the Horizon in 1856 was John Jaques, who described passenger life in the following manner:

Sea-sailing is very pleasant at times. I could sit for hours on the forecastle, and watch our noble vessel dashing through the briny waves, and lashing them into an innumerable variety of fantastic forms of spray and foam. But then, who can possibly like to be continually rocked about. . . . Who admires treading on a platform that seems the plaything of an everlasting earthquake? I have no great taste for these things. I can make myself, with a little exertion, tolerably comfortable at sea, whenever it is advisable for me to go there, but when I have the privilege of choosing, I like to be where I can enjoy myself more naturally. . . . The idea of waiting, day after day, on the idle wind is bad enough, but the reality is much worse. It makes one feel like getting out and pushing behind. Then the wind comes with a bit of a vengeance, as if to make up for lost time, just as people hurry when they have been loitering on the way. Then the willing ship dashes through the waters like a mad thing, at the rate of a dozen miles or more an hour. We tack to the right and tack to the left, and, after sailing so heartily for 200 or 300 miles, the captain takes an observation and finds that we are 20 miles worse for all our trouble, or perhaps we are in about the same place as when becalmed. (Millennial Star,30 August 1856, 553-57)

One of the biggest challenges Dan Jones had to deal with during the crossing was the contention which developed between a small group of passengers who eventually apostatized and the bulk of the more committed. He placed the blame on an uninvited passenger:

Also the devilish foe, himself, asserted his right with Neptune (the god of the sea) to journey with us, though his company was not so sweet; nevertheless, it was hard work to cast him overboard because of his cleverness. And not infrequently in hard times he would turn himself into an angel of light and as such would occasionally hide in the pocket of an officer. Of everyone who may be left behind in Babylon let this one be the last! He is a poor sailor, a troublemaker, and a worse guide than Ahithophel. Not to the swine, not to the sea, but to some of the Babylonians he escapes at times. And the next time that I cross the sea with a group of the Saints to Zion the other two kinds can stay home! (Jones, 18 April 1849, 13, TD7)

The day before leaving Liverpool, this unwelcome meddler had already marred the Sunday meetings held on board the Buena Vista by possessing one of the sisters "until she was driven out of her senses, causing her to scream and utter inhuman things and frightening curses" (Jones, 18 April 1849,5, TD7). But after a blessing, the sister was calmed and peace restored.

Hardly any escaped the almost immediate onset of seasickness. The evening of the first night at sea saw all go willingly to their beds after prayer services. But for most, sleep was not to be had, rather they would divide their time between vomiting and agonizing. Though the wind was not stormy and the sea was not rough, just the normal rocking and swaying of the ship was sufficient to create the image of a violent tempest to this lot of landlubbers. Jones and a few others who had their sea legs from previous experience spent the night rendering what assistance and comfort they could to the sufferers. And, although Jones makes no specific reference to such a thing in his letter, the assistance no doubt meant countless clean-ups for and around those whose debilitated condition did not allow them to conduct their regurgitations over the guardrail on deck-a task certainly not to be envied!

The next morning after such a memorable night no one had even the least desire to move out of bed, much less to expend the gargantuan effort required to go on deck and breathe the healthful air, as Captain Jones was insisting they do. Assisted by Daniel Daniels and William Jenkins, Jones prepared some gruel from oat flour. This was better to stay in the shrunken stomachs than anything else, but hardly anyone gave any more than a groan for Jones's efforts. Thomas Jeremy reported that Jones would jokingly threaten to get the pulley down from the deck and put ropes around the recalcitrants to pull them to the top (18 April 1849, 22, TD8). Not wanting to sound negative, Jeremy declared that the sickness had actually been a benefit to the emigrants by cleansing their stomachs!

Jeremy's infant daughter, Mary, was not sick during the entire journey, although some had predicted back in Wales that she was likely to die at sea, because she had not been weaned. However, emigrants were counseled to refrain from weaning their small children just before embarking for fear the adjustment from mother's milk to ship's food would be more than a little constitution could abide.

When the vomiting was reduced to mere agonizing, Dan Jones was allowed a little more time to himself, during which he accomplished much of his pondering and writing. Thus, he began to compose the letter he would eventually send John Davis from New Orleans. [^8] He reflected on the scenes he had recently left in Wales as the Buena Vista sailed southward between the coasts of Ireland and Wales. Four days previous to his departure from Merthyr Tydfil to meet with the emigrating Saints in Swansea, his wife Jane had given birth to their daughter Claudia; at this time Claudia was their only child, as several others had died previously, including two in Wales during his first mission. In view of the situation Jones deemed it wise to entrust Jane and Claudia to the care of fellow Saints in Merthyr Tydfil until he could return for them after delivering all safely to the Salt Lake Valley. Jane did not applaud this plan, but she could do little about it until after her confinement. Two weeks after the Buena Vista left Liverpool, however, Jane had made her way to the same place and booked passage on the Emblem, a sailing vessel which would take her and her daughter to New Orleans. From there she would take the steamer up to Council Bluffs and rejoin her husband for the trek to Zion.

But as far as Jones knew at the time, he would not see Jane and Claudia for another two or three years or more. This prospect, together with the threats on his life while back in Merthyr Tydfil, caused him to become a bit nostalgic and reflective in his letter:

And is it a fact or just a dream that I have escaped on the water from the midst of my Welsh brothers with my life by the skin of my teeth? If so, why? If not, why all the persecution, the slander, and the false accusations I suffered for years from the press and the pulpits? Why did my residence have to be guarded for weeks? Why was my life safe only among guards? Why did I have to flee in secret before the time? Why was I not able to bid farewell to my dear wife and my baby? (18 April 1849, 8, TD7)

Just about the time that the passengers were getting accustomed to being in a constant state of motion, all were surprised and saddened at the unexpected passing of Sarah Davies from Liverpool. Although she was sixty years of age and in poor health at the outset, her desire to accompany her husband and daughter was greater than her fear of being buried at sea. The ship became a house of mourning. A prayer meeting was held that evening (6 March), and plans were made for the funeral. At two o'clock the next afternoon burial services were held on the deck. Jones preached the funeral sermon in which he endeavored to answer the question "How are the dead raised up and with what body do they come?" Jones described the event in his account of the crossing:

After the sermon, the coffin was placed on a large plank, the ship was stopped, and after the Saints had sung a hymn the sailors raised the inward end of the plank so that the coffin slipped down the other end to the salty deep, which, because of the weight of the stones which were placed in the coffin to sink it, opened up to swallow its precious treasure and to keep it safe until the day when the command shall be given for the "sea to yield up the dead which are in it." . . . After the sea had closed its jaws on its morsel, and after our little ship had stood for us to be able to behold this majestic sight for a few minutes, her sails were filled with breezes and she galloped across the waves as if nothing had ever happened. (18 April 1849, 11, TD7)

Jones's sermon became the topic of discussion for almost every meeting held during the rest of the voyage. Much fear and many "misconceptions" existed among the group about being buried at sea. In addition to speaking about the resurrection in general, Jones endeavored in his sermons to dispel fears and clarify mistaken ideas. With his oft-exercised gift for rhetoric he depicted a sea burial as something to be preferred over the customary ground burials:

Some think they would float on the surface, a prey to the fish. Even if it were so, it is no worse than rotting in the cold gravel and being food for grave worms; but the fish do not have those who are buried in the sea; the purpose for putting weights with the body is so that it will sink down quickly and lower in the ocean than the fish ever go and lower than they can live. And there it will float in peaceful salt water, which will keep it from decomposing or rotting forever. Yes, until the day of their rising, when the "sea will boil," they will be kept better than the best of the Egyptians were kept through embalming. (18 April 1849, 11, TD7)

Throughout his letter Jones availed himself of every opportunity to reemphasize that the emigrants were being guided by divine powers. One of these opportunities arose on 16 March after eighteen days at sea. Because the wind had been so strong against the ship, Jones called a special prayer meeting so that all might pray for fair wind. Characteristic of the fervent attitude which he had displayed ever since his baptism in the Mississippi River six years before, Jones announced he felt like going on deck and not returning until the fair wind was granted. When he had put his foot on the first rung of the ladder, one of the brethren asked him what he wanted most. He replied he would most like to hear the mate on the deck shouting, "Haul in the weather braces!" (the order to set the sails across the ship, an order which meant fair wind). With obvious contentment Jones announced to his compatriots back in Wales: "And before I had moved my foot, I, and the others who had heard my wish, heard the mate above our heads shouting loudly, 'Haul in the weather braces!'—yea, word for word as I had said" (18 April 1849, 12, TD7). The fair wind came; the grateful Saints gave thanks. Gradually the passengers developed more and more expertise in traversing the rocking deck, although they frequently observed that one of their legs was longer than the other or that the other was shorter. At times, however, the strong winds made it impossible for anyone to lie or stand in place. Jones compared the ship to a door on its hinge which continually swayed those who were reclined. "But as for those standing," he wrote, "it was throwing them along the deck with the boxes and their crockery as recklessly and without warning as the wild horse throws its unskilled rider across the hedge and leaves him there. But without any pity when the rider got up, the ship would throw him somewhere else until he crawled home" (18 April 1849, 10, TD7).

Often, however, the wind was fair and the weather was lovely so that it was "almost like Wales in June." Jones describes the activities that would take place whenever sheer survival was not the focus:

It is beautiful to see the children playing across the deck and entertaining their parents. Some singing here, others talking or reading there; some walking arm-in-arm while others prepare foods of as many kinds almost as could be obtained in any cookshop. The musicians did their best to beautify the atmosphere. Also the harp with its pleasant sounds alone in the evening entertained us as it sang farewell to the king of the day as he lowered his red head into the western sea. (18 April 1849, 12, TD7)

One other activity, engaged in for the first time by many, Jones mentions a bit apologetically and by first holding up a revered Old Testament prophet as precedent:

No wonder that scenes less wondrous than this excited the heels of David of old to the point that he even took off his garment in the temple-and for what? Hush! shall we reply? What is the use of hiding the fact; did he not do this in order to dance? Yes, yes, and there was hardly anyone in our midst, except for an occasional dry sectarian, who did not prefer to imitate him rather than to find fault. At least it would be hard to deny that it was so here at times, and it did not even cause a storm. (18 April 1849, 12-13, TD7)

On 7 April, after thirty-nine days at sea, the emigrants sighted land. The little ship had arrived at the Bahamas and the Welsh passengers were jubilant. Because this area was one of the most dangerous places in the world for navigation, a number of small ships called "wreckers" sailed around continually waiting for the opportunity to profit from the misfortune of other ships. The wreckers were well acquainted with the dangers presented by the many islands and would offer their services for a handsome fee to the ships which became lost in the maze. And often, much like today's dishonest mechanic who creates problems with an engine so he can repair it, the wreckers would send deceptive signals to lead ships into difficulty so they could go to their assistance. The Buena Vista passed through the area without any such assistance.

Cuba was not far to the south. Its proximity brought to mind the "ridiculous and loathesome prophecy" which had appeared in the Seren Gomer that Dan Jones would sell his followers into slavery. All on the deck scornfully discussed the absurdity of such a prediction. Jones observed:

That correspondent has immortalized his foolishness with poor taste and has brought Cuba more notoriety than anything else. This now serves to bring to the recollection of the emigrants the lies and false accusations which were said and published about them and their dear religion by their fellow nation until it loosened their love, knot by knot, even from the country of their birth. And instead of thinking of turning back, it prompted them to turn their faces not toward the east but into the sunset for freedom to worship God, and for those rights of which they were deprived by "zealous Christians" of their own country! Yes, the constant prayer of everyone throughout the ship is, "Blow, east wind, blow us fiercely to the western ocean." (18 April 1849, 17, TD7)

Something which marred the crossing was the council's having to excommunicate William Jones and his wife, Marian, both nineteen. The young couple had been at odds with other passengers and especially with the religious leaders on board from quite early on in the voyage. They did not manifest the proper commitment to the teachings of their new religion to satisfy Jones and other members of the council (William Morgan, Rice Williams, and William Davis). It is quite possible that the two recalcitrants had used the Church and the emigration plan simply as a vehicle to transport them to America, as such things were not uncommon. Perhaps their intentions initially had been pure. In any event, they stayed with the Saints until they all reached St.Louis on 1 May, fifteen days after their excommunication for causing "much worry to the Saints through their false accusations to the captain, disgracing. . .[their] religion, etc." (Jones, 18, April 1849, 20, TD7). Upon landing at St. Louis, William and Marian, along with several others, left without uttering a word to Jones.

William and Marian Jones were deprived of their membership in the Church just two days prior to arriving at New Orleans. The infraction which precipitated this action by the council occurred 5 April during the Thursday night "Saints' Meeting." It was on this occasion that the Saints first "put the gifts into practice." Exactly what this phrase was meant to imply is not clear, but it appears to have reference to a special kind of communication with divine powers. Jones describes the collusion and the collision which ensued:

Great was the commotion this caused up and down the ship amongst the Babylonians! [^9] They clustered along with the officers of the ship at the entrance of our place and listened in amazement. We wondered greatly what had caused this; then we perceived that "Achan" [^10] was in our midst—that two or three of the Saints who had transgressed were there with them, translating for them and causing them to believe evil things about us, so that the officers of the ship and the captain also were more bitter toward us then than ever before, and I had a hard time calming him down.

Jones laments the confusion caused by traitors in their midst:

To our dismay their interference obliged us to cease practicing the gifts in the middle of the meeting, but not before we had received great comfort through them and learned some things about you, yourselves, there in Wales, etc. We were informed that the party of those who failed in their designs on me as I was about to leave Wales is plotting revenge on my dear fellow officers who were left behind me; but they will not succeed. (18 April 1849, 17, TD7)

One further event which caused sorrow among the emigrants was the passing of Eliza Williams, age seventy-seven, just six days before the Buena Vista landed at New Orleans. She had been ill several days prior to her demise. After fifty-five years with the Methodists, she rejoiced on her deathbed at the honor of dying a Mormon and bore strong testimony to the truthfulness of Mormonism. Sister Williams's funeral was similar to the one held five weeks earlier for Sarah Davis.

A few days before reaching New Orleans, Jones recorded:

More water was apportioned out for washing, as we have plenty on board to last for another month. And I cannot liken this bustling scene with the sisters all around the deck doing their washing any better than to the scenes I remember seeing by the hot waters of the iron furnaces in Merthyr on washday! . . . More food was offered from the "company store," but everyone had such an abundance that they did not come to get it. They said that all their sacks and vessels were full so that they had no room to hold any more. And many said that they had never before had such a variety or abundance of food in their lives. And I maintain that anyone who is not happy with this food should be shut in the oven for a while, like the lap dog of the gentle lady. (18 April 1849, 18, TD7)

Thomas Jeremy's wife Sarah was reported by her descendants to have had a somewhat less enthusiastic attitude concerning the food and water situation at the end of the Atlantic crossing:

After seven weeks aboard the Buena Vista, they ran out of oatmeal, bread and water and had to eat hardtack and drink water full of slime, called "ropey water." (Sarah Jeremy, 8)

Numerous emotions welled within the breasts of the sojourners as they neared New Orleans: relief at the prospect of ending their fifty-day voyage on the Atlantic; joy in anticipation of being on land once again; frustration at having had such poor relations with the small group of cabin passengers (five men and two women in their twenties and one thirteen-year-old girl), one of whom had succeeded in "bemusing and confusing" one of Elizabeth Lewis's maids; anger toward the small group of disenchanted Mormons who had fought against the faithful; gratitude toward the captain and crew, despite the strained relationship with them, for their having brought them safely to the journey's end; and doubtless much nostalgia rife with homesickness as the Saints contemplated their virtually irreversible decision to begin a new life in a new land with, for most, a new language.

One the morning of 16 April two steamers went toward the Buena Vista in a frantic race to reach the ship first so as to be the one selected to tow her into New Orleans. The winner was given a large rope which was then used to lead the Buena Vista into the mouth of the Mississippi and then to the New Orleans docks.

The weary emigrants arrived at their destination the next day. The long sea voyage was finished. Two rivers, however, had to be ascended and the plains had to be traversed before their final destination was reached.

Crossing of the Hartley

About the time the Buena Vista emigrants were recuperating from their bout with seasickness, seventy-seven other Welsh Saints back in Liverpool were just about to set sail on board the Hartley. These had fully intended to journey across the Atlantic with their compatriots, but when it was determined that the number of paying passengers exceeded the number of accommodations on the modest-sized Buena Vista, one-fourth of them had to be reassigned ships. After having waited in Liverpool eleven days, already a week beyond what was originally anticipated, those selected to extend their wait for yet another week were disappointed and displeased. Some had even been sleeping on board the Buena Vista when they had been asked to leave. What criteria were used to determine ship assignments is not clear.

David D.Bowen recorded his disgruntlement: "All our friends and acquaintances left in the Buna Vesta with Dan Jones, and we were left among strangers, to sail in another ship, and our ship was not reddy to sail for good many day yet" (19). Bowen had left Llanelli, South Wales, with his wife and two children in company with three other families. Two of these went with the first group, and two remained behind to sail with the second.

Not only did the reassignments result in separations from friends and a costly delay in a strange city, they also caused the Welsh, many of them non-English-speaking, to be thrown in with the English, Scots, and a few Irish, none of whom understood Welsh. Although all 161 of the non-Welsh passengers were also converts to Mormonism, David D. Bowen said that in their midst were "some of the meanest people" he had ever seen (21), although he did not give any illustrations of their "meanness."

Considered as a separate group, the seventy-seven Welsh on board the Hartley were similar in composition to those on the Buena Vista. Slightly fewer than half were male (35 of the 77, or 45 percent); slightly more than half were female (42 of the 77, or 55 percent). The age group distribution is shown in table 3:

TABLE 3

Age Distribution of Hartley Passengers

Age Total Percentage

0-10 20 26.0

11-17 12 15.6

18-30 24 31.2

31-50 16 0.8

51+ 5 6.4

—— ——

77 100.0

Combining the two groups, the Buena Vista and the Hartley, results in the following figures:

TABLE 4

Age Distribution of Buena Vista and Hartley Passengers

Age Total Percentage

0-10 79 24.3

11-17 48 14.7

18-30 95 29.1

31-50 78 23.9

51+ 26 8.0

—— ——

326 100.0

And like those on the Buena Vista, most of the Hartley passengers were part of a complete or partial family unit:

TABLE 5

Family Units among Hartley Passengers

Total Percentage

Part of a complete family unit 63 81.8

(husband, wife, and children [if any])

Part of an incomplete family unit 9 11.7

(father or mother and children)

No apparent family attachment 5 6.5

—— ——

77 100.0

Combining figures for the Buena Vista and the Hartley shows:

TABLE 6

Family Units among Buena Vista and Hartley passengers

Total Percentage

Part of a complete family unit 242 74.2

(husband, wife, and children [if any])

Part of an incomplete family unit 46 14.1

(father or mother and children)

No apparent family attachment 38 11.7

—— ——

326 100.0

David D.Bowen, because of his experience on the seas, was appointed cook for all the Hartley passengers. But for the first few days not many took an interest in sitting up to the table. Gradually business picked up and eventually got quite brisk. It was a "very disagreeable situation," as Bowen described it (20), but the one shilling he was supposed to receive from every passenger, as promised him by Orson Pratt in Liverpool, offered sufficient incentive to keep him in the kitchen. Either the passengers had not been informed about the cook's salary or they simply chose to ignore it, for when the ship arrived at New Orleans only two passengers rewarded Bowen for his services: Cadwalader Owens with 75 cents and David Peters with 25 cents. After preparing food for over two hundred people three times a day for over seven weeks, Bowen felt cheated. He stayed with the Church and the group, however.

William Hulme, president of the Saints on board the Hartley, reported a voyage that had "been more like a pleasure excursion" (185). The weather had been so pleasant and the sea and the wind so gentle that only one or two rough days had been experienced during the crossing. They reached the Bahamas on the thirty-fifth day, five days fewer than had been required for the Buena Vista. At that point, however, some calms and contrary winds delayed their progress. Consequently, the Hartley docked at New Orleans on 28 April 1849, fifty-four days after leaving Liverpool.

The only blemish to an otherwise placid sea-journey was the passing of Elizabeth, infant daughter of Joseph and Mary Stringer. She died of the croup just nine days before the ship arrived at New Orleans. Her body was placed in a tin coffin made of tea canisters; this makeshift coffin was then placed in a wooden one. The burial services were held at New Orleans.

In contrast to the strained relations between the 249 Buena Vista Saints and their captain, the Hartley company got on famously with Stephen Cammet, their captain. Things had been so pleasant that the leaders of the company drew up a letter of appreciation of Captain Cammet for "the kind, humane, and generous treatment, and the watchful care" which he had demonstrated in their behalf during the passage (Hulme, 186). And four of the sailors had so greatly admired the Mormons that they cast their lot with them and were baptized immediately on arriving at New Orleans. These were John Everett, Alfred Percy, George Percy, and Davis Wilson, all in their twenties.

Two births occurred on board the Hartley: a son was born to Joseph and Hannah Hale from Liverpool, and a daughter, Jane Hartley Eames, to Nathaniel and Sarah Eames. [^11]

From the Buena Vista to the Constitution—New Orleans to St. Louis

When the Buena Vista was dragged into New Orleans it was the first time for nearly all the passengers to behold the majestic Mississippi. One for whom it was something of a homecoming was their leader, Captain Dan Jones, who several years earlier had plied the Maid of Iowa on the river. This time, however, instead of transporting someone else's converts upstream on his boat, he had to rely on someone else's steamer to perform the task for his flock of faithfuls.

When Jones's group docked at New Orleans, they discovered that they had caught up with the Saints on board the Ashland, a ship which had left Liverpool on 6 February 1849, nearly three weeks ahead of the Buena Vista. And since the two groups were headed in the same direction, Jones hired a steamer which both shared.

At the rate of $2.25 (about ten shillings) per person, the captain of the Constitution agreed to transport the combined group of nearly 450 passengers a distance of 1,100 miles up the Mississippi to St. Louis. He even agreed to pull alongside the Buena Vista in order to take the goods aboard his boat, and thus spared Jones's group the expense of having their belongings moved from one vessel to the other.

The exact date of departure from New Orleans is not clear from the few sources which even mention the event. Because of the cholera in that city it was considered unwise to linger; thus, one would assume that after two or three days the company was on its way once again. There was a separation of eleven days between the arrival of the Buena Vista at New Orleans and the arrival of the Constitution at St. Louis. The brief voyage was apparently uneventful, for Dan Jones had little to say about it in the 30 April 1849 letter he wrote to William Phillips from St. Louis. A young child of Rees and Jane Price died of consumption on board the Constitution, and a baby boy was born to Samuel and Ann Leigh just two days before reaching St. Louis. From among the English Saints who had joined with the Welsh in New Orleans, three died of the deadly cholera. Jones emphasized how fortunate they were to lose so few: "The cholera is very bad in New Orleans, and many are dying on the steamboats along the rivers, especially the immigrants. On one ship which went before us there were forty-two who died from cholera; on their other journey, nineteen, etc. But they were not Saints." Jones wrote of the surprise of the officers of the Constitution and quoted them as saying each morning: "'Are there none of you dead yet?'" (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 122, TD9).

Although everyone feared the cholera, the Saints thought that their faith combined with the will of the Lord that they arrive safe at their destination would make them essentially immune. Jones pointed out that the ones who had suffered so terribly were not Mormons. The writer for the Cambrian back in Swansea had marveled at how confident the Latter-day Saints were of reaching the end of their journey completely intact, even the old and the infirm. And it was with obvious relief that Jones happily reported to William Phillips from St. Louis: "The Welsh Saints have come alive and healthy up to this point" (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 122, TD9).

The lone exception was Jenkin Williams, a twenty-year-old engineer from Aberdare, who died within a few hours after arriving at St. Louis. However, Dan Jones was still optimistic as he informed President Phillips of the boy's death: "[He] was a good and faithful lad the whole voyage, except that he went contrary to the counsels which were given, and he hid the cholera as long as he could by taking his own way to treat it through brandy. . . . A few minutes before he died, he left a remarkably good testimony after him and said that he was completely happy as he faced death" (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 122, TD9).

And even though Mary Rees had a stillborn son the same day as Jones wrote his report to the Saints in Wales, he repeated his earlier comment about the general condition: "Everyone is healthy today and heartened and rejoicing in their privilege and desirous to move forward" (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 122, TD9).

St. Louis was the place to purchase flour, meat and other groceries, and everything necessary for the trek to "California," which would be initiated from Council Bluffs, the place where the immigrants gathered. Clothes, firearms, stoves, and even iron to make wagons were included in the buying spree. Jones was delighted that they could hold public meetings at any time they wished. When he had been in St. Louis in 1843 and 1844, "it was worth the life of a man to say that he was a Mormon" (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 123, TD9).

The Highland Mary, the steamer which Jones contracted to transport the Saints up the Missouri River to Council Bluffs, had just barely returned from an earlier voyage to Council Bluffs. [^12] Terms were still quite reasonable although a bit more expensive than passage on the Constitution. There was no charge for children aged three and younger; children between four and fourteen went for half price; all passengers fifteen and older paid the full fare of sixteen shillings eight pence. Each was entitled to one hundred pounds luggage at no extra charge: two shillings was the charge for each additional hundred pounds. The cost for making the journey up to this point had turned out to be about what Jones had calculated in his counsel to the emigrants in Prophwyd y Jubili five months earlier.

It was May Day 1849, and the Ashland Saints and the Buena Vista Saints were eager to complete the last leg of their sea-journey to Council Bluffs. The Highland Mary had pulled alongside the Constitution, and the goods were once again transported from one vessel to another at no expense to the passengers. Preparations were nearly complete, and the departure from St. Louis was set for the following day.

A few passengers, however, desired to seek other company at this point. Jones bitterly remarked in his letter to William Phillips that "Benj. Jones and his whole family except his wife became blemished from unfaithfulness. They went away along the road to destruction at a gallop today. David Giles and David Jones and his wife went with them, completely unknown to me. I shall take greater care next time to refrain from bringing any but the faithful Saints with me" (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 123, TD9). It was Benjamin Jones's son, William, and his daughter-in-law, Marian, who had been excommunicated while on board the Buena Vista just two weeks earlier. Benjamin Jones, in addition to his wife, Jane, had yet another son, Thomas, and daughter-in-law, Eliza, and grandson, John, traveling with him. Presumably all seven members of the family, including Jane despite her faithfulness, parted company in St. Louis with their traveling companions and were joined by three others. And, although Dan Jones did not give any further information concerning them, it is very possible that St. Louis had been their destination all along and that they were simply taking advantage of cheaper fares by joining the Church in Wales and traveling with the Mormons. If such were the case, they were certainly not the first to use this money-saving approach for reaching America.

The cholera had spread to St. Louis and had claimed many victims by this time. The second Welshman to die of this dread disease was Benjamin Francis, a forty-six-year-old blacksmith from Llanybydder. His death occurred the morning of 1 May. Jones referred to him as a "dear and faithful elder" and observed: "It would be difficult to find any more faithful than he in his life, and he died happy. His wife and children will come along with us" (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 123, TD9). Benjamin and Margaret Francis had left Wales with four children; the widow Margaret Francis arrived at Council Bluffs in mid-May with only one child and unspeakable sorrow.

Cholera on the Missouri River

Cholera morbus is a highly infectious bacterial disease which is transmitted by polluted food or water; its symptoms are severe diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, and collapse.

Virtually nothing was known in the mid-nineteenth century about prevention or about treatment of an individual once he or she had contracted the dread disease. Orson Spencer, president of the company of Saints on board the Zetland, which arrived at New Orleans two weeks before the Buena Vista, told of his experience with the cholera on the Mississippi:

It was confidently said by officers of this steam boat, that at least fifty of so large a company would die on our passage to St. Louis. We are now within fifty miles of St. Louis, without any apprehension of another death unless a Gentile doctor on board kills them with his favorite dose of 20 grains calomel, laudanum, camphor, and brandy. This dose was given to our deceased brother and sister, contrary to my wishes,. . . and to many others who died immediately within a few hours! Several Saints I rescued from this dose who were as mortally seized, and they now live. (Millennial Star, 15 June 1849, 184)

The numerous suggested treatments call to mind modern-day quackery in dealing with arthritis and cancer:

[Some] felt that the fumes in the air...carried the disease. As a result great campaigns were waged in which sulphur was burned for the purposes of purification. Lime was spread on the streets and all kinds of remedies were proposed. The newspaper advertisements proclaimed anti-cholera medicines of all kinds. Blood-letting was advocated and one doctor burned the soles of his patients' feet. Another raised blisters on his sufferers' abdomens. One lucky doctor found most success in washing down medicines in small doses with "lots of water." (Clifford L. Ashton, 65)

Had they listened to this last doctor and followed his advice about drinking plenty of water, fewer lives would have been lost. The medicine he prescribed was of little benefit; rather it was the water which saved the victim from dehydration. A twentieth-century physician commented:

The prime essential in the treatment of any case of cholera is that it be regarded as a medical emergency. . . .It cannot be too strongly emphasized that the replacement of fluids and electrolytes (salts and potassium) is the most urgent necessity, and all other methods of treatment should be subordinated to it. (Elsom, 1411)

Brother Benjamin Clapp, a Church member, was advising the Saints not to drink any water if they were stricken with cholera—a most unfortunate bit of counsel. One who chose not to heed Clapp's advice was nine-year-old Thomas Jeremy. He "crawled out of his bunk and drank the water off of some oatmeal that one of the ladies had put on the stove to cook and by so doing, his life was spared" (Sarah Jeremy, 8).

Dan Jones had some advice of his own, which he dispensed to the Saints. In St. Louis he wrote to William Phillips that the members of his company had reached that point alive and healthy "through being careful to observe the rules of cleanliness, to refrain from drinking the water of the river without letting it settle, putting alum or oat flour in it—through being faithful and godly—through refraining from eating fruits, meats, etc." (Udgorn Seion, June 1849, 122, TD9).

Regardless of how well intended all the advice and remedies were, the reality was that in a twenty-three-day period between 28 April and 21 May, forty-four of the original 249 Buena Vista passengers fell victim to the cholera epidemic. One by one their names were recorded by Thomas Jeremy in his pocketsized journal. One can only attempt to imagine his terror, especially on 6 and 7 May when the ink spelled out the names of his three young daughters, two of them buried in the same small coffin. And he was no doubt near utter despair when just four days later he wrote: "Thomas, my son, and Hanah, my daughter, are sick" (11 May 1849, trans.). These two children, however, recovered.

David and Mary Phillips had begun their journey with four children; part way up the Missouri River they were left with just one child after burying the other three in a three-day period. And so it was with Margaret Francis, who was widowed on 30 April; on 8 May she stood at the shallow, hastily dug grave of her third child to be buried in as many days. Samuel Leigh, whose wife had presented him with a new son just before reaching St. Louis, looked on helpless nine days later as both were taken from him. Very few families were left intact as the cholera swept along its path of devastation, claiming one-fifth of the Welsh Mormons aboard the ill-fated Highland Mary. Age was no factor in the selection process—victims ranged from newborn infants to ninety-two-year-old Evan Jones.

The otherwise uncomplicated journey from St. Louis to Council Bluffs was lengthened by several days to allow time nearly every day for graves to be dug along the shore. Only on three days of the fifteen-day passage did Thomas Jeremy not have to record new names in his journal. [^13] Dan Jones's pen fell totally silent for the next two months.

Noah Jones, at the passing of his wife, Esther, expressed his grief in verse:

My dear friends in the environs of Wales,

Kindly hear my lament in verse;

Lamenting still am I in sorrow

Over the loss of my dear Esther,

Whom I loved as my own soul While she was mine;

But God called for my maiden;

Only He knows why;

She had to depart, though against my will.

Not one care came to my family

While crossing the ocean,

And on the Mississippi we were full of comfort,

Until we went to the town of St. Louis.

After we got there the enemy came,

With his spears filled with poison;

He cut the strongest from among us,

And did not ask permission of anyone,

Rather did he cut the finest as if the worst.

Five died by his sword,

No powers were able to withstand him.

They were buried, albeit sadly,

And then we left the town of St. Louis.

The third day of May it was,

When we left the city,

And all were glad to take their leave,

In a steamboat named "Mary."

To Council Bluffs we wished to pull.

The next day was the fourth,

Two died, and heavy is the news;

And on the fifth, seven were buried;

Today some who were seen are seen no more;

The sixth day came to meet me,

I shall forever remember that day,

For I had to leave my dear bride,

And put myself in great tribulation,

Blinded by the strength of the blow.

I called two elders to come to me;

They came according to my summons;

I was anointed with holy oil,

According to the commandment of the apostle;

And they prayed

To the One who dwells in the heavens,

And He did not delay in hearing them,

I was made whole under their hands;

As long as I live I shall remember my God.

(Noah Jones, 1-2, trans.)

William Appleby, who was on the Missouri River during the same time period as the Welsh immigrants, recorded in his journal a graphic portrayal of the scenes left in the wake of the cholera:

And to add to the horrid spectacle were the graves, side by side—beds and pillows half burned up—pieces of tents, broken cups, bowls, pillows, mattresses, etc., lined as it were the banks of the river, near the boat; while blankets, mattresses, beds, etc., on which the sick had died came floating down the river; while in town, nothing could be seen scarcely but carts and hearses loaded with rough coffins (chiefly). Physicians riding to and fro—citizens congregated together—some locking up their houses, and fleeing into the country, and fear and consternation depicted on every countenance, mingled with the groans of the sick and dying from the hotels, churches and houses, all added to the general and prevailing gloom. (Appleby, 1)

For fear of becoming infected themselves, the Saints in Council Bluffs wanted no part of the new arrivals. Isaac Nash, having recently buried his brother and his grandmother along the Missouri, recorded in his journal:

When we arrived at St. Joseph, the Captain of the boat, by the name of Scott, declared he would not take us any further. But the authorities of St. Joe made him take us away from there. We arrived at Council Bluffs in a sorry condition. Nobody would come near us. We were put out on the banks of the river with our dead and suffering. Apostle George A. Smith, hearing of our arrival and of the sad condition we were in, came down to the river banks. . . . Brother Smith sent word to the people that if they would not take us in and give us shelter, the Lord would turn a scourge upon them. It was not long before teams and wagons came down and all were taken care of. (Nash, 6)

Dan Jones may have written to John Davis and William Phillips about the cholera and its devastation, but very little ever appeared in print in Udgorn Seion. This brief comment, made in a letter written eight weeks after the arrival at Council Bluffs (13 July 1849), was printed: "The cholera imposed heavy losses on our small army along the rivers, especially on the accursed waters of the Missouri; yet, the effect was small in comparison to that on other people throughout the neighboring boats and towns" (Udgorn Seion, September 1849, 180, TD10). And as Jones neared Salt Lake City three months later, he expressed concern in his letter of 12 October 1849 to William Phillips that Welsh Mormons would remain in Wales after hearing of the effects of the cholera. In addition to offering encouragement to the reluctant Saints, Jones called up the ultimate philosophy in such matters as expressed by Job: "'The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away; blessed be the name of the Lord'" (Udgorn Seion, April 1850, 108, TD13).

New Orleans to Council Bluffs—the Hartley Group

Waiting at New Orleans for the arrival of the Hartley was Lucius Scoville, who was there on assignment for the Church to assist the immigrants. Also he was there at the request of Thomas D. Brown. On board were sixty-six boxes which Brown had asked Scoville to see through customs, preferably without having to pay duty. In case that was not possible, Brown had sent $400. Scoville assisted the Hartley passengers through customs and succeeded in getting his assigned sixty-six boxes through duty free.

William Hulme, president of the 238 Hartley Saints, went back on board the ship to make a final check for any items which may have been left behind. He found one small box containing a writing desk and fixtures. He put the box under his arm and left the boat. He was promptly arrested for smuggling and put in jail to await his trial four days hence. The box was taken to the customhouse, where Lucius Scoville was transacting business. Scoville recognized it as one of the sixty-six and learned that Hulme had been put in prison with bail posted at $750. The Mameluke, the steamer which Scoville had arranged to transport the immigrants upriver to St. Louis, was loaded and ready to leave that evening, the third of May, at 7 o'clock. Hulme, who had been a professor of music back in England, was now behind bars of a different kind, and his two teenage daughters were waiting for him at the docks. Scoville did about the only thing he could do; he arranged for a lawyer to go the next morning to the jail, post Hulme's bail and try to clear him of the charges. The lawyer, as Scoville learned later, did just as promised. The Mameluke, however, departed on schedule, one passenger short. Hulme was able to rejoin the others shortly thereafter.

The only other happening in New Orleans which David D. Bowen recorded in his journal was that John Hughes Williams, president of the Welsh Saints on board the Hartley, got drunk. Although Bowen did not mention any repercussions, the imprisonment of one of their leaders and the inebriety of the other must have caused the immigrating Saints considerable concern. Their minds, however, would soon be fixed on a far more pressing matter—the cholera.

The New Orleans-St. Louis journey of the Hartley Saints coincided almost exactly with the St. Louis-Council Bluffs journey of their Buena Vista compatriots. And the toll exacted by the cholera epidemic was equally disastrous. On 12 May after a nine-day voyage, the Mameluke steamer arrived at St. Louis. Lucius Scoville wrote in his journal: "We had buried 30 Saints and 4 deck hands between New Orleans and St. Louis" (8 June 1849, 2). Ten of the dead were from among the Welsh—five children and five adults from four different families.

At St. Louis another steamboat, the Lightfoot, was contracted to take the company up the Missouri River to Council Bluffs. According to Scoville, only 110 passengers boarded on 14 May. Apparently, nearly half of the original 238 remained in St. Louis. The Lightfoot left St. Louis at 1:00 A.M. on 15 May and stopped a few miles upstream at the mouth of the Missouri River to bury the seven immigrants who had died while at St. Louis. Two days later at Jefferson City twenty-five more passengers were taken on board, all that was left of Brothers Farnum and Appleby's company who had been on the Monroe (Scoville, 8 June 1849, 4). And at St. Joseph another fifteen persons boarded the Lightfoot, these from Brother Jesse Haven's company.

By 30 May when the Lightfoot reached Iowa Point, twenty more persons had died from the cholera, the chief pilot and the fireman among them. The river was high and the current was so strong that the steamer could not progress any further. For want of a pilot to take the group the forty-five remaining miles upstream to Council Bluffs, the boat lay idle for several days. Finally, Captain Brooks, whom Appleby labeled "a base swindler without any refinement, more fit for a wood raft than Captain of a steamboat" (Appleby, 1), decided to go back downstream about seventy-five miles to Savannah Landing. There he "put all the passengers and their freight ashore" (Appleby, 1) and hired another steamer, the St. Croix, to take the hapless immigrants the rest of the way to Council Bluffs. There they arrived on 8 June after a frustrating and sorrow-filled twenty-five-day journey, which even the Buena Vista group with all their difficulties had accomplished in fifteen days.

When the Lightfoot backtracked to Savannah Landing, there was one Welshman who determined that he had had enough. Having buried his wife and four-year-old son just a few miles upriver from St. Louis, Thomas Davies decided to take his remaining eight children and remain in northwestern Missouri. Nineteen-year-old Thomas, Jr., however, went contrary to his father's wishes and stayed with the main body of the Saints.

When thirteen-year-old Nathaniel Eames stepped off the St. Croix at Council Bluffs he had been an orphan for nearly a month. In a five-day period just before the Lightfoot reached St. Louis, Nathaniel had lost his father, his stepmother, his five-year-old half brother and two little half sisters. One of the little girls had been named Jane Hartley Eames, having been born on board the Hartley just two months before. At the end of the journey the William Owens family consisted of just three children; a complete family of parents and seven children had left Liverpool three months earlier. Of the seventy-seven Welsh passengers on the Hartley at least twenty died between Liverpool and Council Bluffs. There may have been more among those who remained at St. Louis; no record has been located.

David D. Bowen, the unpaid cook for the Hartley passengers, was one who stayed in St. Louis. Both his wife, Mary, and his mother-in-law, Elizabeth David, were extremely ill. He took them to a hospital in St. Louis where his mother-in-law was admitted as a cholera patient. Mary Bowen was refused admittance, however, because her illness was something other than cholera. Bowen then left his mother-in-law at the Charity Hospital with her youngest daughter, six-year-old Rachel, whereupon he took his wife about three miles further to the City Hospital. He left her there "with a lot of strengers that shee never seen before" and went back to the Mameluke, the steamer which had brought them from New Orleans. "There," wrote Bowen, "I had to nurse my little babe eight months old all night without her mother. We had a very miserable night of it."

The next day did not bring any better fortune:

When I arrived there [at the Charity Hospital] to my astonishment shee [his mother-in-law] was dead and beried before I got there. I did not see her atall and little girl Rachel was there like a little stranger. I then went to the other hospital where my wife was. There I found her very weak & feble. She said that she had nothing to take while shee was in there but water and shee begged on me to take her out from such a miserable place. I compleyed with her desire. I took her out. I had to carry her on my back most of the way from the hospital to the boat through the City of St. Louis. (Bowen, 12 May 1849, 21)

When they reached the boat, David and Mary found two of Mary's younger sisters sick with cholera.

The next morning Morgan David, Bowen's father-in-law, went out to the country to look for a place to live. He found a small branch of the Church located at Dry Hill, about six miles from St. Louis. Some kind brothers in the gospel, Thomas Green and William Stone, accompanied him back to the Mameluke with a team and wagon. There they retrieved Morgan David's family and David Bowen's and transported them with their belongings back to Dry Hill. That night all nine guests, three of them extremely ill, stayed at the home of Brother Green. His landlord, a Mr. Garsaide, gave orders that the newcomers be sent away for fear they would bring the cholera to the coal diggings at Dry Hill. His orders were ignored.

The next day Bowen and his father-in-law purchased a little cabin for fifteen dollars. In a short time all were healthy except for Mary Bowen, whose condition worsened with the passing of each day. On 23 May, Bowen recorded: "With day light this morning shee was very bad and about 4 o clock shee set on the box and leaned her head back on the wall, shee died in an instant without uttering a word" (23 May 1849, 22). A month later Bowen's infant daughter died; she was buried in the same grave with her mother.

Council Bluffs—Off the Water at Last

Rejoicing was made difficult by the unfathomable sorrow which enshrouded the Welsh immigrants as they dragged themselves, literally, into the city of Council Bluffs. Many times while still in Wales and also during the crossing, they had reviewed with great anticipation what they would do when they reached Council Bluffs. Here was where the Buena Vista 249 would reunite with the Hartley 77 plus the babies that Ann Leigh, Mary Rees, Sarah Eames, and Letitia Thomas were likely to bring forth by then. Here was where the Welsh speakers would be surrounded by English speakers and where the former would need to begin studying their new language in earnest. Here was where some would begin immediate preparation to make the trek farther westward and where others would search out employment and begin their nest eggs toward their opportunity to complete the journey to the Salt Lake Valley. And here was where the constant swaying and rocking caused by the Atlantic, the Mississippi, and the Missouri would cease.

Many, however, were absent from the anticipated reunion. Nineteen had abandoned their belief in Mormonism and were searching for brighter horizons in St. Louis and in northwestern Missouri. Sixty-seven had died at various points along the way. [^14] A number of the Hartley Welsh had remained at St. Louis to care for their sick. As for the expectant mothers, only two of the four, Mary Rees and Letitia Thomas, would live to see Council Bluffs. And just one of the babies would survive; little Hannah Maria Thomas, born 13 May 1849, was just four days old when her parents carried her ashore to Council Bluffs. Her maternal grandfather, Dan Davis, had been buried along the shores of the Missouri four days before Hannah Maria's birth.

The need for preparations to get underway and for employment to be found loomed large. Recuperation and mourning were cruelly curtailed by the abrupt reality of the situation.

Insufficient housing was a chronic condition in this way station for the westbound Saints, but space was provided where there really was none by jamming several persons in the already overcrowded rooms. And when no cholera epidemic ensued in that area, fear was replaced by frontier hospitality and kindness.

Council Bluffs was becoming rather cosmopolitan with its English, Norwegians, and now a large band of Welsh. Interpreters were kept busy, as they provided the only way of communicating for many. The need for the Welsh to learn English was diminished by their banding together and by forming a Welsh-speaking branch of the Church, the first in that part of the world. [^15] However, communication even between persons of the same language was often hampered by the sometimes frantic atmosphere of excitement.

Those who planned to cross the plains that season needed to arrange for wagons and teams if they expected to make it to Salt Lake City before the cold weather and the snow came upon them. Because of the great influx of immigrants, employment opportunities in the immediate vicinity were not plentiful; consequently, wives and families were often left in Council Bluffs while the men went as far as St. Louis to get work. Tempers were short as people agonized over their recent loss of loved ones and worried about what the future would bring. And, although the situation had become quite irreversible at this point, there were some who wished they had never left the comforts of home and family back in the old country.

Isaac and Eliza Nash together with Morgan and Margaret Hughes had been befriended by Father King at Council Point, not far from the river. Isaac's and Eliza's passages had been paid by Elizabeth Lewis from Kidwelly, South Wales, in exchange for a service which Isaac had performed for her—he had helped persuade her husband to sign papers allowing the sale to Lewis's brother of a rather large inheritance. The money was then used to assist a number of people to emigrate (Nash, 5-6). Isaac had understood that Sister Lewis had agreed to pay for him and his wife all the way to the Rocky Mountains, but Sister Lewis informed him upon reaching Council Bluffs that he was then on his own. Nash, a blacksmith by trade, obtained work with a Brother Ovett at Council Point. Shortly thereafter, Captain Jones requested Nash's services in ironing some wagons. Nash refused, wishing to honor his contract with Brother Ovett. The argument that ensued was solved only with the intervention of Apostle George A. Smith. Nash was to iron the wagons, shoe the horses, and do other work for the company; Jones was to allow Nash the use of a team and wagon filled with provisions until he reached Salt Lake City. In addition, Elder Smith purchased a set of blacksmith tools in St. Louis which he promised to Nash upon arriving at the end of the journey.

Misunderstandings arose also between Elizabeth Lewis and Phoebe Evans, a seventeen-year-old girl who served Sister Lewis as her maid in exchange for passage. Phoebe became so exasperated at demands made on her that she finally packed her belongings and went to live with her sister, Margaret Hughes, also a Buena Vista passenger. Dan Jones soon arrived at the house and declared that because Phoebe had not fulfilled her part of the agreement with Sister Lewis he would have to take her clothes and auction them off as restitution. And, according to David D. Bowen, who the following year married Phoebe Evans, the clothes were taken and sold (January 1850, 24).

Eight weeks were required for preparations to be completed for those who would continue directly on to the Salt Lake Valley. During this time approximately 200 Welsh were living in and around Council Bluffs. For the most part they banded together and offered mutual assistance. A special branch of the Church was set up to accommodate other Welsh Saints who would follow. William Morgan made coming to Council Bluffs sound very attractive in his letter dated 2 September 1849 to President Philips back in Wales:

This will be to the advantage of the monoglot Welshmen who follow; for there will be people of the same language and from the same country, and most likely many who will know them and have been associated with each other many times, to welcome them to this new country; for there are only Englishmen here for several hundreds of miles—and we, a small handful of Welsh in their midst, brothers and sisters, enjoying our freedom like the birds, with no one to say a word against us, but all of them very friendly. (Udgorn Seion, November 1849, 218, TD11)

Dan Jones had arranged for the Welsh who remained in Council Bluffs to have their lands adjoining; he then purchased a land claim of about 150 acres near the Welsh holdings and gave it to William Morgan to administer as a gift to the Welsh. Morgan reported an element of prosperity among the Welsh Saints: "Some in this company who had not a penny when they landed here have cattle and sheep now; in fact, I know of no family in this country who has not a cow or two" (Udgorn Seion, November 1849, 219, TD11). He offered encouragement to his brothers and sisters still in Wales to come and join in the abundance.

From Council Bluffs to Salt Lake City—1849

By 13 July a large segment of the Welsh was on the trail to "the Eden," "new Canaan," and "chief paradise of the world" (phrases from the song "Hail to California," TD1). They had covered about eighteen miles of the thousand-mile, 108-day trek and were headed to the nearby Elk Horn River, the gathering place for the George A. Smith Company.

Of the 370 persons in the Smith Company, the Welsh numbered eighty-four, or just over one-fifth:

From the Buena Vista 69

From the Hartley 12

From the Emblem 2

Native-born American 1

—

84

The Emblem, a ship which left Liverpool two weeks after the Buena Vista, carried Jane and Claudia Jones, Captain Dan Jones's wife and infant daughter. The "native-born American" was little Hannah Maria Thomas, the lone breath of hope midst the miasma of cholera along the Missouri. Most of the eighty-four had buried family members prior to embarking on the overland journey. Had all the families remained intact, twenty-eight more Welsh Saints would likely have gone to the Salt Lake Valley in 1849.

Of the total, forty-one were male and forty-three were female. When seen according to age groups, the pattern is not unlike that of the original 326, despite the cholera, the defections, and the division:

TABLE 7

Age Distribution of the Welsh in the Smith Company

Age Total Percentage

0-10 20 23.8

11-17 12 14.3

18-30 29 34.5

31-50 18 21.4

51+ 5 6.0

—— ——

84 100.0

The cholera altered the ratio of complete to incomplete family units significantly; the percentage of those with no apparent family attachment was a bit higher:

TABLE 8

Family Units among the Welsh in the Smith Company

Total Percentage

Part of a complete family unit 39 46.4

(husband, wife, and children [if any])

Part of an incomplete family unit 30 35.7

(father or mother and children)

No apparent family attachment 15 17.9

—— ——

84 100.0

Dan Jones continued to be the spiritual leader of the Welsh; however, for purposes of temporal organization, the Welsh were divided into three groups, each of which was under the leadership of a "Captain of Ten," a person who was responsible for about ten wagons. Daniel Daniels and Thomas Jeremy, both from the Buena Vista, were two of these captains, and Lysander Gee, an American, was the other. In addition to Gee's family there was one other family, that of Robert Berrett, which traveled with the Welsh. Albert Bowen and the Ricy Jones, two other Welsh lads who had arrived at Council Bluffs some time prior to the Buena Vista immigrants, were also with the group.

The following rules and regulations, used previously by other "Camps of Israel," were adopted:

The statistics of the camp, recorded by William I. Appleby, clerk, were as follows (2):

Ducks 23 Ponies 3

Turkeys 4 Oxen 477

Crows 1 Cows 214

Doves 2 Loose

Guns 131 Cattle 35

Pistols 27 Sheep 105

Wagons 118 Pigs 12

Souls 370 Chickens 81

Horses 20 Cats 13

Mules 1 Dogs 20

Driving a team of oxen yoked to pull a covered wagon was something totally foreign to many of the Welsh. John Johnson Davies, a pioneer who crossed a few years later, described the difficulties the Welsh in his group had with this new challenge:

After breakfast was over, we got the cattle together and tried to yoke them up. I can assure you that this was quite a task for us, and after we got them hitched to the wagon, we started out. Now comes the circus, and it was a good one! The Captain was watching us and telling us what to do. He told us to take the whip and use it, and say "whoa Duke, gee Brandy" and so on! Now the fun commenced. Then we went after them pretty lively. When the cattle went "gee" too much we would run to the off side, yelling at them "whoa!" and bunting them with the stock of the whip. Then they would go "haw" too much and we were puffing and sweating. (160)

With respect to how well the Welsh in his group managed, Dan Jones wrote to William Phillips on 12 October 1849:

The Welsh are holding up under the difficulties of this journey, and are learning to drive oxen better than any expectations, and are winning praise from all the other camps of the Saints for their organization, their virtue and their skill, and especially for their singing. (Udgorn Seion, April 1850, 108, TD13)

Singing, something which was far more natural for the Welsh than driving a team of oxen, became the trademark of the Welsh as they gathered around their camp fires at night. William Morgan accompanied them the first few days of the journey and commented with pride to William Phillips and John Davis:

As we sang the first part of the verse . . . we saw the English and the Norwegians and everyone, I would think with their heads out of their wagons. With the second part the wagons were empty in an instant and their inhabitants running toward us as if they were charmed. . . . Some asked me where they had learned and who was their teacher? I said that the hills of Wales were the schoolhouse, and the Spirit of God was the teacher. Their response was, "Well, indeed, it is wonderful; we never heard such good singing before." (19 July 1850, 6, TD21)

Most likely John Parry directed the singing. After reaching the Valley, he was asked by Brigham Young to organize a choir with his compatriots as the nucleus. His choir gained in fame over the years and evolved into what is now known as the Mormon Tabernacle Choir.

Another talent the Welsh were noted for was poetry. Numbered among the Welsh in the George A. Smith Company was William Lewis, a poet who had won several prizes for his verses in the old country. The muses inspired him to compose the following poem during the trek westward:

Verses

Some of the sectarians insist,—that to sell us

In shame, like animals,

Across the sea, our leaders would do:

Such was the group's cry.

"The Captain," they say, "enticed,—in the area

Of Merthyr a huge number of Wales's children,

That they might be sold,—

Yes, a shipful from among the host."

Oh! blind men, poor souls,—if they continue

In their course of an angry disposition,

When the judgment and the plague come upon them,

Their false tales will be as the wind.

Our Moses and mighty chief—he is Jones,

Our supreme and heavenly teacher;

Full of the energy of holy wisdom

To lead us into the land of praise.

(Lewis, 12, TD22)

The first three hundred miles of the journey was through mud and mire, brought about by the frequent rainstorms. The task of the neophyte teamsters offered daily discouragement as the wheels inched forward with great reluctance. The heavy sand which was encountered next was a change, but not much of a rest. On the positive side, however, were two factors: as far as Laramie the grazing was abundant and the loss of cattle was minimal.

The company was following in the tracks of groups of gold diggers who had crossed the previous year. The bones of hundreds of cattle which lay along the path served as a reminder that the animals should receive only the best treatment and that the traveling should be paced according to their capacity.

After gaining two months' experience and completing about two-thirds of the journey, these pioneers wished to impart their new knowledge to others who would travel the same path later on. At this point George A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson, and Dan Jones sent an informative letter back to William Morgan in Council Bluffs with a request that Morgan translate it into Welsh and send it on to John Davis, who was then to publish it in the Udgorn Seion. Morgan complied with their request; Davis, however, judged the instructions of such importance that he published them as a separate pamphlet, together with William Morgan's letter containing additional suggestions. William Lewis's verses were also included in the twelve-page pamphlet.

After reading through the long list of Christian virtues which Brothers Smith, Benson, and Jones recommended to all in the forepart of their letter, one would suspect that love and harmony did not always prevail among the pioneers. Following these initial observations, they presented many suggestions of a pragmatic nature: the oxen should be between five and ten years old; wagon wheels should be six inches larger than normal for keeping supplies dry while crossing rivers; wagon loads should not exceed two thousand pounds with three yoke of oxen; spare parts for the wagons should be brought along; animals should not be expected to cover more than sixty miles each week; "Russian duck" canvas should be purchased in Liverpool as the best covers for the wagons; provisions should be obtained in New Orleans or in St. Louis instead of relying on the merchants of Council Bluffs, who had disappointed others with unfulfilled promises; the service of a few good American teamsters who were gentle with animals should be enlisted.

An item which received special emphasis concerned the use of strong drinks:

Our brothers come from a distant country where liquor is scarce and hard for anyone to get except for the wealthy, and so they are seldom used by the poor. But when they come to America where liquor is so cheap, and they not being accustomed to the drunkening effect, they are very likely to make too much use of it, to their own harm and great loss. For that reason, we counsel everyone under your care to abstain completely, and refrain from making use of it, only except when necessary in the case of illness. (Jones, 21 September 1849, 4-5, TD12)

One must allow for a bit of exaggeration on Jones's part in this rosy depiction.

In his letter, William Morgan gave a number of recommendations which complemented those given by Brothers Smith, Benson, and Jones. Morgan directed himself specifically to the farmers and gave them American prices of items such as iron ploughs, iron harrows, files for sharpening saws, scythe handles, hay spikes, wheel rim iron, milk pitchers, pottery, billhooks, axes, tongs, fire shovels, bellows, knives, forks, and spoons. He ended by reiterating the counsel which had been given previously by Dan Jones for individuals to either break engagements or get married before leaving Wales.

When the company was about three hundred miles east of their destination, they were met by a group of teamsters, wagons, and about sixty yoke of oxen which had been sent by Brigham Young from Salt Lake City. Such assistance was gratefully welcomed by the travel-weary Saints and gave them new life with which to complete the last leg of their seemingly interminable journey.

A major setback came during the first week of October as they approached the summit of the South Pass with the Wind River chain of mountains on the north. At this seven-thousand-foot elevation the snow and the wind suddenly became severe and the temperature dropped, forcing the travelers to make a hasty encampment without being able to form their wagons into the customary corral. George A. Smith and William Appleby described the ordeal in their 18 October 1849 letter to Orson Hyde:

We turned our cattle loose, and drove them into the willows near by, to do the best they could, and share their fate; and such a storm of wind and snow as we experienced, we think was never superseded in Pottawatamie. For thirty-six hours, it continued to howl around us unceasingly, blowing nearly a hurricane, drifting the snow in every direction, and freezing fast to whatever it touched. Being unable to keep fires, (except a few who had stoves in their wagons,) we had to be content without them, and do the best we could. Many were the mother and infant that was obliged to be in bed under their frail covering that sheltered them from the pitiless blast, to keep them from perishing with nothing perhaps, but a piece of dry bread, or a few crackers to subsist upon, while the winds spent their fury upon our camp of canvass, covering it with a mass of ice, the snow drifting around us in some places to the depth of three or four feet. (Millennial Star, 15 April 1850, 126)

First thoughts when the storm abated, after it was verified that no human life was lost, were of the animals: "As we wended our way down the stream among the willows; indeed it was a sorrowful sight to behold our perished cattle, one after another, cold and stiff, lying in the snow banks food for wolves, ravens, catamounts, magpies, etc., that inhabit these mountainous regions in countless numbers, and live on prey" (Millennial Star, 15 April 1850, 126). They found that upwards of sixty head of cattle in George A. Smith's camp, as well as in the two camps immediately ahead, had perished. Some others died within a few days from the effects of the storm while still others were some time in recovering. Notwithstanding the loss, the pioneers rejoiced that it had not been worse.

During the entire journey, George A. Smith reported that "not a solitary death . . . occurred of man, woman, or child (Millennial Star, 15 April 1850, 127). One birth, however, did occur—that of little Robert Dan Parry, born 15 October, thirty miles east of Fort Bridger, to the widow Ann Parry. Ann's husband had died on the Missouri River. Also there was a marriage—that of William Clarke, widowed while on the Mississippi, and Eliza Thomas, a servant girl to the Jeremy family. They were married on 14 September by Isaac Clarke, president of the company (Appleby Journal, 14 September 1849).

Upon arriving at Little Mountain shortly after the storm, the Welsh gathered for a meeting at which an extraordinary proposal was presented. According to Isaac Nash, Dan Jones told the Welshmen that they needed to stick together as a nation, inasmuch as they had been discriminated against. The wagons, animals, onions and potatoes sent by Brigham Young, Jones explained, had come primarily for Brother Smith and the Americans and would not have been sent at all had the company been entirely Welsh. Because of this perceived unfair treatment, Jones proposed they all go across the Jordan River and settle there as an independent nation with Elizabeth Lewis as their queen. [^16] All who were willing to declare their independence and become subject to their new queen were asked to raise their hands. All hands went up except for those of Isaac Nash and Edward (Ned) Williams. When asked why he had not raised his hand, Nash replied that he had had enough of the Welsh and was going to try Americans for a while. When Jones threatened that Nash would be cut off "from the Book of the Nation and never be restored," Nash went and reported the entire incident to George A. Smith, who accompanied Nash immediately back to the meeting. Jones was still speaking when they arrived. Brother Smith, when invited to address the Welsh who had just upheld Jones's unique proposal, made a very conciliatory speech to the "rebels." He said that the wagons, animals, potatoes and onions had been intended for them as much as for anyone else and that there was no need for them to become an independent nation (Nash, 8). Apparently Smith's appeal for unity was successful, as there is no record of any further attempts to set up an independent Welsh nation across the Jordan River. Feelings, however, between Jones and Nash were considerably strained after the incident.

In the Valley

On 26 October 1849, after 108 days on the trail, the Welsh arrived at their "land of promise." Eight months had elasped since they had stretched out their arms for the oranges thrown by their brethren on the Waterloo Dock. One-fourth of the original 326 were now with the main body of the Church and had achieved the goal of all faithful Welsh Mormons.

The first night in the Valley they camped on the northeast of the old Emigration Road, where they were visited by Brigham Young, a familiar face only to Dan Jones. All were excited to be in the presence of the one who had beckoned them there and who now addressed them in a language for which most required interpretation. President Young gave them a warm welcome and requested the mechanics to stay in the city and the farmers to go to a plot of land near the Jordan River about four miles west of the city.

Only seven declared themselves mechanics: John Parry, Caleb and Catherine Parry, William and Eliza Clark, Isaac and Eliza Nash. John and Caleb were stonemasons, William a tinsmith, and Isaac a blacksmith. These all remained at the campground while the others traveled the few remaining miles to receive their parcels of land to farm. To own land had long been the dream of the Welsh, most of whom had been tenant farmers or laborers in Wales. And had they stayed in Wales, it is unlikely that any would ever have become independent landowners. The attraction of actually owning land was so strong as to cause Daniel Leigh, William Lewis, and Daniel Daniels at this point to declare themselves farmers, whereas their occupations in Wales had been joiner, mason, and stonecutter.

Because of the separation of mechanics and farmers, Isaac Nash and his wife were left without a wagon to sleep in. Nash described their first night in the Valley: "About dark that night it began to rain. We were without fire, bedding and food. At ten o'clock a man came to us and wanted to know why we were staying here in the rain. We told him our situation. He suggested that we use a little shanty which he had not far off. It contained a fireplace and we made a fire, cooked some food he gave us, and began to feel comfortable" (9). The hospitable man was Elijah Gifford. By extending assistance to Isaac and Eliza Nash, he was carrying out the instructions which Brigham Young had given to all residents of the Valley—to succor the newcomers.

With the beginning of winter only a short time away, housing became a pressing concern to newly arrived immigrants. Thomas Jeremy and his family lived in their wagon for the first month and then in rented room in the city for four months before they were able to complete construction of a home on South Temple and 6th West. Built with willows and plastered inside and out, the home was called "The Willow Basket."

Each of the Welsh families received a city lot of one-and-one-fourth acres in addition to some land for farming about four or five miles west of the city. Many of the Welsh built their homes in the same vicinity, and the area was soon called "New Wales." The land had been mapped out into "blocks," each of which measured about ten acres. The Welsh occupied the greater part of three of these blocks. Coming from a land of hills and vales, these "sons of Gomer" were no doubt elated to live and farm on the flat lands of the Salt Lake Valley.

In his letter written the following April, Thomas Jeremy joyfully announced that there was plenty of room for thousands of his compatriots to come and settle in "New Wales." The statistics concerning the fruitfulness of the land offered great encouragement to the Saints in Wales: "Mr. Halliday planted one bushel of wheat, called 'touse wheat,' and got from it about 183 bushels; another planted one bushel of potatoes and got 330 bushels. It is said that you can get from barley obtained from California about 100 bushels from planting one. Perhaps this account is too good for some Welsh to believe, but yet, that will not make it any less true" (Udgorn Seion, October 1850, 283, TD19). According to Jeremy, wages in the Valley were considerably higher than in Wales. Laborers were paid $1.50 per day; carpenters received $2.00; masons earned $2.50; and a tailor could earn from $6.00 to $10.00 for making someone a coat. Jeremy reported: "Some of the Welsh brothers here earn from $3 to $4 per day by digging by the job. The Americans are not used to digging. So you see how easy it is to live here" (Udgorn Seion, October 1850, 283, TD19).

Elizabeth Lewis, the benefactress of over one-third of the newly arrived Welsh, also offered encouragement to her fellow Saints in the old country:

Though it [the Salt Lake Valley] is not perfect heaven, nor is everyone in it perfect, yet I am not sorry for having come here, and the evils which were prophesied to me back there about this place and its inhabitants have not been fulfilled; and I believe that it is my duty to my Good Lord and His cause to send my witness back, for the sake of those who have not had this experience as I have had, and so they can take heart also to come here. (10 April 1850, 6, TD16)

Sister Lewis compared herself to the Queen of Sheba in that she had not been told "half the good things about this place and its inhabitants." She wrote of the joy she felt in being able to hear from various Church leaders and to mingle in peace and harmony with other Saints in the Valley.

I have not seen a drunken person in this place or anyone quarrelling with another; I have only heard of someone threatening to take another to court, except that he was too ashamed to be the first one in the place to do that. [^17] I have yet to hear an oath or swearing on the street; not one murder or theft that I know of in the place, nor have I seen any immorality. . . . There is no one here begging or any poor here. The men who came here the same time as I did are such freeholders that it is difficult for me to get anyone to work my small farm. (10 April 1850, 7, TD16)

As was the custom, the Welsh were rebaptized after reaching the Valley in order for them "to renew their covenants and seal their faithfulness to the Lord God of Israel" (Jones, 20 November 1849, 2, TD14). Permission was obtained from President Young to establish a Welsh branch of the Church and to hold worship services in the Welsh language. Thomas Jeremy was appointed president of this unique branch with Daniel Daniels and Rice Williams as his counselors. The Welsh branch was the first of several foreign-language branches established in Salt Lake City to accommodate various ethnic groups which settled there.

The 1850 Census shows that the Welsh were in two groups plus a few which were scattered in several places. The greater part of them chose to settle in "New Wales." Sixty-four of the eighty-four who crossed with the George A. Smith Company were there together until the fall of 1850; at this time fifteen went to settle in Manti: Dan, Jane, and Claudia Jones; Elizabeth Lewis, who by this time had married Dan Jones, and her six children; Rees Thomas and Mary Evans, who were married by then; Sarah Davis; Owen Owens; and little David Davis, orphaned when his mother, Margaret, died on the Missouri.

Isaac Nash and Caleb Parry and their wives were in other parts of Salt Lake City. Many of the others had married and settled with the families of their spouses. Mary Davis, with her marriage to James Switzler, was among the first to marry a non-Welshman. Such marriages undermined the preservation of the Welsh language and culture. Although many children of the Welsh pioneers learned the Welsh language and customs as they grew up, such things became less and less common with each succeeding generation.

From Council Bluffs to the Salt Lake Valley—1852

Life for the 113 Welsh converts in Council Bluffs and for several others who had remained at St. Louis offered numerous difficulties and challenges. Most had not gone ahead with the George A. Smith Company and their compatriots simply because their resources were exhausted by the time they completed the Atlantic crossing and the ascension of the two rivers. A few who may have had the wherewithal to continue on to the Valley that same year had been requested to stay behind and preside over the other Buena Vista and Hartley emigrants.

With an organized body of Welsh Saints in Council Bluffs, future immigrants of the same language would have a warm welcome, in addition to instruction and guidance as to how they could complete their journey to the Valley. Housing would be provided, employment information would be given, and assistance in getting "fitouts" would be available.

William Morgan was selected to preside over the Welsh branch of the Church in Council Bluffs. Morgan wrote several letters to the brethren in Wales to give them the benefit of his experience and to encourage all the Saints in the old country to begin preparations immediately for emigration. He also sent them copies of the Frontier Guardian, the newspaper published by the Mormons in Council Bluffs. In return, Morgan was to receive an ample supply of Udgorn Seion, the periodical which succeeded Prophwyd y Jubili and which contained news of Mormons in Wales.

Morgan was a liberal dispenser of counsel and advice as to how to make the sea voyage more enjoyable than the one he had had. In a letter dated 25 December 1849, he wrote to President Phillips: "We advise everyone who will be emigrating to take care that their boxes are strong, made of dry wood; some have suffered losses because their boxes were not dry, and so their clothes have become mouldy. Potatoes on the ocean would be very desirable, and herrings, oat flour, bacon, dried beef, pepper, mustard, salt, pickles, onions and oranges" (Udgorn Seion, February 1850, 52, TD15).

He also recommended they bring some brandy, as it was "beneficial to warm the stomach" when the weather was cold and when the sea was rough.

Many gold diggers headed for California were expected to pass through Council Bluffs in the spring of 1850. Some of the Saints had made considerable profit by selling provisions to them; Morgan saw no reason why the next company of Welsh should not take advantage of such an opportunity as well, and he promised to send further information as to what items the emigrants should purchase in Britain for selling in America. [^18]

Morgan reported performing two marriages among the Welsh by the end of 1849: Mary Jones to John Williams, and Alice Richards to Edward Evans. Alexander Owens had died from yellow fever; William Phillips was to inform Owens's wife in Twynrodyn (a suburb of Merthyr Tydfil). Cholera, according to Morgan, was no longer a problem in St. Louis and had not reached Council Bluffs. [^19]

Some were able to obtain jobs in the Council Bluffs area. Others were forced to travel all the way back to St. Louis to find work. In October 1849 John Hughes Williams, Rees Price, Morgan Hughes, Noah Jones, and William Lewis [^20] all returned to St. Louis in hopes of getting employment in the coal diggings at Gravois, a place in the vicinity of St. Louis. There they met David D. Bowen and Morgan David, who had stopped off at St. Louis back in April because of the illnesses of their wives and children.

Bowen, a widower by this time, was informed by Rees Price of one Phoebe Evans in Council Bluffs, a seventeen-year-old Welsh girl whom Bowen should consider marrying. The following spring Bowen took Price's advice and traveled to the "Bluffs" where he courted and then wed young Phoebe Evans. Their return to St. Louis resulted in a very cool reception on the part of Morgan Hughes, Phoebe's brother-in-law, because Bowen had not obtained his permission for the marriage. And Morgan David's daughters, sister-in-law to Bowen, were bitter toward Phoebe, possibly because they (at least two of them) were just as old and just as eligible as she.

During the next two years, Bowen worked and saved towards making the overland journey to the Salt Lake Valley. At times he earned as much as twenty-five dollars per week; at times the amount was far less. And on two occasions for periods of several weeks he was totally incapacitated by illness and had no income at all. Others of his fellow Welsh Saints were faced with similar circumstances.

By June of 1852 most of the remaining Buena Vista and Hartley immigrants were fitted out and ready to begin their journey to the Rocky Mountains. Disease, misfortune, and defection had reduced their numbers. In the winter of 1850 there had been much illness among the Saints at Council Bluffs. William Treharne was among the fatalities. [^21] Noah Jones, the poet, died of Bright's disease in the fall of 1851. His dying wish was that his orphaned fourteen-year-old daughter, Mary, be allowed to cross the plains with the Welsh Saints the following year. In 1852 the explosion of the steamer Saluda killed William Rowland and two of his children.

During the three years which William Morgan and his fellow Welsh converts remained at Council Bluffs, they were joined by other Welsh Mormons from various parts of Wales. Those who could afford to continue immediately to the Valley did so; most, however, stayed in Council Bluffs until 1852 when the bulk of the remaining Welsh Saints traversed the plains together.

There were nine wagons of Mormons who traveled from Gravois to Council Bluffs to join with the others for the crossing. Among these was David D. Bowen, who had made enough money by January 1852 to purchase two yoke of oxen and a wagon "on shares" with Thomas Vargo for the purpose of going to the Salt Lake Valley. This small band met together at St. Louis on 6 April 1852 and began their journey across the State of Missouri and up to Council Bluffs. They stayed together as far as Lexington, where Bowen and Vargo struck out on their own with their "shared" wagon. At St. Joseph a misunderstanding occurred between the two, and they decided to part company. Each received one yoke of oxen, a cow, and half the wagon. Bowen sold his share of the wagon to Vargo, put his wife and child on a steamer from St. Louis, and proceeded to finish the remainder of the journey to Council Bluffs on foot with his three animals. Once he reached Council Bluffs in mid-May he made an agreement with an older gentleman by the name of Daniel Shearer. Bowen agreed to haul him and his luggage to Salt Lake City in exchange for the wagon which Shearer owned. Then Bowen worked at unloading steamboats and hauling wood until the main body was prepared to depart about one month later.

By 21 June the Welsh had gathered near Winter Quarters, where they were visited by Apostle Ezra T. Benson. They needed an interpreter to translate Benson's instructions as to how they were to be organized for the crossing. William Morgan was appointed Captain of Fifty (the Welsh with a few English and French made up fifty wagons). His counselors were William Davis and Rees Jones Williams, Davis's son-in-law. Three days later they crossed the Missouri and camped at Winter Quarters for another three days.

On the morning of 28 June, as the company finally got under way, Bowen lamented: "I had a deal of trouble with my cattle for they was not broken, but very whiled [wild] and young. The day we started from winter quarters was very hot. I leboured so hard with the cattle and sweat so much that I had the headache that bad I was all most blind all day" (28 June 1852). In the afternoon William Davis showed his lack of experience at driving a team by running his wagon into another one and breaking his axletree. There was a delay until the following day while repairs were made.

Morgan reported that five buffaloes were killed during the crossing; he described the taste as similar to Welsh beef. It was his custom to ride ahead of the camp to determine the trail and places suitable for stopping.

On one occasion Morgan found himself in the midst of several hundred Sioux and was greeted by one who appeared to be a chief: "'How do, Mormon good.'" Morgan was then taken to the Indian camp about a mile-and-a-half away, where he was invited to sit down and smoke a "pipe of peace" with the chiefs. Morgan compared this unique custom to the handing around of the shilling jug in the taverns of Wales for each to take a drink (Udgorn Seion, 27 August 1853, 145, TD30).

On the whole, the journey for the 1852 Welsh pioneers was considerably more pleasant than it had been for those who crossed in 1849. At the outset William Morgan reported cheerily in a letter dated 22 June 1852: "All the Saints are in good health, each one with his canvas tent as white as snow. . . . Much milk in our camp is thrown out as casually as is the bathwater used by three or four Merthyr colliers. We have more than we can use, and there is no one close by in need of it" (Udgorn Seion, 7 August 1852, 259-60, TD28). On 20 September 1852, near the end of the journey, Morgan wrote that the weather had been "unusually moderate" (Udgorn Seion, 8 January 1853, 32, TD29). They had experienced no rainstorms and no snow, even when they went through the mountain pass which had buried the 1849 pioneers in snow. Four Welshmen, however, died before they reached the Valley. One of these was the nine-year-old son of the widow Martha Howells. Morgan describes the happening:

We administered to him through the ordinances of the Church of Jesus Christ, according to the scriptures, and the next night he was strolling around the camp. He fell sick again in a day or two, and Bro. Taylor and myself administered to him again, but he died in spite of everything and everyone. (Udgorn Seion, 8 January 1853, 32, TD29)

When the company reached Fort Laramie, they crossed to the south side of the Platte River. The unusually high water of the river made crossing difficult, and many things were lost as a consequence. A few days later they arrived at Deer Creek, where they stayed for several days. Here David D. Bowen had difficulty with Brother Shearer:

Here I had a quarrell with old Sherar in consequence of his wagon which he promise me for hauling him and his luggage to Salt Lake City. He said that he did not calculate to give me the wagon. We had to get other men to settle between us. He promise again to give me the wagon or I was going to leave him and his wagon there. I listen to his fair promises and haul him along again. (29 September 1852, 30)

A number of cattle died at Devil's Gate a short time later. It was there the company divided into several parties. David D. Bowen's "Ten" traveled alone the rest of the way to the Valley. On 23 September, they reached the mouth of Emigration Canyon, where they were visited by Bishop Lorenzo D. Young, Brigham Young's brother. His main message, according to Bowen, was to "mind Number One," the first principle in the Valley. Two days later they went down into Salt Lake City, arriving in the early afternoon. Bowen's wagon partner once again decided that he would not part with his wagon. Bishop Joseph D. Noble, asked to arbitrate in the matter, decided that Bowen and Shearer should each have half, but Shearer was unwilling to sell his half or to buy Bowen's half. Finally Bowen sold his half to a man from San Pete in exchange for twenty dollars in lumber.

When the main body of the Welsh was about eighty miles from the Salt Lake Valley, they had a reunion with their beloved Captain Jones. Jones, together with Thomas Jeremy and Daniel Daniels, had been called by Brigham Young to return to Wales on another mission. More than three years had elapsed since the 1849 group had left Council Bluffs, and emotions were strong as the 1852 group welcomed Jones into their midst. Morgan described the reunion in a letter dated 20 September 1852: "After shaking hands, embracing, weeping and kissing, we went to the bank of the river where he [Dan Jones] had left his horse, having traveled from twenty to thirty miles during the night ahead of his company in order to meet us. We decided to spend a day in his friendship, to converse with each other about things pertaining to the kingdom of our God. Oh, brethren, how sweet the words poured over his lips" (Udgorn Seion, 8 January 1853, 33, TD29).

Later in the day, Thomas Jeremy and Daniel Daniels arrived at the Welsh gathering and drank deeply from old friendships as they joined in the camaraderie. Jones gave Morgan a letter which he was to present to Bishop Edward Hunter just as soon as he arrived with his company in the Valley. Morgan was so moved by the letter that he quoted a segment of it in his own letter dated 25 June 1853 to Phillips and Davis back in Wales:

"Esteemed Bishop Hunter.—Many of my compatriots are coming across in the 13th Company; I do not know their condition; perhaps their money and their provisions are scarce. If so, when they reach the Valley, I shall be grateful to you for furnishing them their needs, through the hand of Brother Morgans [sic], and I shall pay you in Manti, San Pete Valley." (Udgorn Seion, 27 August 1853, 147, TD30)

A few days later several other Welsh brethren arrived in the camp. These had traveled over thirty miles from Salt Lake City with a load of "watermelons, mushmelons, potatoes, pickle cucumbers, grapes, etc." These delicacies came as a welcome treat to those who had spent three months on the trail. Two days later, just before the camp reached Little Mountain, they found "a multitude of the brethren" (Morgan, Udgorn Seion, 27 August 1853, 144, TD30) awaiting them with wagons of fruit and vegetables from the Valley. Among the group were John Parry, Caleb Parry, Daniel Leigh, Owen Roberts, and Cadwalader Owens. Delighted at having their ranks swelled with the newcomers, these 1849 pioneers extended a sincere and loving welcome to their compatriots.

Morgan was pleased at how the crossing had gone: "Although the journey was long, I considered it nothing but enjoyment every step of the way" (Udgorn Seion, 27 August 1853, 146, TD30). He gave equally positive comments concerning everything and everyone in the Valley and predicted that the Salt Lake Temple would be completed three years hence. [^22]

Conclusion

Several thousand more Welsh Saints journeyed to the Salt Lake Valley during the next decade. They usually came in clusters rather than in companies, with the 560 "sons of Gomer" on board the Samuel Curling in 1856 constituting a notable exception. Many of them settled in the same geographical areas—Malad, a city in southern Idaho, and Spanish Fork, a city fifty-five miles south of Salt Lake City, were initially Welsh communities. The first and second generation Cambrians were conscientious in the preservation of the language and in the observance of periodic Welsh celebrations. By the turn of the century there were many Joneses, Davises, and Williamses who spoke with great pride of their Welsh ancestry. They had to do so, however, in English.

Notes

Footnotes

Appendixes

---
Notas:
[^1] Listed as David Giles in Appendix B.
[^2] All lost property was to be brought to the Captain of Fifties' quarters. 2. In Welsh Mormon folklore there is a faith-promoting but apocryphal story about the "sinking of the Buena Vista." "The boat was a leaky one that the English said, 'Let them have it and it will go down with all the damned Mormons on board.' But Jones, being seaworthy and wise, repaired the ship and, with prayers each day for safety, they came across the ocean, unloaded everything upon the docks (much of it water soaked and spoiled . . .) and the ship sank in the harbor" (Heart Throbs, 2:4).
[^3] All dogs were to be tied up at dark to prevent annoyance of the guard. 3. One is led to wonder at Jones's estimate of the number of onlookers. The emphatic use of hyperbole is not unusual in Jones's writings.
[^4] No man was to be allowed to leave the camp by himself or without the consent of his captain. 4. See appendixes for further information on the passengers.
[^5] The Captains of Ten were to instruct their men to attend to their family prayers at the sounding of the horn. 5. The Welsh "protestants" were in opposition not only to the Catholic church but to the Anglican church as well. Consequently, they referred to themselves as "nonconformists," or those who refused to conform to the religious policies of King Henry VIII.
[^6] The Captain of Fifty was to see that the guards were placed around the camp at half past eight o'clock each night to relieve the captain of the herd, whose duty it was at the sound of the horn in the morning, with the men and boys exempt from guard duty, to take charge of the herd until the night guard was again posted. 6. Writers often attribute a "college education" to Captain Dan Jones, but such a distinction is utterly impossible for him to have had, given the circumstances of his laboring-class background. He had gone to sea by age seventeen and somehow had acquired a high degree of polish in speaking and writing. Had he been university trained in nineteenth-century Wales, however, he would have taken his place as a "gentleman" and would never have soiled his hands with such things as anchors and riggings.
[^7] The sounding of the horn in the morning was to be the signal for the camp to arise and attend to the duties of the morning. 7. Warner's spelling has been maintained.
[^8] The camp was to be ready to start each morning at half past seven o'clock. 8. Jones had intended the letter to be published in Udgorn Seion (Zion's Trumpet); because of its length, however (nearly 10,000 words), Davis combined it with Thomas Jeremy's smaller letter (about 1,800 words) and a foreword of his own and published a twenty-four-page pamphlet which he entitled Hanes ymfudiad y Saint i Galifornia (An account of the Saints' emigration to California).
[^9] Implicit obedience to the officers was required of every man in the camp. 9. In Wales the term Babylonians was used by Mormons to refer to all other Welsh citizens; used here it refers to the eight non-Mormon cabin passengers.
[^10] Each man owning horses or mules was required to take them into the corral at sundown and secure them. 10. This is a reference to Achan in the Old Testament, who because of his disobedience causes much consternation among the Israelites following the seige of Jericho (see Joshua 7).
[^11] Each teamster, without fail, when the herd was driven in at night, was to see that his team was on hand or in the herd. 11. William Hulme mentions only the first baby in his letter. See David Peters's records for information on the second.
[^12] Every member of the camp was to be at his quarters at nine o'clock and the guard was to cry the correct time without making any unnecessary noise (Appleby, 1-2). 12. See Ashton, 66, for a detailed explanation concerning the two steamers.
[^13] 13. Jeremy used Welsh in his early journals; however, knowing that his descendants would probably not speak Welsh, he kept his later journals in English, his second language.
[^14] 14. These figures could be considerably higher. If accurate records of this period were kept, they have yet to surface.
[^15] 15. Many, such as Lowry Peters (H34), who lived another fifty-one years, would go to their graves as speakers of Welsh only.
[^16] 16. Elizabeth Lewis was called the "Welsh Queen" for many years afterwards. Some thought that she actually was a Welsh queen; few knew, however, how the title had arisen.
[^17] 17. Numerous court cases were held in Salt Lake City prior to Elizabeth Lewis's letter. The "someone" she heard threatening to take another to court could have been Dan Jones. On 22 April 1850, Jones was awarded $239.17 from Edward Williams, a debt which was due Captain Jones, according to Hosea Stout, who was Jones's lawyer, "for assistance in helping him [Williams] from Wales" (Stout, 2:367). How Jones, after four years as a missionary in Wales, was able to proffer assistance to Williams, and how Williams, a collier before emigrating, obtained the wherewithal after just six months in the Salt Lake Valley to pay the settlement to Jones are certainly legitimate, if not answerable, questions. The fact that Jones married the wealthy Elizabeth Lewis two weeks after arriving in the valley may provide some clarification to the first question. Elizabeth said of Jones in her letter to John Davis: "Capt. Jones . . . has not been the evil man that they prophesied about him. . . . He has not received nor has he tried to get any of my money, and I have not heard that anyone of the company has been the loser of one penny because of him" (10 April 1850, 8, TD16).
[^18] 18. No letter containing such information ever appeared in the Udgorn Seion.
[^19] 19. While the Welsh Saints were being decimated by the cholera along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers in mid-1849, the same disease had reached epidemic proportions in the Merthyr Tydfil area. One of its victims was the Reverend W. R. Davies, the person who had coined the epithet Latter-day "Satanists."
[^20] 20. There were three men by the name of William Lewis among the emigrants. The one who stayed in Council Bluffs instead of continuing directly on to Utah was number 70 on the Buena Vista passenger list.
[^21] 21. His daughter Jane had also been sick for several days when she heard of her father's death. She was administered to by Brother Abel Evans, whereupon she arose immediately and rode six miles on horseback to attend her father's funeral (see Ashton, 79).
[^22] 22. The actual completion of the Salt Lake Temple was not until nearly four decades later.
