Hugh Nibley, Ancient Documents and the Pearl of Great Price ( 1986)

Lecture 8

The Council According to the Shabako Stone

This Shabako Stone is now viewed by many as the most important single document in religious history. It's in the dramatic texts of Sethe, etc. We will refer to the person who discovered it later. But it has been in the British Museum since 1805. George Spencer gave it to the museum, and many attempts were made for one hundred years to interpret it. Some people did some pretty good guessing, but for one thing they didn't realize that it was written backwards; the characters were facing in the opposite direction from what they should have been facing. This is very archaic Egyptian; it's not in the later period. When it reached James Henry Breasted at the University of Chicago, he was able to make a very good study and translation of it. That started things going. He was the one that discovered what it was all about-discovered the clue or key, which was reading it in the right direction. In 1901 he first came across it, and he raved about it. He calls it "The First Philosopher." I've had four or five copies made, and it's on reserve now for this class. It has the translation of this document as given by him. But there have been many changes since.

People return to the attack again and again, and every time they not only confirm but realize that what Breasted said about it was an understatement. Every time its great value, great importance and age is mentioned; it gets older every time. Of course, every time they are able to understand it better. Usually, as you know, when someone gushes and gets all excited at some great discovery, they go wild about it; and then there's an anti-climax. Well, there's been no anti-climax here. The more it's studied (and everybody's on to it now) the more important it is considered. He thought it was in the Middle Kingdom, but it's much older than that. After he was able to present his version of it, everybody could do it. It became easier then.

Is there anyone here who doesn't know the story of Columbus and the egg? You don't know it. Good, I'll tell you the story of Columbus and the egg. The rest of you can ignore it. Columbus was at dinner with some dignitaries. It was after his first voyage to America, and somebody said, "It wasn't such a great thing after all. The ship did it easily enough; anybody could have done it." Columbus didn't say anything, but later on he said, "Can any of you here make an egg stand on end?" Well, everybody tried it and couldn't do it at all. Columbus took the egg, gave it a light tap, and stood it on its end. They said, "Well, of course, anybody can do it that way." He said, "Yes, and anybody can do it when somebody shows them how it is done." There was nothing said about the egg couldn't be cooked or the shell had to be unbroken, or anything like that. Just, could you make the egg stand up. But the point with Columbus was that after somebody has done it, it's the easiest thing in the world and no great show at all. This was the same way. They were absolutely helpless and floundered around until Professor Breasted did it.

Incidentally, he was very much interested in the Book of Mormon. I knew his wife very well. We used to bicycle together in Claremont. She lived next door, and in those days people didn't ride bikes much, and so we used to wheel around the place. That was after Breasted had died; he retired there. But it used to bug him. She said that he intended to get rid of the problem once and for all. He liked a lot of Mormons, and he said the best thing to do is just show in a half hour or twenty minutes where this is wrong and that's wrong. There would necessarily be some glaring contradictions in it. So he set to work, and never a peep. Nothing came of it. Well, anyway he did the great work, and after that everybody could set the egg on end. He gave it this rave notice, as I say, which you will read in The Monist, "The First Philosopher." And then Erman came along in 1909 and gave it the name Shabako. Shabako Stone comes from Erman at Berlin. He called it the Shabako text because it was by King Shabako. The great study of it is by Sethe in 1929, and others have come out since.

But this is basic; this is the one that first brought it out, and it's good. But he says that Shabako was just the man. He believed that Shabako was the founder of the dynasty. Shabako was an extremely religious man. He had come up from the South, and he wanted to establish his dynasty there. He was just the man to do this, a great archaizer. He goes right back to the beginning of things digging up all the records he can. Lots of pharaohs practiced that-were interested in the archaic documents and tried to restore things, especially in the twenty-second, twenty-fifth, and twenty-sixth dynasties. And this was the twenty-fifth dynasty when it really happened. Under Piankhi, under the Sheshonqides (the twenty-sixth dynasty) they went back to the earliest days and renewed everything. And they thought, well, this is a copy from that. No, it is a faithful copy, not a reproduction-not an attempt to imitate anything.

But Sethe believes that Shabako was just the man to give us this text. Every time they founded a new dynasty, they would do the same thing; renew the theology, give a new version of the creation story. It was done at Heliopolis; then Menes did it at Memphis-that's this text here. Then Ammenemes did it in the Middle Kingdom at Dahshur. Then Amenophis IV did it at El Amarna. Then the Moslems did it at Cairo. Always with a new center and a new theology, but they always follow along the same line. But I said he was going to renew it, so he went back to the old temple that was built to celebrate the founding of the first dynasty in Egypt at the beginning of civilization 3100-3200 B.C. It was very old then, we find out. Epigraphically, orthographically, vocabulary and syntax all put it before the Pyramid Texts which are the oldest books in the world. They are all before 2000 B.C. They are found under the pyramids written on the walls, beautifully carved. But they are very old; they go back to 2700 - 2900 B.C. And this is older than that-the grammar.

As I say, this is proved epigraphically. What do we mean by epigraphically? By the way it's carved on the rock-the order, the columns, the way they are divided, etc. This is the quaint, the old-fashioned way. They never did it later on. It was never used after say the eleventh dynasty, so it puts it very old.

And then orthographically, the way they spelled things. They used the old, archaic spellings, very quaint spellings. Well, those of you who are in English know the difference between Middle English, and West Saxon, and Northumbrian, and modern. But you recognize immediately what particular period it came from although they are using the same words. It was the same thing here. And the syntax (the order in which the words occur) is peculiar to the times. And everything puts it before the Pyramid Texts, so it is very, very old.

What we are showing here is the left side first. The left side is the drama, and the right side is the theological discourse-the temple drama. Incidentally, as we read that piece from Zabkar the last time, this carries right on, he says, into the Old Testament and the New Testament. You will find that everything is very familiar here, and this caused everybody to pause because, after all, what are these people doing with the Bible? Shaba, the first person to look at this, was stunned (well, in other texts especially) by close resemblances to the Bible. In the 1920s the Petosiris text is a classical example of that. It has long passages from the Psalms and the Proverbs in it. And you will find Old Testament and New Testament passages-in a work from 300-400 B.C. Well, this shouldn't be, you see. So they would always soft pedal it. And they always skipped around it. It's only within the last ten years that they have said, "All right, if it looks like an elephant, call it an elephant." This has been staring us in the face all these years; everyone was blushing and no one would dare mention it. Now all of a sudden within the last three or four years half a dozen articles (big studies) have come forth showing that the wisdom literature of the Egyptians, the Ammenemes, as Erman showed onceÂ�He was ashamed of it. He kept it covered up and never mentioned the fact that it was his greatest discovery. The Wisdom of Ammenemes is the wisdom of Psalms; it's the same thing (word-for-word passages). Well, this really stunned him, so Erman tried to cover it up. That would never do. That's not the evolutionary development of things, but today it is being recognized.

The story that the rabbis tell is that when the animals came to Adam, he was naming them. And the Lord said, "What are you going to call this one?" He said, "I'm going to call it an elephant." "Well, why an elephant." "Because it looks like an elephant," he said. So Professor Popper used to say, "If it looks like an elephant, call it an elephant." Sometimes you hesitate and say, "No, it can't possibly be that." Well, if that's what it looks like, try that first. Take a chance here.

Well, we have the theology, and the left side is the myths of Horus and Seth and the learned discourse in the drama. The oldest parts are the dialogues of the gods here. They are preserved in archaic form like a Greek chorus. Now, most of the Greek plays come from Athens. They are in the Ionic dialect; that's Athenian. But the choruses are in Doric. They are in the old Doric or Aeolic. But Doric is the older language, and the chorus will come on with this archaic Doric with the long "ahs," etc. because they are preserving the original text. It's the same way here. There are obviously two texts. There's a rather free commentary, which is much newer, though it's far older than anything else.

But then what they are commenting on is the urtext, the text that goes right back to the beginning. The rest was more up-to-date, but very late. The speeches of the godhead are the remains, Sethe says, of a prehistoric book. They were kept in a book, but the book, of course, was long lost. It was copied from this. Remember, he tells us here that he had it copied from a roll that was found in the cornerstone, like the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House. When they were renovating the White Temple, the first temple in United Egypt (the one that began the kingdom), they found this document. And he had it copied on stone. That's why we have it today. But one of the reasons we've been so long getting it out is that it was so hard to read. And the reason it was so hard to read was that it was in a dark corner of the British Museum, and they would never take it out so people could look at it. That's so absolutely typical. The great Richard Laurence who discovered the Enoch texts had to do all his work in the Bodleian Library. They wouldn't even let him take the text over to the window so he could read it better. He couldn't take it out of that damp, dark cell in the Bodleian Library, and that's why he had to work all of his life. Since then it has rotted away from age. They haven't taken any care of it at all.

Anyway, the speeches of the godhead show that we had a very old book here. They treat the sagas in it, the stories of Osiris, Horus, and Seth in dramatic form. It was to be presented on a very special occasion, of course, at the new year-at the founding of not only the empire, but the beginning of the world, the revival of things. In fact, Sethe says, it very closely parallels the mystery plays of Easter and Christmas that were put on in the Middle Ages. But much earlier than the Middle Ages, you will find them all over the Middle East, the same plays. The complex on the top of the temple at Dendereh, which is preserved, is what Daumas (who did more work than anyone else on it) says is an Easter complex. It was to celebrate the rebirth of the god at the spring equinox which is Easter. And then they did the other one which was the new year when the sun comes back, the birth of the sun. But it is to celebrate the cyclical death and rebirth of all nature and all the rest. We get our friend Geb in here. So it is for presentation on festive occasions. But it was secret; it was given to only elect people, only those who were qualified and had recommends could see it.

It's in verse, incidentally. It has been quite recently discovered that the Book of Dead (that's one thing people have been reading for a hundred years now) is in verse. That's how little we know about the vowels and the values here. And Sethe, who is the one who made the definitive edition of this, also edited the Ramesseum texts, from the Ramesseum on the other side of the Nile, over on the west side in Thebes. This is another prehistoric dramatic text, and you can match the two. This was a text which was dramatized with the king. He took the role of Atum, the lead. They went through the whole thing, and it toured the whole length of the Nile. The king and the court would dramatize this and were chosen for various parts. On different occasions they could shift the actors around. So the idea of traveling troupes of actors is very old. It goes right back to the beginning of time. You still find them traveling with a donkey and a shadow theater. I have an Arabic book on the subject which is very good-the traveling shadow theaters in the Middle East.

It's from way back pre-war times when things were fairly stable. But a troupe would travel around, and what they would put on was a shadow theater. The theme was Adam and Eve, the Garden of Eden, and the Fall. They would go through all that sort of thing. People would all gather for it, and it would be a big affair. They'd get some good pictures of it, as a matter of fact.

In this text the actio is the drama. The word drao means "to do, to carry out visibly." There is the action of the play, and then there is the spoken word which is the dialogue. The action is clearly marked by stage directions. They are very short and very specific, as with the Ramesseum drama. Erman thought the stage directions were commentary, but it turns out they are not. They're directions on what is supposed to be going on here. And these are directed by the keri-hep, who is the lectern priest. He directs the ordinances and takes charge. He's the man who is in charge of the operations. There are others there. Of course, people participate in it, but he directs the whole thing. And he or somebody else would read off the lines describing the events that could not be presented visually. There are some things, you know. Should we recite the introduction to Henry V at this point? We'd waste a lot of time. But why is the play the oldest thing? It's because it is the most amusing, entertaining, engrossing. It involves you more than anything else. And it make things clearer than anything else. It's the best way of abbreviating. You don't have to go into long words. A play can be kept short and tell you a great deal.

And let us, ciphers to this great acompt, [Now, you have to make the play, you see] [This many represents the army. You divide him into a thousand parts, and you make an imaginary military force.] Turning the accomplishment of many years Into an hour-glass: for which supply Admit me Chorus to this history;

Well, that's the idea. You have to do it. You are involved, and you're committed to the play. And Shakespeare is great at getting us that far, isn't he? There's a play for Hamlet. Well, we won't get into that. This is getting off the track, isn't it. We need to finish this whole thing today. Here it is now. Well over five thousand years ago they are putting on a play, and it's a terrific play.

The first time I went to the Hopis, it was with Brother Virgil Bushman who was the great missionary to the Hopis. He was born down there. Just after the war, he insisted on taking me down there. There was just a dirt trail, terrible road at that time. They still were using ladders to get up to the mesas. We went up there, and it was the fifteenth of March when they have their first dance. It was bleak and windy, and you go up on the high mesa. It was at Hotevilla. There in the plaza of houses at dawn was this play going on. This tremendous drama was being played. Magnificent costumes they had. It was a cloud dance. The rule is that you can never use anything bought. You can never use anything old or dirty. It had to be neat, beautiful and made of native substance by yourself-really something. And here they were doing this. I started counting them, and there were 52 dancers that came in. There had to be 52 dancers in the oldest Greek chorus (52 weeks of the year). And then the protagonist and the antagonist came in, and they started their dialogue. First the priest went around with the sack of meal and laid out the course that the chorus was to follow. Then a Greek play took place there. After that was a comedy with the mudheads clowning around, etc. But it was the same motif. There was the altar in the center as they have to be in the Greek play. Nobody answers in that because that is the conistra, the dust place, where nothing lives. This is the moat between us and the other world because in the center is an altar. And in every Greek tragedy, the ghost appears out of the ground from there. Then they have the two little evergreen trees, like Christmas trees, on either side of the altar in every place where the Hopis have their festival, the twelve villages. And the spirit feathers tied on them in their prayers. This takes you to the spirit world, and the ghost appears (as the ghost of Darius appears in the Persians) out of the ground.

So this stuff is very old, but who told these people to do this? They're as poor as dirt. They were chased to the ends of the world and brutally exploited by the coal people who were strip mining the sacred places in an awful way. But the thing is here they were by themselves going to all this trouble. There were only a few old people and a couple of little kids on the houses because who wants to get up on a cold March morning at dawn and go through that? But they went through it with the greatest solemnity, everything accurate, and the priests reciting their lines to each other, etc. They are very particular about any taking notes or writing anything. I just jotted down one little thing, and they had it out of my hand in a second. I learned from then on, but I went to many of the dances after that. I went later down to Moenkopi. It was the time I took Brother Merlin Myers, the anthropologist. He had never been before. So I said, "Well, I go down all the time." We went down, and I took down that very nice reproduction (1912) of the Book of the Dead-all colors and everything. It's a beautiful reproduction that Budge got out. I took it out, and there was a meeting of the Hopi kids. They met across the road from Tuba City in the Hopi village, Moenkopi. They recognized everything. For example, the dancers had to have the two feathers; they had to have the copper bracelets; they had to have the tortoise shell; they had to have the coyote or fox skin with the tail, as every Egyptian priest had to. They looked just like them. I mean there was no difference at all, an amazing thing that goes on.

Well, how old this stuff is. What is going on here? What have we been missing, you see? The thing is that it's still carried on. They still persist against tremendous opposition. Peabody Corporation tried to get them all to move out to Los Angeles. They offered them mobile homes if they would do that-give up this thousands of years old culture. They resisted the Spaniards; they resisted the Catholics. They resist everybody. They all joined the church at once when the gospel was first introduced to them. Then in 1906 there was a big fuss in Congress, and the Mormons were forced to leave. And, moreover, the Mormons had their farms down there. At Danabata Wash and Moenkopi Wash is where the Mormon farms were. Up along the benches you can still see the poplar trees which mark the farms. But they were all forced to leave in 1906 because of the influence they had on the Indians. Well, that's another story, but it is very close to this one. What are these people up to? How do they know so much about these things?

Now, the oldest parts are these dialogues, and the actio has these directions. The things that can't be staged are described by this lecturn priest who conducts the play. He says this is practically identical with the ancient mysteries of the Easter and Christmas celebrations. It's always with the seasons. There is no dancing now. It won't be until March 15, the first full moon in March. It's Easter when they start out, and always that one. That will give you goose flesh. No artificial lights; it has to be by moonlight. There the Havawuhti comes out. That's really scary. The only sound (no drums or anything) is the flute. Like the Greeks. In the earliest Greek play, there was just the flute. The lyre and the string instruments are for the [p.8] solos and the melodramatic stuff; but for the old archaic stuff it was just the flute. And it's eerie by full moonlight. And then the Havawuhti starts walking down the street with these giants with their long rawhide whips, whipping on either side and telling the people to get their distance. Well, that's the Egyptian Nut. She emerges out of the kiva all in black, and she is holding a bow and two arrows. That's her sign, the two arrows. It's in here. You will see the Lady Neith with the same thing, the two arrows. She walks in a stately manner, and everybody really keeps their distance. It's the Havawuhti who is Neith, the woman who brought things first from the underworld.

The speeches are brief and few. Here's another thing. There is no effort to follow chronological order. If a past event must be brought up, they don't hesitate to use a flashback and show what happened in an earlier time. So don't try to construct it according to the rules of Aristotle here. The speeches are brief and few, but they are the main thing. They are the prehistoric parts. Quoting Sethe here, "It is an ancient, holy, piously guarded heritage, a secret ordinance like the Easter mysteries." I mentioned the last time Henry John Feasey's very interesting work on the English holy week ceremonies (very ancient of course). I recommend that you read Augustine, not St. Augustine, but Augustine who in 590 came as the first missionary to England. He was sent by Pope Gregory the Great. You know the famous story about angles and angels. He saw these little English children for sale in the market place in Rome, and he said, "Who are these?" They said, "Well, these are Angles." He said, "They are not angles; they are angels."

So he decided to send a mission up there, so he sent Augustine up there. We have Augustine's correspondence with Gregory. He said, "Look, do you know what these people do? At Easter time they meet at these holy places and they have their races and their festivals. They build booths with green boughs, and they feast and hold celebrations along with the races. They elect their king and queen and all the rest of it." And Gregory said, "Well, that's exactly what we do in Rome at the same time of year. We set long tables in the streets and have a feast for everybody at Easter." It's the time of rebirth; Christ has risen from the dead. Everybody celebrates, so let them go. Let them do anything they want. Let them build their green booths." Remember in Israel for the festival they had the sukkot. For the festival you had to have a booth. For the Passover they had to go to Jerusalem, and nobody was allowed to celebrate the Passover within his gates. He had to make it as a pilgrim. So when they were there, they had to have some shelter. So we have the ordinances of the green booths, and we have them all over the world. Well Gregory said, "Let them do it; just sprinkle it with a little holy water and there's no difference. I don't see any difference at all." And there wasn't. They were ancient long before that, and that was at the end of the sixth century.

So they were doing their Easter business long before Christianity ever got there. And it's the same thing here, he says. We're dealing with the same type of thing. As we mentioned the last time, it goes right over into the Old Testament and the New Testament. And this is the way Breasted begins his article: "During his sojourn in the British Museum, it was the writer's good fortune to subject to close scrutiny an ancient stone, the importance of which has hitherto been entirely unsuspected." Well, everybody suspected it might be important, but they couldn't make heads or tails of it. That was the trouble. "It contains the oldest known philological explanation of the world written a thousand years before the first Greek philosopher was born." He was wrong there; it was written a thousand years before that at least. It was written three thousand years before the first philosopher was born. There were other people philosophizing too. See, the archaic world has disappeared completely, and the marvelous thing is that this has been able to survive. He tells how it happened to survive; remember making a copy, etc. So for the first time there is tangible support to the Greek tradition of the origin of their philosophy in the East. The Greeks said, "We get everything we know from the Egyptians." But nobody would ever credit the Greeks when they said that. Theodor Hopfner was the man who spent his whole life searching as a classical scholar the Egyptian religion as it is recorded by the Greek and Roman classical writers. But he always insisted there was no connection between them whatever. The Greeks insisted over and over again that, yes, they got that there. Plato studied in Heliopolis. Parmenides did, and Thales did. German scholars always said "no" to everything like that. They had no proof that it wasn't so, but it just didn't fit. It was too picturesque, too fantastic. We don't allow things like that; they're not dignified.

Well, now the stone itself is three feet by four, seven. It is black granite, and it's very heavy. But alas, alas, it has that square hole in the center of it because it was used as a nether millstone. Of course, being that shape it couldn't turn as an upper millstone. But it was used as a lower millstone. You can imagine how that would preserve an inscription to grind it and grind it for a few hundred years. It was very hard stone. Naturally, the part that was ground out you can't read. Just very faint forms there. It is sadly damaged and so faint, says Breasted, that either a squeeze or a photo was out of the question. They couldn't make an impression of it, a photo. The best thing to do would be maybe make a rubbing of that, but they wouldn't let them do that. And paleographically it's an exceedingly beautiful inscription. The signs are very much like those produced in modern hieroglyphic type. It just looks like a modern printed book, like Gardiner's book. They never changed the style. It is beautiful writing, way back there in the beginning, just as clear as ever. "But it would be a lot easier to read outside of the dark hall. In years to come they might be able to bring some light in here," he says. And they did, of course. They put light from various directions to bring out the contours, and then they could read it.

Well, let's get to the text now. Turn it on and see what we've got here on the beginning. Here are the stage directions. Ptah-Pen-Pel. This one you see here, Pel, refers to whatever we happen to be talking about. It always answers the question: who is this? Or especially, what are you talking about? So we introduce ourselves by saying Ptah, the opener, the beginner. This Ptah is the one we are talking about, Ptah-Pen-Pel. Much he is acclaimed; he is heralded in glory, in the great name of Ptah-Tenen.

And the abbreviation here shows how archaic this usage is. Ptah is in heaven now. It begins with Ptah in his glory, and he wishes to transmit the powers of heaven (the powers he possesses) to the earth, the same celestial order.

Incidentally, I'm going to suggest that we are following the Terpanderinomos. At the twenty-sixth Olympic games in 676 B.C., they introduced musical games, and Terpander won the prize. He won the prize then four times in succession at Delphi at the Pythian contest. Notice, these were at the holy centers. Delphi was the holiest of all. They were oracular centers, and Terpander introduced the musical element and what is called the Terpanderinomos or the rule of Terpander. You know who Terpsichore is, goddess of the dance. The Terpanderian rule divides the whole according to the ritual pattern. Namely into the arche, the rule, the beginning. This is the foundation. You start up with Ptah on his throne in the world above in timeless ages. And that's the arche or the beginning. The middle part is called the omphalos (same word as Latin umbilicus). That is the navel or the center of the thing-the main center around which everything is going to revolve. At Delphi, for example, you can still see out in front of the temple there's the omphalos shaped just like an umbilicus. This was the center of the world. This was the hierocentric point from which everything came. Every holy shrine had its umbilicus. A great deal has been written about the umbilicus. Then finally comes the sphragus, the seal that seals everything up.

The umbilicus here is where the upper millstone turned. It turned around here. And here was the square to pull this in place. So this is pretty well wiped out, but you notice the millstone only went to here, so this part was spared which gives us a little Garden of Eden romance in here. Then on the final one (this is the other half) it ends as it began. But now his glory has been established on earth, naturally in Memphis. The whole purpose of this is to show that the king at Memphis (Shabako in this case) holds the same authority that was held by God and was handed down to man through Atum and through the heavenly council to the spirits and brought down to earth. That's what he is going to tell us about here. So we now proceed here, and Ptah is the main thing. But it's now Ptah-Tenen which means the uprising, the lifting up, the exalted. The rising of the land, the rising of the earth, the first pyramid, the first burial mound, the rising of resurrection-all that is together along with the name Ptah-Tenen. His name is Ptah-Tenen, the first person to put life upon the earth. So this is Ptah coming down to earth (Ptah means earth, you see). But it's earthy. The problem is how are we going to transmit the powers and forces of the universe to this one little planet? This is the way we do it. Well, this is the land; this is the setting. This is the land of the Mekhy of the North and of the Resy of the South. And it is the joining place of the two glorious ones. These are thrones of glory. That was originally a sunburst coming out here. It's very finely, very beautifully carved, but they were already conventionalized. It was the hill with the sunrise over it. So you had this form like this and then like this. That's what this is, called the Kha, which means to arise in glory. It's a regular word used for coronation or crowning of the king. Enthronement was his rising in glory, of course, being compared with the sun.

Notice he is wearing the white crown of the South; and North, the red crown of the North. There were always two crowns, always two thrones, even two graves for the king. Everything was double. Every ordinance was carried out four times really, but there was the white and the red and they were always mixed. We see they are mixed here. "And he was who begot Atum." Now here is our friend Atum again who in turn is the father or the begetter of the pesedj. The writing on this pesedj here, that means the nine. You can count the nine, and everybody translates that as ennead, but it isn't ennead. Sethe says about this, "Perhaps we are dealing here with the ennead as no more consisting of nine members than at Karnak, the writing of which has no connection whatever anymore with the number nine." Anytime you want a large council, it's ennead. With the Egyptians whenever you want a thing to be taken literally (they use it much more later on, but we should have some examples of it here), you put a little stroke by it signifying one-one item, one thing. It's interesting how that's used later on. You have to use it with every word later on if it's taken literally. If you want it to be dual, you put two strokes by it. But three means any number after two. You're not going to go on adding four, five, six and seven after that. So you have a singular, a plural, a dual and a plural. Incidentally, the dual is the same as it is in all indo-european languages. It sounds the same way. And the plural is the same. You'd be surprised. You'd think it was Latin or Greek or something like that here; how much like it they are. Well, anyway he begot the ennead, the nine of them. But he says here it has no connection with the number nine whatever anymore. That would only be something left over from the old Heliopolitan ennead.

And then this means to gather your family. There's a very interesting Iyat there. We mentioned in the Coffin Texts (which are very old, 2000 B.C.) of the nobility, Num. 131 on, and 146 especially, have to do with the sealing of one's family to one's self in the other world-the gathering of the family. That's the word they use for gather the family and for the family too-a family gathering. This means to call together, to assemble. "He assembled the Council of the Gods for discussion." Another interesting word here is wep. You see that all over the place "between Horus and Seth." Notice every time the name Seth occurs, somebody has piously rubbed it out because Seth is the opposition. Seth is Satan, you see; we don't want him in the picture. So for superstitious reasons we wipe him out.

But wep is so interesting. Notice it is always written with the horns. It means "open" and "brow." What is the Latin word for brow? It's ops, optic-the eye etc. And it's the opening out. Open, wep, ops, optic and webben (same thing). It means to rise and shine and all the rest of it. But it is to divide and make distinction. The horns divide and go in opposite directions. It's a division. When you open, what do you do? You unfold thy portals everlasting. You unfold the portals; you open them up. That's why this wep means to make a distinction, to set them apart. Then you go up to the top here. Breasted thinks that means, "he explained, he laid out in particular." But Sethe says it means "to forbid, to put an end to." The three balls you see together there always have the meaning of exception, to rule out; either to explain in detail or to rule out-to say we are not discussing that.

To eliminate, to explain by elimination. We'll say, he forbad their quarreling. Remember, he forbad that there should be any contention among them and he placed Seth on the southern throne in the land in which he was initiated. Later on it says in which he was born. But initiated will do because that's what it says. "In the land in which he was born therein at the place of Saa, a prehistoric place."

And then the other one. We mentioned who Geb was. He is the principle of legitimate succession. It's an interesting thing here that it is Geb who puts Horus on the throne of the North-on the bee throne, the deseret throne. Deseret means red land, (it was red rock country) and it is the word for holy land. All these things are mixed up. But it is Geb who appoints Horus because Geb is the principle of legitimate partriarchal succession. I was puzzled the last time because then he should have put Seth in there too. But he doesn't, which is may be significant-the fact that Horus is the only one that is legitimate. Then in the northland (this is Mekhy). Paul Karge said that the word Mekhy, like the word Mexico, means northland. This Mekhy always means "northland," and Mexico in the Central American language meant north country too. Another parallel with Egypt; you get lots of them. "At the place where his father was drowned." Now his father goes into the water there, and he emerges from the water to come into a new life and to mount the throne. Well, obviously baptism. In fact, that's what Gardiner calls it. He wrote a long article in the JEA on "The Baptism of Pharaoh." The place where he was initiated; the place where his father was baptized.

At the division of the lands en pesh taw (same word as part, split, etc.). There's a very interesting conjunction here that you only find in very old Egyptian. Then Horus and Seth mounted. See, here is an aha which is a mast on a ship which you mount. It means mounted up, of course. They both mounted upon the two thrones of Horus and Seth. This is a very interesting word. I talked with Professor Edwards when he was here about this. This is what an iyat is. If you go through the Pyramid Texts, you will find every once in a while a person makes a pilgrimage to the most holy place, and he circumambulates the iyats. There are usually three of them-always written like this. It is a mound surrounded by standing stones. This is the iyat, and that's what it says here. Each one has his iyat or his ceremonial symbol, which means it goes back to megalithic times (Stone Age). It's very old stuff. Each one has his iyat because we know that's what Heliopolis was. Mariette discovered that it was such a founding. Each had his iyat here, and it's very interesting that Edwards himself has come to accept that idea as the origin of the pyramid now. Somebody has just written a monograph on the subject which justifies it. They never would hear of it before. At the division of the lands, the two lands were pacified and reconciled. This is our old friend Hetep. You always see hetep all over the place in everybody's name. They pacified and settled the two lands at Eon, which means the beautiful place (like Nauvoo). At the Eon which is the place where the lands are divided. Remember King Lib dividing the Land North and the Land South.

Now we come to this next one. And Geb now speaks to Seth. You can always tell Seth because his name has been blacked out.

Now this formula; there's no doubt what that means. These words must be spoken out loud. They must be recited exactly as they are written, and these are to be spoken by the person who is taking the part of Geb, the earth god. Now the goose is purely phonetic because all of these characters are human. Nowhere do you find them in any animal or bird form or anything like that. This is the oldest times; it was all human. And he speaks to him and says, "Go to the place where thou wert born." So it's born here. And here are stage instructions. Seth takes his place on the south side of the hall. So this is dramatized that way. Then he says to Horus, "You go to the place where your father was buried in the waters-where he was drowned in that place. Horus goes to the north side of the hall. Then he addresses the two of them together, Horus and Seth. He says, "I have divided you; I have set you apart" (notice there are the dividing horns). So they take their places north and south, and that's it.

It continues this way now. Geb then speaks to the entire assembly of the gods (there are the three signs of divinity), and he says these words, "I have commanded Horus saying you are the yinnep, which means successor to the throne. It can also be the wetu, which means the same thing. It's related to the word for wepwawet here. "You are the successor," he says to him. Geb speaks to the gods again, "Only Horus; he is the only heir." You notice the word for heir or inherit is a leg of beef, called suet or iyat here. You notice why it is a piece of meat. It goes back to early times. Who gets the biggest piece at the table? You know in Homer the quivering chines of beef and you compete about the meat of honor. Well, at the table who gets the biggest chunk? This is a quivering chine of beef, you see, and it means a payment, or often a reward. You put a t on the end and it means he is the heir. He alone receives the inheritance. Then he says to them again very emphatically, "This one is given the heir." (And it's the old old form) "He is the heir; he is the only heir." He is making this known to everybody, you see. "I have chosen him. I have chosen for the son of my son Horus to be the (notice here is Wepwawet).

You will notice on the Facsimile No. 2 that the top figure carries the staff with the dog on top (that's Wepwawet) who opens the way, begins the years. It is the hound of the Pharaoh, or whoever it is, that goes ahead of you in the hunt and smells out the way in front of you, scares out the game, and leads the way. So Wepwawet is the one who comes first, of course. It goes back to hunting culture. And he is the one who shall be the opener of the way. Here it is written out, the Wepwawet. He is the one who will open the way. But here he is the wetu. This means the principle of patriarchal succession. He repeats the same thing again here, "He is the opener of the womb." There's wep again, you see. The firstborn, in other words. It is the belly and udders of a cow. And wep-en-khat is the one who opens the womb, the first born. "He is my son; he is my first born," he says here. "Horus, who is Wepwawet, who opens the way. He will establish things on the earth and take over."

Then in the final one here, he speaks again to the Council of the Gods and says, "This is my son who is born, who is Horus, and who is born at the new year." So it celebrates the new year. It's the beginning of a new age. Everything starts out at once-a new life, a new age, a new kingdom and everything else. We are founding a new kingdom, a new dynasty. What better than to go back to the beginning of all times; the oldest, most stable kingdom in the world when it was founded, and that's this. So this is founded at the new year. This was noticed long ago, this 18 here. Everybody noticed that. This is the end of Act One. They have been given their appointments. Things are settled, etc. Now what's going to happen? The play has to move now. So we get to Act Two, and the trouble begins. But we won't have time for any more trouble than we have already had here. We should be able to finish it the next time, ha ha.
