Hugh Nibley, Ancient Documents and the Pearl of Great Price ( 1986)

Lecture 12

The Plurality of Worlds

Let's pass these around. This is a talk Professor Baer is giving tomorrow night on who really robbed the Valley of the Kings. He has a very good sense of humor. You'll love Professor Baer.

Next time we reach the halfway point, and then we shift over to the text. But this introduction, on which we have hardly scratched the surface, is indispensable. I think you will find it so. The subject for today, for example. From now on almost everything I mention you will be able to find on reserve. You can get a lot of the stuff down at F.A.R.M.S. on the corner of University and Eighth North, on the top floor of the old Amanda Knight Hall. They have all this stuff copied for two and one-half cents a page.

Remember, we have been talking about literalism, cosmism, preexistence, and the Council in Heaven. All require the existence of other worlds. Of all the propositions that ever came forth in discussion of gods, the cosmos, etc, this has been the most obvious one, and the most inviting. It has also been the most hotly denounced and the most hotly resisted, especially in the seventeenth century. It was the big fight of the seventeenth century. Is there a plurality of worlds? If we go down the list here, we'll find the arguments for and against and the people for and against it. They are all very famous. They are all central to our whole civilization here. Nothing is more clearly set forth in the Pearl of Great Price than this teaching. I have all the passages listed here from Moses and Abraham. Let's read them after we've seen what the opinions were on these things. I'm going to keep score here. Who is for and against this plurality of worlds? (I've got to learn how to write better; I used to write carefully and very well.) In the ancient world from the earliest times in the old records, like the Egyptians, the absolute rule of the one is the idea. You have the one king, the one god on his throne. There cannot be two swords in a scabbard. There cannot be two suns in a sky. There could only be one ruler, an ideal king who sits on the throne. So there can only be one world, one heaven or anything else. But what gives him his glory is the hosts that surround him. He's in the midst of great variety and great numbers of the acclaiming hosts. What about the other worlds going around? The two go together. As soon as you require the god on the throne to have glory, he has to have something to rule over. This was a very definite concern. How can God have glory if there is nobody to acclaim him? Many thought that's why he created the world so that he would have somebody to cheer him and make him feel that he had done something wonderful. A foremost French theologian, Etienne Gilson, who recently died, wrote a book the title of which is God, and he said, "God is the self-thinking thinker who thinks only thought." He thinks only of himself because nothing else is worthy of his thought except himself, of course. He can't lower himself. Well, that's his ultimate definition for God. But he has to have more glory than that, so already you have the two sides here, the two ideals.

Even in the Pyramid Texts, the one becomes three.

Xenophanes, a philosopher of the sixth century B.C. and one of the Milesian School, said, "It is quite reasonable to suppose that there are boundless suns and moons and all of the same substance as this earth." So they were preaching that in the sixth century B.C. He was part of the school of the physical world teaching philosophy on the basis of physics which began in his generation in Miletus. And along with this goes the feeling of pothos. Pothos is an interesting word. Thucydides uses the term effectively. Pothos is the yearning for the beyond, the feeling that there is more there and the desire to get out there. It's funny, when the Russians gave up the idea of heaven, they became obsessed with this idea of pothos-of going out into outer space, the hope for realities beyond. It's natural and inevitably looks to dreams of other worlds. There are various articles and books on these subjects.

There are two well-defined approaches and traditions to the plurality of worlds. First of all we should mention that Xenophanes is for it (fifth-sixth century). Aristotle (Aristotelian doctrine) is against it (fourth century B.C.) What was his argument for that? Well, Professor Jaeger in his celebrated work on Aristotle says, "It is very important for Aristotle to prove that only one world is possible. [Of course, the Christian world is going to follow him.] Just as the mind may be focused on only one thing at a time, only one object is most worthy of our total contemplation, and that is God." You can't be distracted by anything else. There can only be one, and this applies to everything. Quoting a recent study by Munitz, "Aristotle's one-world theory with its foundation in the gross facts of familiar experience [After all, you can see there is only one world, and you can see the earth is the center of everything. Everything is drawn to the earth; everything falls to the earth; things that are heavy go down. So there can be no other. This is the center; man is the center. By your senses you can see the stars and planets revolving around the earth, around the place you stand on. This is the gross, obvious, observational evidence of the senses.] made reference to worlds beyond our own both unwarranted and unnecessary." We have enough here. We don't need any other worlds. They are not necessary, and it is unwarranted. This is obviously the center. You don't need to go any further and argue about it.

"Against this you have the intuitive genius of Democritus," says Munitz. Remember Democritus-the laughing philosopher, the inventor of atoms, etc. He is fifth century. Democritus is for it, and Aristotle is against it. We'll have to leave a place in the middle because with Plato you can go either way. "Against the intuitive genius of Democritus, there was no observational evidence whatever that there might be more than one world. [You can't observe it that way.] The observational range of astronomy at that time had no need for other worlds," he says. "Earlier, Plato's reason for looking upon the cosmos as unique, as only one cosmos, is essentially theological. There's only one perfection. That's it, and you can't have others." So Plato on one side was opposed to it [Aristotle's teacher was Plato], but on the other hand, his doctrine leads to the insistence on having more than one world. It was his idea of perfection that led to later Christian and Jewish involvement in pleniarism through possible infinity of worlds. If God made the best, he did the best of possible jobs. Why would he stop at one? There should be more. We demand more of a good thing. You can't get too much of a good thing, so why limit it to just one. It's to Plato they appealed both against and for it. Professor Shorey made Plato a high church conservative, and Professor Gifford made him a low church liberal. That was at Chicago. Professor Shorey wrote a book on what Plato meant, the absolute opposite of what Gifford and the others said about him.

So these are the two well defined traditions, the issue stated in the now familiar Clementine Recognitions. We are always running into that. Peter is arguing with Simon Magus who claims to be very scientific. Peter is on the side of reality, and Simon Magus is against it. This is early second century writing. Simon says that the heaven can only be seen in the mind and, therefore, cannot be corporeal. You can't have other worlds. Heaven is only something you see in the mind. Peter in reply says that he too sees only in his mind when he thinks of an island which he has never yet visited. But he says the island is real. It is there just the same. "I had a definite idea what Caesarea would be like before I ever came here," he says. "Though the real Caesarea when I got here was quite different. But it was real." Then Simon challenges him, "What do you think is beyond the heavens?" Peter replies, "I believe in a great source of light that is real and not a mere fantasy, nor the product of sophistic assertions, but it is testified by law and by nature." So Peter is being the scientific, down-to-earth, common sense one. He says, "Of course, there are other worlds, and they are going to be real-things beyond the sun." Simon Magus says, "No, this must all be spiritual." And Simon's viewpoint was the winner as far as the church was concerned after.

The Jewish theory is the same way. We have the Zohar. What does that say? "God creates worlds and destroys worlds, and you too will be able to create worlds and to destroy worlds." This was a doctrine common to both the Jews and the Mandaeans. We find it in Bin Gorion. So the Zohar is definitely for it. Not only that God creates and destroys worlds (as in the Pearl of Great Price), but you too can become a creator of worlds if you follow a certain line. This is an interesting theory. "Other worlds have disappeared," says the Zohar, "because God did not dwell in their midst regularly and constantly or [as the text reads] because God had not come down to them." They must be visited by God, so they just whithered and perished in time. There were unworthy worlds that passed away. That's an interesting thing because they do talk about unworthy races and pre-human races that weren't able to make the grade. Of course, we know that civilizations do pass away. Well, why shouldn't it happen with worlds too, if God hadn't visited them or if they rejected him? So the Jews worked on that.

There's a very famous work by the brethren Ahwan of Basra, edited by Dieterici. I have one of the few copies in existence of the text of this, and it's great. Back in the ninth century at Basra, where all the oil bombing is going on now, there was a society of the holy brethren. They were scientifically advanced. They knew all about microbes and molecules and everything else. They had a marvelous encyclopedia, and in it they say, "The business of the angels is to [p.4] coordinate the operations between the worlds, to keep them all functioning according to the same plan. There are many worlds. They are all coordinated, and they all work together in one big scheme." This is a very bold concept which, of course, we find in the Pearl of Great Price. So we will put the brethren of Basra here. It was a great school, a very important center at an early time. First Christian, then Moslem.

This was the doctrine of the Nazarenes, we read in the Migne collection here. "As the one-world school clusters around Aristotle, so the plurality of worlds developed with impressive logic and imagination by the Christian writers who pretend to teach the old Christian gospel of the Gnostics." The Gnostics picked it up because it was very popular, of course. So we will put the Gnostics over here. They knew they couldn't give it up. It was a teaching of the old church, yet they weren't inclined to it because they didn't believe in anything physical hereafter; no physical resurrection, no physical creation. God was not worthy of that. So some of the sects keep it, and there are many of them, because the Christian tradition demanded it. This is part of the teaching that went back to the early church as attested by a strict contradiction to their favorite doctrines.

Justin Martyr, the first Christian martyr, insists on it, and he's very important. Remember, he was the first philosopher to become a Christian. He was martyred for that. He never laid off his philosopher's robe, and he wrote apologies telling his philosophy friends in the school why he joined the church, justifying himself. But he insists that the Christians are not interested in mere abstractions. "They demand reality," he says. He promises the perspective of the Christian as Dame Virtue promised Heracles at the crossroads. He says here, "If you follow me, I can promise you unlimited worlds. The worlds go on without end." So we will put Justin Martyr down here. He's a very important one, very early too. As I say, the first Christian martyr, after Stephen. Remember, the first philosopher to join the church. Later, it was only the heretics that still clung to that old belief. Philastrius is one who collects a lot of arguments for and against it. We have him in the twelfth volume of the Patrologia. He's in the fourth century. As we have seen before, the philosophers of the fourth century rejected it. They didn't like any of this physical stuff at all. He says, "There are heretics who still cling to the old belief [you notice it is the old belief] that worlds are infinite and innumerable according to the silly opinions of some philosophers" to which he opposes Gen. 1:1, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth." This was usually the answer. He says, "That says the world is one and from one source, and you can't get around it. There can only be one." And this is followed closely by Methodius. Referring back to the cosmology of the Egyptians and Chaldeans, he argues that if the sun and the moon and other stars are divine and greater than men, then it is necessary that they also contain greater life. There must be worlds greater than our world. He says, "They would have greater peace, greater justice, greater virtue. Is that reasonable?" Well, why not. It follows all right, but they found it offensive. But he sort of remains on the fence, and a lot of them do. This is interesting in the early period. There's a good footnote in the Patrologia on that. Those who have the glory of God at heart [p.5] generally like this. It put Him at the head of the greatest possible show. They wanted God to have the biggest possible universe.

And our old friend Origen; where is he? He's stuck right in the middle and can't make up his mind. Remember, he knew what the old church taught and he was the best of theologians, but he also grew up on the campus of the University of Alexandria. He had to accept both. He tells us some interesting things here in his famous work on the first principles of the gospel. "Yet there may be other worlds, but what their nature and number may be I confess I do not know. If anyone could show me, I would gladly learn." That was the position of the church at the beginning of the third century. He was born in 185. "I don't know," he says. "There may be and I wish there was, but can you tell me about it?" Notice, there's no authority; the tradition is lost. The apostasy has taken place. They don't have anything. And, of course, St. Jerome. He said that Origen believed that the number of worlds was infinite, but he avoided being a follower of Epicurus by having them exist not all at once but in succession, one after another. So there would be lots of worlds, but just one at a time. Well, that explains a lot. Remember, the Pearl of Great Price says, "As one world passes away another comes into existence." But Origen is still carrying water on both shoulders here. Epicurus is one of the classic exponents of it. We mentioned him saying you should enjoy yourself, but the idea that there should be other worlds goes along with atomism and Democritus. Putting it on a physical basis, there is no reason why it shouldn't be repeated. Philastrius notes that in his day there was a wide disagreement in the church on the subject. Half the teachers took one side and half took the other.

Michael Scotus, the famous philosopher of the Middle Ages, got around this by supposing that God could create a plurality of worlds but that the nature of the world he did create made the existence of other worlds impossible. He said, "God could have done it. You can't deny him that."

"While some Christian tastes chided Aristotle for limiting God's control to a sphere of light within the circle of the moon [that makes it a very small show] preferring the broader scope of the schools in Babylonia, India and Egypt who taught that there were other worlds and whose teachings would be hard to refuteÂ�" That's a very interesting writing by a Palestinian writer in the Oriental Patrologia, also from the fourth century. The Aristotelian concept taken over by the doctors of the Christians and the Jews in the Middle Ages is akin to the doctrine of universal monarchy. All outside the monarchy are in the outer darkness and have no place at all. There can only be one kingdom. They went to work on that. The argument of perfection though works either way. "The Arab, the Jewish, and the Christian philosophers of the Middle Ages taught that the harmony of all nature requires that there be only one perfect universe." This was taken as the proof of only one God. So the strong arguments are against it. All of medieval philosophy now (Jewish, Christian and Arabic; the Arabs were leading at that time) says you have to have a perfect universe. The Book of the Mysteries of Heaven and Earth has Peter saying to the Lord, "' Nothing was created before heaven and earth,' and in spite of Matt. 25:34 nothing existed before heaven and earth except the three names of the Father, [p.6] Son and Holy Ghost. The Christian Hermius of the fourth century contrasts the Christian belief in one cosmos with Epicurus' idea of many and infinite worlds which he says would require many heavens, many ethers etc. and that would be absurd."

Augustine, of course, is our big one. Like Origen, he is on the fence. He's the most important, but he decides against it in the end. Early, he was a Manichaean and was very strongly for it. I was reading in The City of God just last hour. He says, "There is no time without mobility." That's a good point. Something has to move in order to measure time. "There's no mobility without creatures. There was no time after which God began to create the earth." He didn't begin at any time. Then he says, "It has to be understood that nothing at all existed before he created this world; therefore, there can be no other worlds. Since there was no time, from that we conclude that before this world was created nothing at all existed." Very interesting thing he says here, "The world was not created in time but with time. Time and the world were created together." The Pearl of Great Price says that Adam went into a new time system when he left the garden. Before then he was on another time system entirely, but it's still a time system. Well, there was nothing before this world because there was nothing to make time in this argument. This conclusion was after much wrangling and soul searching. They considered this a very important issue.

John Chrysostom, a very important writer of the fourth and fifth centuries, rejects it. We have many volumes of his writings, and he was the greatest orator of his time-a tremendous influence. He says, "The beauty and utility of the heavens are all exclusively for the benefit of man." This is the point of view of that time. Talk about anthropocentric. He rejected the possibility of many heavens. He says, "The stars were created first and foremost for the benefit of sailors. That's why He made stars, so there's no reason to go on creating them for anybody else because there is nobody else there." That was the argument, but it got feeble as it went along.

Then we get the Middle Ages (twelfth century) and Thomas Aquinas. He explains why Plato's idea of perfection makes it impossible that there should be more than one world. He says, "Duplicated worlds would be futile and foolish. Why make more?" So Aquinas is against this and he reads Plato that way. "Even though their totality might be perfect, still there would be imperfect worlds." That's his commentary on Aristotle on the Heavens, DeCaelo, lecture 19, D&C 14, etc. So in the Middle Ages they settled it this way.

Now in the Renaissance and Reformation this doctrine emerged again, and did they have a fight about it. This was the big thing, the main issue in the Renaissance. The Renaissance was the expansive period; they discovered this world and other worlds. When it emerged in the Renaissance and Reformation, it called for counter measures. It was the greatest crime of Giordano Bruno who was its great defender. He was burned at the stake in Rome for preaching this doctrine. He was a great genius in many ways. This was in 1600, right at the turn of the century. When they go into the seventeenth century, then it becomes more scientific. But it becomes the main argument of the seventeenth century. Whether it's Pascal or Descartes or the rest, they talk about that more than anything else. Bruno was teaching the "decentralized, infinite, and infinitely populous universe," and it cost him his life. He went everywhere, but they wouldn't accept him. They threw him out of Geneva. He went to Paris; he went to London. He was one of the great geniuses of his time. But this teaching that there is more than one world is what "cooked his goose." It rested not on the astronomy of Copernicus, as Lovejoy tells us, or Gallileo, but on the principle of plenitude. For a thing to be perfect, there must be the most possible of it. So there must be plentiful worlds.

Arthur Lovejoy's book The Great Chain of Being is very good on this subject. He takes it up here in the Renaissance and the Reformation. The other one is Alexander Koyre's book called From a Closed World to an Infinite Universe. It's a new one, and it treats the subject again very well. You can get these at the Bookstore quite cheaply. It begins with Nicholas of Cusanus. We'd better have him down here because he is very strong for it. He comes before Bruno. It sounds Italian, but he isn't. He's German. That's the town of Cusa in Germany. He's way back in the fifteenth century, 1401-1464. He became Cardinal Nicholas and traveled everywhere. He had great influence with the popes. He wrote a famous work called De Docta Ignorantia (On the Learned Ignorance). He was the most learned man of his time, and he said, "Learning consists entirely of knowing that you don't know." He takes as a famous example the squaring of the circle. That's following Socrates. You put a square around a circle and then you cut the corners off the square. Then you keep cutting those corners off. That can go on forever. You'll never get a square. He says that's the way with knowledge. You get nearer and nearer, but you never get it. And he picked up the saying from the Mandaeans, I think (which they applied to God), of the universe whose center is everywhere and circumference is nowhere. He says, "That's not God; that's the universe that we are describing." It certainly is Einstein's universe. The center is everywhere; you know, the exploding universe, the balloon and all that. Nicholas Cusanus said that the inhabitants of this world are inferior to inhabitants of other stars. That's one way to get into trouble. "They remain wholly unknown to us," he says.

Now I'm quoting Lovejoy here, "By the early sixteenth century, the theory of plurality of solar systems and of inhabited planets, of the infinite number of stars and the infinite extent of the universe in space were already common topics of discussion. [Was there an infinity of worlds and a plurality of solar systems?] What most attracted the seventeenth century was the idea of habitable celestial bodies with creatures more or less like ourselves." This was the big appeal. Lovejoy says, "This is a truly revolutionary thesis in cosmogony which was generally accepted before the end of the seventeenth century." Well, if they accepted it by the end of the seventeenth century, whatever happened to it? It comes in as quite a novelty in the Pearl of Great Price. In the middle of the century Burrell published his new discourse proving the plurality of worlds in which he called attention to the mountains and rivers on the moon and recalled that Pythagoras called the earth a moon. Pythagoras was the great one that was for it. He learned it in Egypt, of course. They learned everything in Egypt. In this century we have Campanella's famous work known as The City of the Sun in which he describes the sun as a populated planet. It was taken very seriously. Lots of people got all excited about it. He paid for it though. He died in 1639 after spending 27 years in prison for teaching it. Then finally Gregory VIII let him out again. But you had to pay through the nose if you taught these things in some parts of the world then. The Protestants were as strong against it as the Catholics. It was a big fight. He believed the sun inhabited by beings far superior in learning to ourselves.

Now Descartes, the father of modern thought, what position would he take? He was against it; that's a strange thing. The great Rene Descartes, who introduced so much of modern thinking, belongs over here. He died right in the middle of the century, 1650. He says, "The question of many worlds is silly and irrelevant since this world is infinite and we must never dispute about the infinite. There's nothing you can say about it." Well, I guess he's on the fence, isn't he. "This matter of the sky and the earth is one and the same and there cannot be a plurality of worlds since it is all a complete self-centered whole." If it's just one perfect whole, you don't divide it up. Well, it is a whole, but can't you have other worlds? This is the argument. But he was engaged with that idea. "Even if the worlds were infinite," he says, "it is impossible that they should not be constituted from one and the same matter."

Well, we believe that. Of course, we have always taught that. "Like unto other worlds"; exactly as has been done in other worlds. We keep repeating that formula over and over again. "As has been done in other worlds." This is not new. There's nothing new about it as far as substance and structure is concerned, but the combinations are different. There's no end of difference between the worlds. He says, "Even if the worlds were infinite, it is impossible they would not be constituted from one and the same matter; therefore, they cannot be many but only one" because they are the same matter. Well, in that sense we agree with him. His argument is that no matter how many there might be, all must belong to one and the same system, so after all it is only one cosmos. The one who treats him is Koyre. He goes into quite a bit of detail on him.

Blaise Pascal, the great inspired genius, came right after him. He died quite young. He invented adding machines and things like that, a mathematical genius. But he couldn't accept it either. Why not, a great "noodle" like his? He couldn't accept life on other worlds because of his attachment to the Jewish and Christian tradition. "He was very pious which long since disposed of his earlier competitors who viewed as absurd the assumption of the existence throughout infinite space of countless other races of rational and presumably sinful beings." He said, "The Christian and Jewish tradition won't allow it. It's absurd. You don't need to go on endlessly repeating things. There's no point to that." Henry More, who was a follower of his, follows the familiar orthodox medieval premise, "The center of each of several worlds is a sun with its planets, and these altogether one world, I concede, and under the inexhaustible God, and God is height whose simple goodness makes the highest diety." Well, he's going into ecstasies about the fact that there is an infinite number of worlds. Well, Henry More says that, the orthodox medieval premise. "Each several world has its suns and its planets. If Descartes rejects the infinity of inhabited worlds, he nonetheless refuses to suppose that the power of the Creator is so imperfect that no such stars could exist." He thinks it's absurd, but he says you're not going to limit the power of God; so God could make more if he wanted to. Descartes is sitting on the fence with that argument. "He could make them if he wanted to," he says.

Likewise with Leibniz, the great German philosopher of the time. Let's see which side he's on first. You'd expect him to be very much on it. Well, he is against it because he believed in the best of possible worlds (if you've read your Candide). He died about 1717, so we're now in the eighteenth century. He says, "No, because this is the best of all perfect worlds." Of course, Voltaire has no end of fun spoofing that. If you call this the best of all perfect worlds, what have you got? That's the whole theme of Candide. But he argues like a German philosopher. He's called Pangloss, the typical German philosopher. As Voltaire says, "He's a little philologian like all Germans."

Well, Leibniz says, "An infinite, immutable, and sempiternal God could not be conceived as limiting his creative action to a small stretch." Well, now wait a minute. He has to extend his actions out here, and where can he stop creating? This is the contradiction that you run into here all the time. Newton is very strongly for it. Newton takes us down to 1727. This is a very neat list we are making, isn't it? Remember, Newton was very religious. He interpreted the Bible literally and would not go along with any of the theology of his time. He was the greatest scientist probably who ever lived, but extremely devout to the end of his days. He speaks in terms strongly reminiscent of the Mandaean and Coptic brethren. He says, "For in God's house, which is the universe, are many mansions, and he governs them by agents which can pass through the heavens from one mansion to another. For if all places to which we have access are filled with living creatures, why should all these immense spaces of the heavens above the clouds be incapable of inhabitants?" He just turns around the argument-why bother to create all those things? He says, "Well, why not? Why let all that space and matter go to waste? Why not organize it?" The arguments work both ways. "Why should all these immense spaces of heavens above the clouds be incapable of inhabitants." By combining Democritus and Newton, the great Immanuel Kant (the father of heavy German philosophy, as you know) was remarkable-his anticipation of the present cosmology and this new sophisticated stuff. He preached about island galaxies and the formation of solar systems from spiral nebula and things like that (Laplace's theory). He went a long way in the study of the stars. Today, they have just barely caught up with him. Some books like Korte's pay great tribute to Kant for anticipating, not just by intuition but by reason, so much of what we teach today.

Incidentally, just before him is Athanasius Kircher. He was a Jesuit who was into everything. And he could get away with everything because he was the pope's pet. He made some good Coptic studies and thought he had deciphered Egyptian. He was not in trouble until he made this statement, and this practically destroyed him: "It would be in God's power to create similar worlds to ours at various distances from the earth." His idea of an iter ex staticum or travel to the planets produced, even among the scientific brotherhood, only an uneasy silence.

Even the scientists couldn't take that. So Kircher went off the deep end with that one. So he was naturally for it. He's a fascinating character. He never let anything stop him. He'd come out with wildest ideas. Some of them were good, and that's the point. He could get away with anything until he started saying that it would be in God's power to create similar worlds to this. Then we mentioned the great Isaac Newton who died in 1727. Then Kant concluded that "the cosmos must be infinite because of the infinite power of God." It works both ways. He carried it on to an infinite hierarchy of island universes of spiral nebula and all the rest. He had it all worked out, solar systems and the like.

Then this argument was used by the famous Richard Bentley who got into the argument with Dr. Arnold at Oxford, that celebrated feud that ran on for years. He was a classical scholar, but he had some pretty nutty ideas too. He says, "This is absurd. What good would an infinity of worlds do? What indeed could be the usefulness of these innumerable stars that are not even seen by us?" If you can't even see a star, what good is it? (as if God created all the stars for our particular benefit, never went any farther).

And then Leibniz again and this utilitarian doctrine. "What good would it do us if there were a lot of other worlds?" (Interesting question, isn't it?) "It's both a materialistic and atheistic argument, yet the doctrine of other worlds was opposed on the grounds that it was too materialistic; indeed it has been widely assumed among scientists that the discovery of life on other worlds would be an end to belief in God." This is a very important thing now. I've got some interesting things here. "Though Leibniz defined universe as one of a system of worlds that could exist but of which only a single one has been effectively realized." So God could have created other worlds, but he only created this one because there's only one perfect world possible and that would be it. So he said, "Well, of course, there could be other worlds and God could do it, but we can't figure it out. So leave it there."

"It may be hard for the present generation to believe that up to this very time it was the scientists who contemptuously rejected the idea of plurality of habitable worlds. While the old tradition lingered, the doctors had trouble making up their minds." (Now this is the official Roman Catholic position on the subject today, which is rather important. It's in a recent issue of the Revue Biblique.) "The doctors had trouble making up their minds in the church. They went both ways until the question was settled this way." The whole trouble, according to Grelot here, is that they couldn't get rid of false ideas of localization. There had to be such a thing as place. If there was no place, then there would be no problem. But localization is a physical thing. Forget locus, forget place, forget space and all that sort of thing. Take it all as spiritual and you can forget about this other worlds business. That's the present position here.

This is a very interesting statement by Whitehead. We put the Roman Catholic Church today on this side officially, and on this side we put Alfred North Whitehead, the famous English philosopher and mathematician. His deathbed statement is a very interesting one on this subject. He says, "The Bible excels in its suggestions of infinitude.

Here we are with our finite being and physical senses in the presence of a universe whose possibilities are infinite." He rises up from his bed, shakes his head and says, "And even though we may not apprehend them, those infinite possibilities are actualities. Don't reject anything. The Bible interpreters unfortunately have scaled and whittled down the sense of infinitude into finite and limited concepts." This is what they did in interpreting the Bible-the things we have been talking about. But we must leave the door open, and this is, of course, the great possibility.

An astronomer reports in 1955 (this is from a journal; notice how recent) a dramatic reversal in outlook on the subject of life outside the earth took place. Before then, in my day, because they had the pass-by or near-miss theory, it could not happen. The same reasons are used the same way today. According to the near-miss theory, a star came near enough to the sun to pull out so much substance and it figured out just right. In the 1930s that was the only one. That was accepted. But then it was junked, and now the new one is the other one. But now you have the 15 key coordinates that have to be fine tuned together. The possibility of coming up with another world by chance is infinitesimally small. So this must be the only one; there can't be any other world like this one. This was argued either way. It was the scientists that opposed it. Old Professor Larkin would throw you out of the room if you suggested it. If a science fiction nut suggested that there might be other worlds, it was absolutely not to be tolerated for a moment, which is surprising. It comes from the scientists here.

This astronomer, Luyten, says, "A writer like Descartes feels that discussion of the question represents the antithesis of real science. [Descartes said, 'This is not a scientific subject because we can't see those other worlds. We can't study them, so forget it.') This is not real science since the same scientists held to one theory of origin of the solar system." Well, as they did in the 1930s, and another theory in the 1950s. "The collision theory-the origin of the planetary system by a chance pass-by with just the right distance, just the right time, just the right place, temperature, speed, and all the rest-was such an extreme rarity that it was all but impossible that it could have been reproduced at all." I'm quoting from another journal Ein Codarschrift and certain digests. "In 1960 many astronomers will prove conclusively and to their own complete satisfaction that planetary systems are quite common." But before 1960 you couldn't say that safely. I have an interesting reference here. This is W. Sullivan, an astronomer, speaking in 1964 on the subject of a project designed to receive or send messages to other worlds (this was Carl Sagan's pet, you know). He says, "This is a subject which we would not have dared to discuss on this kind of platform even as recently as two years ago." So recently they gave up the idea. There may be contacts, etc., but they wouldn't have dared to discuss it before 1962.

The discoverer of radar, very largely, was Arthur Clarke. He wrote 2001 Space Odyssey. He's quite a scientist, as you know. He objected to some of the fancies that have inevitably grown from the acceptance of life's existence elsewhere. He doesn't question the possibility, but like Descartes, he questions whether it would have any significance that people have assumed for it.

He says, "Man will never 'conquer space.' It will never be possible to converse with anyone on another planet [because of the time lapse]. The whole concept of interstellar administration or culture is seen to be an absurdity. Any form of control or administration over other islands in space would be utterly impossible, and all parallels from our own history thus cease to have meaning."

Maybe he doesn't take some things into account. Last night, I was reading Nathan Ha-Babli, a medieval Hebrew traveler of the Middle Ages. The Great Khan was administering an empire effectively where you couldn't reach some of the cities and some of the forts without traveling three, four, or five months. And yet they kept the thing organized. Well, maybe you could get your space empire that way if you are willing to sit it out. Of course, you can go into "overwarp" and that takes care of all that.

Has he forgotten about the great empire spreading over most of Europe and Asia? The capital was often months or more than a year's journey from its agents and messages from the provincial centers of government. I was reading about the Khazar and the Hibar kingdom of the Jews in central India in the sixteenth century. They asked for help from Charles V. It was a matter of two or three years to reach it. Isn't that something? We'll finish this next time, and then we will read the passages from the Pearl of Great Price which are very striking on this same subject.
