Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

Preface

The United States is known as a land of religious pluralism. No where else in the world can one find such a variety of Christian societies. In 1961, the National Council of Churches listed in their annual Yearbook over 250 denominations. As there are hundreds of sects in America that are not enumerated by ordinary statistical processes, this figure does not represent all religious bodies organized in this country. Many people who gather in barns, vacant lots, homes, halls, and auditoriums are not classified on published reports; and many faith healers, spiritualist mediums, and religious extremists periodically gather converts without gaining more than local recognition.

Pluralism is not only a national trait but is a characteristic of many popular religions of America. The Baptist denomination, for example, is composed of at least twenty-eight different bodies, such as the Southern Baptist Convention, the National Baptist Convention, the American Baptist Convention, the Two-Seed-in-the Spirit Predestinarian Baptists, Free Will Baptists, General Baptists, Regular Baptists, and Seventh Day Baptists. The Methodist church has divided into twenty-one bodies, the Lutherans, sixteen, and the Presbyterians, ten.

Diversity further exists within many bodies. The National Baptist Convention and the Free Will Baptist body are comprised of many local societies of different persuasions. Moreover, members of some of the local congregations maintain conflicting views on many doctrinal subjects. In some congregations, there is a greater diversity of belief than exists among some individuals who are members of different denominations.

Although there are hundreds of Christian societies in the United States, 70 per cent of all church members are affiliated with three denominations, Roman Catholic, Baptist, and Methodist, 85 per cent are members of seven denominations, and over 90 per cent are affiliated with twelve religious societies. Since less than 10 per cent of the Americans classified as churched are members of small sects and since one cannot include within the cover of a single volume a description of all denominations, I have limited this study to a description of the origins and beliefs of the major Christian denominations of the United States.

In early America, creeds were regarded by most Protestants as proper expressions of faith. Therefore, an examination of popular standards of faith reveals the tenets held by most church members prior to the Civil War. After the disruption of American democracy, a reorientation of Christian thinking occurred in many Protestant circles; and some Americans rejected orthodox Christianity in favor of a new theology which de-emphasized dogma. Because of the changing patterns of belief and the diversity within denominations, I have employed in this work an historical doctrinal approach. After analyzing the beliefs of the early leaders of the major Christian religions and discussing the most popular Protestant creeds, I devote the final chapter to a description of the religious trends in post-Civil War America.

The historical setting of Mormonism, with emphasis on the preliminaries to the Restoration, is another dominant theme included in this work. Many people ask the questions, "Why did the apostasy continue for so many years?" and "Why didn't our Father restore the fulness of the gospel in the tenth or the sixteenth centuries?" These questions cannot be answered with a few simple statements, for to simplify history is to falsify history. Major developments are the result of many, complex factors, and man's limited capacities cannot comprehend the actions of God. Nevertheless, an examination of the past reveals that conditions were not ripe for the Restoration prior to the early nineteenth century. After centuries of preparation, however, seeds were sown and cultivated, creating in the new nation a fertile field already to harvest.
