Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER ONE

From the Primitive Church to Modern Catholicism

As the eleven apostles were discussing reports that Jesus had risen from the grave, the Savior of Mankind appeared in their midst. Immediately, the men were startled and frightened. They had doubted accounts of Christ's visitation to others and supposed they were looking at a spirit, but Jesus calmed the men by saying, "Why are you troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have." Then, the Savior took part of their food, ate, and instructed his special witnesses, commanding them to go "into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature." [^1]

Shortly after this remarkable event occurred, the apostles received the gift of the Holy Ghost and inaugurated the Christian missionary program. They preached fervently, traveled extensively, authorized others to serve as ambassadors of the Lord, and witnessed the spread of the Christian religion from Judaea to Syria, Asia Minor, Africa, Greece, and Rome.

I. The Growth of New Testament Christianity

There are a multitude of factors which partially explain the remarkable growth of New Testament Christianity. This religion was a practical, spiritual, and beautiful philosophy of love, of service, of/justice, and of morality. It was a way of life promising glorious rewards, including hope and joy in mortality and exaltation and eternal life thereafter. It was a program which was all-inclusive, being available and appealing to men and women, aristocrats and slaves, and intellects and commoners. Moreover, nearly every member became a missionary, for Christianity was spread by merchants, craftsmen, farmers, housewives, and slaves. Some of the first missionaries also had the advantage of being endowed with the power of God, conveying to them the ability to perform miracles and giving to them keen insight into the problems with which they were confronted. The organization established by the apostles under the direction of the Savior was superior to the polity formulated by the pagans; and in the revivalistic age in which the movement was launched, many seemed prepared for the acceptance of the gospel of Jesus Christ. [^2]

II. Factors Contributing to the Disruption of the Divine Church

Pagan Competition

Although the membership of the church increased rapidly, many factors precipitated the passing of New Testament Christianity. The early Christian missionaries encountered the age-old problem of established patterns of religious behavior. The vast majority living in the Roman Empire were satisfied with their religion, the one taught to them by their parents. They endorsed a strange mixture of beliefs and cults, being primarily a blend of oriental ideas and Greek mythology. In contrast to the simplicity of worship advocated by the Christian, the adherents of the many mystery religions sanctioned impressive ceremonies employing candles, flowers, holy-water, chanting, bells and incense. The doctrines espoused by the Christian missionaries were also repugnant to many pagans. Many residents of the empire could not conceive of limiting their worship to a Trinity nor curtailing their liberal philosophies to the dogma of one true religion, and only by retaining some of their traditions were many willing to join and remain numbered among the Christian fold.

The Missionaries

It is also apparent that not all the missionaries were effective ambassadors of the Lord. Many went forth without proper preparation and without a correct understanding of the principles they unfolded to others. These early missionaries had no precedents to turn to, no stereotyped traditions to guide them, and no articles of faith nor New Testament to recommend to others. All were not like Paul; all had not seen the Messiah; all did not possess the faith, the courage and the determination that some of the apostles maintained; and all were not endowed with the power of the Holy Ghost. Consequently, some early missionaries of the church circulated apostate doctrines among the people in the Mediterranean world.

Problems of Communication

After churches were organized, the new converts were plagued with the lack of communication with those who received revelations. Questions arose. Letters were submitted to the church leaders, but before answers were available, innovations occurred. "I marvel," Paul admonished the Galatians, "that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel: Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ." [^3]

Death of the Apostles

The crowning blow which sealed the fate of the Christian Church was the elimination of inspired apostles and prophets, the central authorities of the church. Before the church was firmly planted, those professing revelation were murdered by the same corrupt elements that had clamored, "Crucify him! Crucify him!" The church was truly crucified! The foundation of apostles and prophets crumbled. The one source that could have established a long dispensation of unadulterated Christianity was destroyed. Visions and revelations ceased. There were not sufficient records available to guide properly the membership of the infant church. Therefore, following the martyrdom of the apostles, centuries of spiritual darkness were initiated.

Apostolic Recognition of the Inevitable Apostasy

The New Testament provides evidence that the apostles were well aware of their fate and that of the church. Christ informed them that his message would be rejected and that those who accepted the glad tidings would suffer the same fate as that imposed on him and the Twelve. As the disciples proclaimed a final authoritarian plea of repentance and baptism, they pessimistically disavowed any expectation of success, individually or collectively. Because of their anticipation of the passing of the church, the apostles failed to organize a perpetual missionary system or to establish an educational system designed to advance the Christian program. They did not even leave their converts sufficient written instructions for the future guidance of the church. [^4]

III. Emergence of a New Religion

Stubbornly refusing to acknowledge defeat, the second century members of the Christian churches turned to the local authorities for guidance. Since bishops had been appointed in many congregations, these local officers gradually assumed leadership of the independent churches. In every important city where Christians resided, bishops gained paramount influence and began directing the affairs in surrounding parishes. When some of these spiritual leaders died, they were not replaced. Gradually, a few bishops in key cities such as Rome, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Antioch, and later Constantinople gained supreme authority in their diocese. Although failing to claim a possession of the same power of revelation certified by the apostles, the bishops alleged that they were the proper successors to the Twelve; and eventually, the belief of apostolic succession of authority by way of the bishops gained almost universal acceptance in the Christian world.

A Syncretized Religion

Since few histories written in the second century have survived, modern scholars refer to this age as the "Great Gap." However, records available after this vacuum occurred indicate that during the lacuna the church split into innumerable factions and the basic teachings of Christ were altered almost beyond recognition. Numerically speaking, the church prospered, but its strength and success lay in its ability to adapt itself to the atmosphere of the times by absorbing the attractive features of its rivals. The compromising of truth and error, the assimilation of the gospel of Christ with the philosophies of men produced a new religion. This new religion was an appealing composite of New Testament Christianity, Jewish traditions, Greek philosophy, Graeco-Roman paganism, and the mystery religions. As Wilhelm Christ so aptly stated, "Christianity was squeezed into a system congenial to pagan-Greek-rationalist thought, and in that safe protective suit of armor was able to face up to the world; but in the process it had to sacrifice its noblest moral and spiritual forces." Civilization continued but the church founded by Christ was replaced by an alien intruder. The sheep had been routed by the wolves and the wheat had been overcome by the tares in fulfillment of the prophecies of the Master. [^5]

IV. From Persecution to Toleration

The early church was already destroyed from within before a semitolerant state made its vigorous attack on the syncretized religion. Prior to the middle of the third century, persecution of the Christians had been localized and sporadic. Then during the reign of Decius (249-251), the first universal and systematic persecution of Christianity was initiated. The religious toleration existing in the empire had limitations. Although the inhabitants were permitted to worship as many different gods as they desired, they were required to add to their conglomeration of beliefs the religion of the empire, symbolized by an emperor who was to be respected as another god. Moreover, to prevent the formation of plots to overthrow the empire, groups were forbidden to hold nocturnal meetings. The Christians defied these laws; and by refusing to participate in any pagan ceremonies and by stubbornly refusing to render even token approval of the emperor's image, they became a socially distinct entity. Sometimes they refused to take an oath in court or to serve in the emperor's army. They insisted that there was only one true religion. Their beliefs were misrepresented and misunderstood. They were accused of narrow-mindedness, intolerance, and impracticality. Then when the Roman Empire was threatened by barbarian invasions and internal discord, the Christians became convenient scapegoats. It was argued that they weakened the empire by refusing to aid in its defense; and since they rejected the traditional pattern of worship, some of their enemies claimed they alienated the pagan gods. If prompt action is not taken against the Christians, men argued, the downfall of the Roman Empire will be the inevitable result.

In 250 A.D. the decrees of Decius inaugurated general persecution of the unpopular followers of Christ. Christians were forbidden to attend their services; some of their meeting houses were destroyed and cemeteries were desecrated; bishops and deacons were executed; and many suffered trials arising from confiscation of property and banishment. This decade of persecution in the middle of the third century was followed by the "Great Persecution" of Diocletian, erupting at the beginning of the fourth century. Diocletian was envious of the growing strength of the Christians and determined to destroy this menace to his absolutism. By a series of edicts issued in 303, Christians were forbidden to assemble for worship. All Christian churches were to be destroyed. Christian literature was to be confiscated. The clergy were to be imprisoned, and all Christians were ordered to perform sacrifices in the traditional paganistic manner or face possible death.

In some regions of the empire the edicts were promptly followed with action. Nobles were reduced in rank, citizens became slaves, priests were tortured, churches were abolished, books were destroyed, and some Christian villages were left in ruins. The most severe persecutions occurred in the East where Galerius, a chief instigator of the persecution, sought to enforce the decrees. He removed Christian officers from the army, ordered all his troops to offer sacrifices, and insisted on the enforcement of the intolerant Diocletian edicts. Christian tradition, however, has greatly exaggerated the impact of the "Great Persecution," for persecution in the West ceased before it fully developed and relatively few martyrs were sacrificed there. The number who suffered death in other areas was also not large. Nevertheless, there were martyrs. There were many who lived in a constant state of fear, and there were those who lapsed into the religions sanctioned by the state. Then there were others who prayed for the inauguration of a new era in which the state could be employed to protect and advance the young religion. [^6]

Eventually, the Roman emperors learned that it was too late for the wholesale eradication of the Christian church. After each new wave of persecution, the Christians reorganized and drew into their fold those impressed by the tenacity and loyalty of the oppressed. The elements attacking the church from without were not as effective as the catastrophic compromises which had destroyed New Testament Christianity from within.

Christianity Recognized as a Legal Religion

A new era of toleration was ushered in when Galerius, the former Christian persecutor, issued an edict of toleration in 311. Perhaps he concluded that the Christians thrived on persecution and that the intended universal destruction of that religion was unrealistic. Possibly, because the pagan gods had failed to offer him relief, his severe illness led him to seek divine help from the Christian God. At any rate, the decree was issued; and since his successor Constantine secured the continuation of a policy of toleration, a precedent was set that was never again seriously altered.

In 313 A.D. Constantine, the victorious Roman general who had won political control of the West, and the leader of the East, Licinius, made a significant agreement. The so-called "Edict of Milan" granted the Christians complete religious freedom. They were given the same privileges as the pagan priests, and all church property confiscated in the recent persecution was to be restored. As the years passed, Constantine also permitted the decisions of the episcopal court to be final and allowed civil cases to be transferred to the episcopal court in any stage of proceedings. Priests were also exempted from taxation and Christians were allowed to bequeath their property to the church. Consequently Christianity became a respected religion and the church prospered in wealth and prestige. [^7]

When Licinius violated the agreement adopted at Milan and resumed persecution of the Christians, Constantine was granted an excuse to remove this challenge to his authority; and in 323, by defeating Licinius, the influential friend of the Christians became the sole ruler of the Roman empire. Diocletian's feeble answer to the problem of the growth of Christianity had been the attempted destruction of the church by the state. Discreetly, Constantine met the challenge of Christianity by forming an alliance with this thriving movement which then represented approximately ten per cent of the population of the empire. [^8] Probably, Constantine considered that the Christian church contained the elements that could best unite his kingdom. Tradition declares that he was a sincere convert to the fold he supported. Nevertheless, the controversial reasons for his actions are not as important as the consequences of his policies. The new religion won a significant victory, but again not without concessions. An unhealthy secular influence proceeded from the state to the church which inevitably led to the union of these two powerful institutions.

V. The Unhealthy Secular Influence

During the reign of Constantine, Christianity was torn by dissension. It has been estimated that there were as many as ninety Christian sects at that time. [^9] The apparent diversity of belief and practices created noticeable discord among the Christians. Pagans criticized Christians for disagreeing on fundamental doctrines. The concept of God, the proper method of administering baptism, the meaning of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the correct date of Easter were only a few issues that plagued the membership. If Christianity was to be employed to advance unity in the empire, Constantine realized that it would be necessary first to promote unity within that church. This policy served as the core of his religious program.

Since there was no universally recognized central machinery existing to settle major disputes among the Christians, Constantine adopted a program patterned after the actions of his paganistic predecessors. The emperors were accustomed to governing in secular and ecclesiastical affairs, and the inhabitants were willing to accept their decrees as if spoken by one of their gods. Constantine also organized dormant or ineffectual elements within the church. He convened councils consisting of representatives from the churches scattered throughout the empire. He summoned to the meetings the bishops he/chose, reserving to himself an appellate jurisdiction. By these maneuvers, he converted the independent councils of bishops into an imperial commission with powers of inquiry and decision when receiving his endorsement.

Constantine's most celebrated intervention in a Christian theological dispute was his attempt to solve the conflict pertaining to the Godhead. Arius, a popular clergyman of the most influential church in Alexandria, taught that there is one God the Father, the Son being separate and distinct from the Father. Since the Father imparted to him divine qualities, Jesus became a God, but remained inferior to the Supreme Being. He maintained that the other member of the Godhead, the Holy Spirit, is also inferior to the Father, and that the three separate and distinct Beings form the Trinity. Because there was a time when the Son did not exist, being created by the Father, Arius contended that Christ is not coexistent with the Supreme Being. Only the Father is eternal, he argued. Nevertheless, Christ, the Son, is the creator and ruler of the universe and therefore should be worshipped.

In Alexandria where Arius popularized his interpretation of the Godhead, Bishop Alexander contended that the Son is eternal and that the three Gods forming the Trinity are of one essence. This controversy over the Trinity became so bitter and widespread that Constantine determined to intervene in order to advance peace and unity in the church and prevent the possible eruption of political discord in the empire.

The Council of Nicaea—An Emperor's Attempt to Advance Unity

Consequently, Constantine declared that leaders of the Christian churches should convene at Nicaea, submitting invitations to this effect to the clergy. Since the deliberations were held in the eastern section of the Roman Empire where Arian Christianity was most popular, it is not surprising that the vast per cent of the men who assembled endorsed the views espoused by Arius. Hundreds of persons, clergy and lay members, gathered for this first ecumenical or universal council of the church, and about three hundred of this group were bishops. Although all of the thirteen provinces in the Empire, except Great Britain, were represented, the West actually sent less than eight representatives. Since the Bishop of Rome was too old to travel to Nicaea, he sent two presbyters to represent him. The controversial personalities from Alexandria were present, Arius and Alexander, Alexander bringing with him a secretary, a young deacon, Athanasius. There were even a few pagan philosophers present who presented their views before the cosmopolitan assembly.

After the bishops were seated according to rank, a heated discussion commenced. In the midst of bitter debates, Constantine arrived and officially opened the meeting. "When I was told," it is reported that he declared, "of the division amongst you, I was convinced that I ought not to attend to any business before this; and it is from the desire of being useful to you that I have convened you without delay; but I shall not believe my end to be attained until I have united the minds of all, until I see that peace and that union reign amongst you which you are commissioned as the anointed of the Lord to preach to others."

Constantine's Intervention

Immediately, the Roman emperor assumed the responsibility of serving as the head of the council, becoming an active participant. Since a majority of the religious leaders were Arians and because the emperor's sister Constantia was an avowed Arian, most bishops concluded that there would be little difficulty in securing an approval of the interpretations endorsed by Arius. However, after Arius presented his views, the minority, who believed in a Godhead of one essence, turned the deliberations into a mass of confusion, probably seizing the petition of Arius and tearing it to pieces. Eusebius of Caesarea then introduced a compromise based upon an old baptismal creed. This compromise was an ambiguous description of the Godhead, but was so indefinite that various groups could accept it by incorporating their interpretations into the creed. The Caesarean creed was then amended to contain a precise definition of God including that Christ was "begotten and not made," and was of "one essence with the Father." For some unexplained reason, Constantine decided to support this latter move which was a popular western interpretation of the Godhead. Although he probably was not converted to any particular concept of God at that time, he determined that this view would best promote the unity he desired and insisted that the delegates endorse the concept of "one essence." A Roman emperor, therefore, who had not been baptized and who did not claim any special revelation determined which of the conflicting views of God would become the official view of the church. Under Constantine's supervision the bishops were forced to sign the Nicene Creed; two who refused were banished along with Arius. The early New Testament program of apostles inspired by revelation had been replaced by secular influence and use of force. [^10]

The Verdict of Nicaea

The results of this gathering provided Christianity, Catholics and later Protestants, with a fundamental formula of the nature of God. The contemporary orthodox description of the nature of God, however, might have been a local creed or a creed formulated by the Council of Constantinople in 381. Although it replaced the genuine creed of Nicaea, the statement which expresses the verdict of Nicaea became universally accepted as the Nicene Creed: [^11]

We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things, both visible and invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father, only-begotten, that is, of the essence of the Father. God from God, Light from Light, very God from very God, begotten not made, of one essence with the Father, through whom all things came to be, both things in heaven and things on earth; Who for the sake of us men and for our salvation came down, and was made flesh, and became man, suffered, and rose on the third day, ascended into the heavens, is coming to judge living and dead; and in the one Holy Spirit.

Reaction Against the Decision of the Nicene Council

At the conclusion of the conference at Nicaea Constantine thought that a major issue had finally been settled, but within a few months, the emperor learned that the controversy over the nature of the Godhead continued among the Christians. The decision had been imposed upon the delegates and the Nicene Creed was unacceptable to the majority of the Christian leaders who had attended the conference. As the pressure of the emperor was released and as the members traveled to their homes, they gradually reacted against the verdict. Eusebius of Caesarea, Eusebius of Nicomedia and many other influential Christians were dissatisfied with the verdict. Some rationalists had accepted the creed with modifications, such as their resolving that one substance really meant similar or like substance. Within four decades, at least twelve councils of bishops were convened to again consider this problem. Some were held in the East; others in the West. Most of the councils held in the East rejected the Nicene Creed but most held in the West confirmed a belief in the basic views expressed in that document. Most of the councils wrote their own creeds so it is evident that the Council of Nicaea failed to establish during the reign of Constantine the uniformity of belief on the nature of God which he had so vigorously sought. [^12]

Athanasius, a native of Alexandria who succeeded Alexander as bishop in that town, emerged as the leading supporter of the Nicene concept of God. Favored by the policy handed down by Constantine that no one should attack the Nicene Creed Athanasius conscientiously waged war against the Arians. However, his opponents were too strong in number and were guided by too many capable figures.

Eventually, Eusebius of Nicomedia won a major influence in Constantine's court. Recognizing that the Nicene council had failed to restore uniformity by dogmatically accepting the views of a minority, Constantine decided to enforce a compromise that he thought might be interpreted by all major groups as an expression of their faith. Reversing his stand, the Roman Emperor advised Athanasius to restore Arius to power as a bishop in Alexandria. When Athanasius stubbornly refused the order, he was banished to Gaul. Finally, shortly before his death, Constantine was baptized by an Arian, Eusebius of Nicomedia. Although the Nicene Creed was never officially rejected by Constantine, it was greatly undermined by his actions, and at the death of the first Christian emperor it appeared as though the followers of Arius had triumphed over the disciples of Athanasius.

The Triumph of Trinitarian Christianity

Major controversies centered on the nature of God continued without interruption until the end of the fourth century. After decades of political and theological divisions in which verdicts failed to become permanent policies, Theodosius in 383 became sole and absolute emperor of the Roman Empire. Theodosius' name is associated with two great triumphs—the triumph of Christianity and of the Nicene faith. Whereas Constantine established toleration, granting Christianity a legal status, Theodosius declared that Christianity was to be the only legal religion in the empire. He ordered the pagans to discontinue offering sacrifices or burning incense. He forbade them to worship in their pagan temples. He closed many pagan houses of worship and destroyed others. Some of the temples were seized by the government and given to the Christians, thus transforming them into Christian meeting houses. Although heathen worship persisted, Theodosius was able to reduce paganism to a state from which it never emerged. The Christian persecution of the pagans was far more effective than had been the pagan persecution of the Christians. "Never in human history," concludes Kenneth Scott Latourette, "have ancient religions so deeply entrenched in the culture of a civilized people been eradicated so completely over so large an area." [^13]

Theodosius also attempted to be the sole arbitrator of the church by determining church policy and doctrines, including the condemnation of Arianism. In an attempt to reach a final and lasting decision on the nature of God, he convoked a council in 381 at Constantinople, in what became known as the Second Ecumenical Council held in the Christian church. The clergy at this deliberation condemned Arianism and adopted the Nicene concept that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are of one essence. After making the Nicene Creed the only legal creed describing the nature of God, Theodosius inaugurated a reign of terror among the Arians, forcing many to flee from Constantinople, a town where Arianism at one time had been the popular view. Although Arianism struggled through centuries of brutal oppression, this philosophy was finally and almost completely eradicated. Aided by pressure from the state, the Athanasian view became universally accepted by the Christians, and under the direction of a theocratic monarchy, Christianity became a world religion.

The Church and the Germanization of the Empire

The close alliance of church and state continued during the Germanization of the Roman Empire. With few exceptions, the German invaders of the fifth and sixth centuries infiltrated the empire without creating catastrophic changes. Before the migrations, most barbarians had learned to admire Roman culture, including the Roman religion; and, therefore, after changing their residency, the uprooted were readily assimilated into a higher civilization.

Early in the fifth century, the first Germanic kingdom was established by the Visigoths in Spain. Although Germans replaced Roman masters, the Roman element remained strong in that section of Western Europe. After an era of toleration, Christianity became the only legal religion in Spain; and, in the middle of the seventh century, Jews were told to discontinue celebrating religious festivals. By the end of the seventh century, Spanish Jews who failed to seek asylum in Africa were legally reduced to a state of slavery.

Another Roman-Germanic society emerged in Gaul. As in Spain, the Frankish conquerors submitted to the ascendancy of a highly organized church whose clergy were among the most intelligent and competent statesmen of that age. During the sixth century, Clovis, a barbarian who joined the Catholic church, conquered much of Gaul, establishing one family and one church as the ruling power of that domain. The Franks ruthlessly enforced conformity on the recalcitrant minorities. In all departments of administration the royal power was omnipresent and supreme. The absolutism of the monarchy prevailed over the church. Clovis summoned bishops to meet in councils and presented to them canons for their adoption. Among the provisions forced upon the clergy was the sole right of the king to permit laymen to enter the ranks of the clergy. Decisions of councils were not published nor effective without the king's approval. Clovis and other Merovingian kings also claimed the right of appointing, or, as in some cases, approving the appointment of bishops.

This sixth century Gallic church was not controlled nor directed by Rome nor did the pope (with few exceptions) attempt to exercise control over the Frankish church. The power of the archbishops also declined so that the local bishops, with royal sanction, had almost absolute power in their dioceses.

While the Germans were conquering lands in the West, the Romans in the East, under the leadership of Justinian, were regaining lands from the Germans. Yet, the relationship of the church and state was not altered appreciably during changes of administrators. Justinian's ecclesiastical policy was influenced by his insistence of royal absolutism, asserting that the ruler of the state was to be both Caesar and pope. This "Caesaropapistic" tendency is characterized by the motto "one state, one law, and one church." Recognizing the powerful influence of the church in the hands of the state, Justinian claimed the right of appointing clergy and dictating church dogma. Whatever religious tendency Justinian endorsed his subjects were required to follow.

Meanwhile, after Constantine transferred the capital of the Roman Empire to Constantinople, a political vacuum was created in Italy; and the pope emerged as a temporal leader. The pope became the biggest single proprietor in Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica, obtaining enormous acreage in these lands. His dominions were vast, his church became wealthy, and his political power became absolute. As governor, the pope and his chief priests maintained civil and criminal courts, executed the laws, commanded the militia, and erected schools, hospitals, and aqueducts. [^14]

The Proprietary Church

The unhealthy secular influence in the Medieval church is also evident by the rise of the "Eigenkirchentum" or Proprietary church, an institution arising from the assimilation of Roman and German cultures. Before the barbarian invasions, the independent Christian churches maintained legal organizations. Under Roman law, a community, church, or corporation possessed the right of owning property so that all the wealth of the local congregations was the property of the church. As a representative of the church, not as an individual or head of a family, the bishops acted as the proprietors of the church assets. Following the infiltration of the barbarians, Roman law was substituted, in some cases, with Germanic law. Germanic law and custom dictated that churches could and should be owned by individuals, and this policy was imposed upon the Christians. In the seventh century, the Frankish church succumbed to the innovation; and by the end of the eighth century, the "Eigenkirchentum" was almost universally established in England.

The proprietors of the churches emerged from the lay and ecclesiastical aristocracy. Many bishops became owners in a private capacity of churches which they built or received as inheritances. Abbots gained title to many monasteries and churches. In England, the majority of the owners were lay lords; and kings were the most active preemptors, gaining possession of more church property than any other individual. The income derived by the church—whether it be from tithes, offerings, or fees levied by priests for administering the sacraments—became the personal income of the proprietor. Moreover, the proprietors exchanged, sold, deeded, bequeathed, and divided their ecclesiastical property as they did other possessions. Although the Middle Ages is often referred to as an Age of Faith, kings, nobles, bishops, and abbots were as interested in economic gain as the businessmen of today. The foundation of churches became one of, if not, the most profitable investment of the early Middle Ages, and "innumerable churches were built as much from motives of speculation as of piety." [^15]

The rise of the Proprietary church had numerous debilitating effects on Christianity. An increased secular influence was exerted upon the church. Bishops of necessity turned for support and direction to their immediate temporal rulers rather than to councils, archbishops, or the pope. The founders of churches helped create canon law and assisted in the determination of ritual. Proprietors secured through canon and civil law the right of nominating clergy (including bishops) and appointed clergy for their churches. The bishop's power of examination, rejection, and substitution was reduced to a mere formality, disappearing and being explicitly renounced in some districts. [^16] The bond between bishop and priest tended to dissipate, while the bond between priest and lord became stronger. The quality of the clergy in some communities also declined, for the proprietors sometimes appointed their friends and relatives, regardless of their spiritual qualifications, to positions of ecclesiastical responsibility.

The "Eigenkirchentum" further impeded the development of central leadership in the church. In the early Middle Ages, the bishops became sovereign in their dioceses. Since the church was a federation of more or less sovereign episcopal congregations, there was practically no legal check on bishops' rights and powers. Some unifying direction emerged as councils were convoked and absolute emperors began dictating ecclesiastical policies in their kingdoms. But this direction waned as the power and privileges of the Medieval proprietors of the churches increased.

The Church During the Age of Feudalism

The unhealthy influence exerted by the secular authorities upon the church and the lack of central leadership within the church continued during the Age of Feudalism. In the ninth century, the power of the monarchs disintegrated; and at the same time, Western Europe suffered by the destructive Norsemen invasions. Out of the chaos and into a political vacuum emerged a new political and social structure. In Western Europe, the centralized governments were replaced by a system based on the power exercised by large land holders. During the political transformation, the churches became the fiefs or feudal estates of the lords of the manors. At the same time, because of increased warfare, defenseless subjects, including the clergy, sought alliances with military figures. Commendation was followed by homage, a public declaration of loyalty till death. The clergy then were required to take an oath of fidelity to feudal lords. In principle, the clergy and people reserved the right to elect bishops, but in practice the kings or lords sometimes refused to sanction the clergy's choice and appointed the incumbent. Since the church hierarchy maintained benefices as spiritual fiefs (a feudal estate) in return for military service, the higher clergy tended to become a military caste. Revenues from the churches flowed into the treasuries of the feudal aristocracy, many of whom dissipated their strength and wealth by constant fighting and maintenance of harems. Consequently, church lands, offices, tithes, and other assets became feudalized. The darkest era of the "Dark Ages" plagued mankind. Culture, education, and morals retrogressed. Monasteries gained a reputation as centers of vice where the rule of chastity was no longer strictly observed. Secular clergy married or lived with mistresses. The church could not seek direction from Rome for the papacy was also a victim of the nadir of public morals. The Holy See became the "puppet of a demoralized and truculent oligarchy," being reduced to its lowest depths of degradation during these centuries of spiritual darkness. [^17]

The Alliance of Church and State in the Holy Roman Empire

The secular influence upon the Medieval church is further evident by the alliance of the church and state which occurred in the Holy Roman Empire. In the tenth century, an ambitious German, Otto I, known as "Otto the Great," forced most of the dukes of Germany to recognize his leadership, defeated the Hungarians, and extended his authority to the Rhone. Then after crossing the Alps and subduing the Italians, Otto I was crowned emperor by the pope, creating what historians have illogically called the Holy Roman Empire. In 963, one year after Otto's coronation, the pope renounced the emperor. Infuriated, Otto returned to Italy, deposed the pope and procured the election of his secretary to the highest position in the Roman church. In addition to controlling partially the papacy, Otto's influence extended to the dioceses and monasteries. By his insisting that the right of nominating higher clergy was a prerogative of the emperor, Otto I selected most of the bishops and abbots who were ordained within his kingdom, thereby assuring that these influential leaders were his allies. Moreover, the emperor regarded the church as a department of state and church leaders were considered royal agents, who, like other state officials, were to perform submissively their assigned responsibilities. The bishops, who became influential administrators over large territories, not only took an oath of loyalty to the emperor, but provided the ruler with effective military assistance. Some Ottonian bishops lead their armies in the field of battle; and some of these ecclesiastical leaders, instead of being revered for their piety, gained a reputation based upon their military prowess. Although Otto secured the nomination of many competent individuals to the office of bishop and was responsible for a temporary improvement in the quality of church leaders, he usurped a power claimed by the church and established precedents which resulted in a degrading secularization of the Medieval church in the regions controlled by the Ottoman emperors.

The Relationship of Church and State in the Middle Ages

During the first half of the Middle Ages, the concept of the freedom of the church did not mean separation of church and state. Both the church and state regarded itself as the supreme body in society. The state supported religious uniformity by removing heretics. It disapproved any attempt on the part of the church to restrict its activities, claiming leadership of the church and a prerogative to fix dogma. Meanwhile, the church reminded the rulers that their sovereignty was an office, that they were servants of the church. Rulers were obliged to obey the moral codes and endorse the doctrines of the church. Heresy of even the most absolute kings was a ground for excommunication. Actually, there were periods when more powerful clergy exerted great influence over the state, and there were other eras in which rulers dictated arbitrarily to the church.

In summary, the Medieval church was governed and it governed. Temporal leaders in the Middle Ages summoned, presided over councils, and dictated the agenda, thereby partially assisting in determining church dogma, ritual, and administration. Men who did not claim any divine guidance approved the appointment of clergy, including bishops, and founded churches, monasteries, and bishoprics. At the same time, religious leaders served as influential advisors of the kings, sometimes controlled local governing bodies, and exerted a strong influence on the central government. The state aided the church in Christianizing the population, and the church assisted the state in administering the law.

VI. From Diversity to a Standardized Theology

In addition to the lack of inspired, authoritarian leadership in the church and the unhealthy secular influence exerted upon the church, another characteristic of Medieval Christianity indicating the reality and nature of the apostasy, was the striking diversity of belief and practice which persisted. Since the assimilation of the doctrines of Christ with the philosophies of men produced various Christian sects in the Roman Empire, the Medieval church emerged from a heterogeneous foundation. After the central leadership of apostles and prophets was replaced by the control of numerous bishops, local religious diversity multiplied. Although the disciples taught "One Lord, one faith, one baptism," the content and expression of men's faith continued to vary from community to community. "The history of Catholic Christianity during the first centuries," observed church historian, Burnett H. Streeter, "is the history of a progressive standardization of a diversity which had its origin in the Apostolic age." [^18] Moreover, the direction given by emperors, councils, and higher clergy was replaced by the influence of countless proprietors of churches and feudal lords who were unable to advance uniformity. The decay of the Roman empire and the consolidation of the Germanic states in Europe truly loosened a growing cohesion of the Medieval church. Then when feudalism was replaced by the rise of national states, a strong feeling of the independence of the national churches and their close connection with the state developed in each country. [^19] Medieval Christianity, therefore, consisted of divergent aspects of religion, including various theological systems, conflicting practices in administering the sacraments, and local variations of belief in the number of practices that should be classified as sacraments.

The Schism Between the Eastern and Western Church

While religious diversity prevailed for centuries in the Medieval church without a major rupture, in 1054 the church split into two communities. The background for this schism had been laid by the growing cultural and political differences that divided the East and the West. Conflicting religious beliefs and practices widened the breech. The Greek church permitted the lower clergy to marry; offered both emblems of the Lord's Supper, the bread and wine, to laymen; and rejected the increasing papal claims of universal authority and supervision. The doctrinal dispute that eventually provided the occasion for the final rupture was the conflict over the dogma of the procession of the Holy Ghost. Most Catholics living in the West held that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father and the Son. The patriarch of Constantinople, Michael Cerularius, concluded that the addition of the words "and the Son" to the Nicene Creed was heresy. Eventually, the pope of Rome, Leo IX, insisted that easterners endorse the western interpretation of this doctrine. When Leo IX recognized that Michael Cerularius would not submit to his demands and claim of authority, the pope anathematized the patriarch. The patriarch responded by excommunicating the pope. After the communion had been broken, the eastern church adopted the name Orthodox, meaning "true belief," and the Roman church replied with the word Catholic, meaning "universal."

Forces of Unification

Another striking feature of the Medieval church is that a semblance of unity in organization, creeds, and ritual emerged in the western church amidst the theological and ritualistic pluralism. [^20] There were four main unifying factors which, although failing to create explicit unity, acted as cohesive elements and served as the sources for Roman Catholic doctrine—the scriptures, the writings of church fathers, the decision of general councils, and the decrees of popes. [^21]

The Scriptures

After the Old Testament was inherited by the Christians from Judaism, by common consent and usage, the books comprising the New Testament were combined. As early as the end of the second century, a collection of writings embracing a majority of the books of the New Testament was being employed by Christians. Some of the works were immediately recognized as scripture, such as the first three gospels; others received tardy acknowledgment. In 367, the first list of what embraces our present New Testament was inserted in a letter written by Athanasius. After the canonical books of the Old and New Testament finally had been approved, Jerome (340-420), one of the most influential Latin Fathers of the church, traveled to Palestine, learned Hebrew, and translated most of the Old Testament from ancient Hebrew manuscripts, preserving much of the language and spirit of the originals. As the centuries passed, the Vulgate became the Bible of Europe and the most influential book of the Middle Ages.

Although the Bible served as a powerful crystallizing force, the scriptures did not produce uniformity in the Medieval church. The scriptures were silent or not explicit on many issues of belief and practice. Moreover, the Vulgate was not infallible, for Jerome employed manuscripts containing conflicting variations and corrupting changes. Then, as the years passed, this version suffered perverting alterations. In the early Middle Ages, the Bible circulated not as one volume but as separate books. Scribes copying from different versions of the Vulgate continued to commit errors, multiplying the versions of the Vulgate. Careless scribes omitted words, incompetent translators rendered improper meanings and unscrupulous clergy revised phrases to alter or clarify a teaching in order that it might harmonize with their theology.

There were periods when efforts were made to restore the purity of the original version of the Vulgate. As late as 1546, the Council of Trent ordered the publication of an official text, and under the direction of Pope Sixtus V, a work was issued in 1590 as "the true," "lawful," and "authentic" version. Although Pope Sixtus forbade anyone to issue another text, scholars soon recognized the mistakes in this Bible, and after Pope Clement issued another official translation, it contained about 3,000 differences from the preceding "authentic" version. Today, Catholic scholars are undecided on the exact text of the Vulgate. Therefore, since Bibles contained mistranslations, omissions and other corrupting changes and were the source for doctrines proclaimed by councils, church fathers, popes, and patriarchs, these groups issued incorrect and conflicting teachings.

The Church Fathers

A second source stimulating uniformity and serving as a basis for Catholic dogma is the writings of the "Fathers of the Church." Although the Council of Trent defined scripture and tradition as the source of doctrine for the church, tradition has classified one group of authors as preeminent interpreters of the Bible and customs of the church. The immediate successors of the apostles, the "Apostolic Fathers," including Clement, Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Origen, and Tertullian, provide practically the only source of non-scriptural writings on the history of Christianity during the first century and a half. Although not one of these authors supply us with a systematic treatise of the beliefs and polity of the New Testament Church, they described some of the Christian doctrines and certain aspects of ecclesiastical government. Other subsequent authors of the early centuries of Christianity eventually gained recognition as "Fathers of the Church," such as Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, and Athanasius. Although by their interpretations of the scriptures, these men helped formulate the beliefs of the Medieval church, they issued conflicting teachings. Some of these early Christians specified that faith and repentance must precede baptism in order to obtain a remission of one's sins. Others contended that since children inherited the sin of Adam, infants should be baptized to cleanse them of the original sin. One group of fathers wrote that immersion was the proper mode of baptism, while others insisted that sprinkling and pouring were permissible. Some believed that when they partook of the Lord's Supper they were eating the emblems in remembrance of the body and blood of Christ, while others argued that the emblems were literally changed and became the very body and blood of the Savior. Some emphasized man's free will. Others declared that the original sin resulted in the corruption of all men, but that God selected a few to be saved, granting to these elected souls the power to do good, thereby absolutely affixing their salvation.

One of the most audacious Medieval philosophers who dared expose the diversity of belief among the church fathers was Peter Abelard, a twelfth century teacher in Paris. In his most celebrated work, Sic et Non (Yes and No), Abelard introduced a series of current theological issues followed by the opinions of the church fathers on these subjects. In order to stimulate independent thinking, this critic included in his work blatant contradictions of the authorities and made no attempt to reconcile the differences. Eventually, Abelard was condemned by an ecclesiastical tribunal. Many of his books were burned; and following his excommunication, he secured refuge in a monastery.

After Abelard's condemnation, one of the students of this influential professor, Peter Lombard, attempted to reconcile the divergent teachings of the church fathers. When reconciliation was impossible, Lombard attempted to determine which of the conflicting views should be regarded as orthodox. In a work entitled Sentences, Lombard followed the procedure which had been employed in Sic et Non, but organized the quotations into a semi-systematic treatise without the apparent appearance of contradictions. This and similar ensuing treatises, however, met with mixed approval and opposition. As in the case of the early councils, only those teachings which the fathers advocated that coincided with what became the orthodox pattern of belief and ritual were eventually recognized as correct doctrines.

The Ecumenical Councils

Throughout the Middle Ages councils were convoked to settle thorny theological issues, thereby stimulating some unity in the church. The precedent for settling disputes by assembling, discussing, and seeking divine guidance had been set by the apostles. After the disciples proclaimed the gospel to the Gentiles, the observance of the Mosaic law presented the problem, should the new non-Jewish converts observe the Mosaic law? Gathering at Jerusalem to determine the issue, the apostles sought divine guidance, and obtained a unified negative confirmation by the Holy Ghost (Acts 15). In the second century, after the death of the apostles, the early Christians began holding synods and councils to settle disputes, but their discussions were not accompanied by the presence of the Holy Ghost, unanimity not being achieved. Since their decisions were not regarded as authoritarian or binding upon the people, they were unfolded to the Christians as resolutions. Increased prestige was given to the councils when the bishops assembled, but it was not until the fourth century that the post-Apostolic councils became sovereign bodies. [^22] When Constantine intervened in Christian affairs, he inaugurated the practice of convoking councils to formulate rules and dogmas which were to be binding upon the Christians. The policy was established that only those councils containing representatives from the whole church could issue dogma for the entire church. Many general councils, however, were convoked and many conflicting decisions were decreed. The problem arose, who was to determine if the council truly was a representative body of the church and if the assembly's decision was confirmed by the Holy Ghost?

Currently the canon law of the Roman Catholic church stipulates that an ecumenical council possesses supreme power of the whole church only when "convoked, presided over, and confirmed by the Roman Pontiff, to whom is reserved also the right to judge as to the universality of the council." "Conciliar decrees have no obligatory force unless they are confirmed by the Roman Pontiff and promulgated by his command." Canon law further decrees that if the pope dies while the council is in session, the meeting is dissolved until reconvened by a new pope. [^23]

In contrast to contemporary laws of the Roman Catholic church, Medieval Byzantine law and policies of many western emperors stipulated that the general council was solely the emperor's concern, a privilege that had been his since the days of Constantine when the First Ecumenical Council was held. The emperors, not the pope, presided over the sessions of all the early ecumenical councils, determined the agenda, and claimed the right of sanctioning the decisions. Not until the power of the political leaders declined in the West were the popes in a position to convene and regulate their own councils, and even then there were periods of political strife, during which time the pope was prevented from summoning general councils. [^24]

Not one of the early councils was ecumenical in the sense that the assembly was a representative group from all of Christendom. In principle, representatives from all or at least a vast majority of the dioceses should be invited to the general council, but only about four bishops from the West were present at the First Council of Nicaea. The Second Ecumenical Council held in Constantinople consisted of a few eastern bishops who met without the pope's knowledge, and almost all the representatives at Ephesus (431) and Chalcedon (451) were from the East. After the first eight were held in Eastern Europe or Asia Minor, all other general councils were held in Western Europe, in Italy, France, and Germany. The overwhelming majority of the bishops who attended these later meetings were from the West. [^25]

Although another essential feature of an ecumenical council is the special manifestation of the Holy Spirit, many of the general councils were not only accompanied by secular interference, but by lobbying, organization of effective pressure groups, and scenes of disorder, all of which are deviations from the pattern set by the apostles who assembled at Jerusalem. On occasions, embittered controversies led to persecution and condemnation of the opponents of the decision who refused to endorse the council's decrees.

There were also conflicting decisions registered by various gatherings of bishops, as is evident during the iconoclastic controversy. When possible, there were early Christians who decorated their homes, churches, and cemeteries with religious paintings, but the vast majority would not tolerate statues, for sculptured images were reminiscent of pagan idols. Among the early Christians there were no images possessing miraculous powers, no pilgrimages to images, and no veneration of images. As half-converted pagans joined the Christian ranks, however, the devotion they had rendered to Goddess Diana of the Ephesians and other such pagan idols was readily transferred to the veneration of Mary and leaders of the Christian church. After a few Christians adopted the practice of venerating images in the fourth century, controversies commenced. By the sixth century, the practice was universal in the East and was becoming popular in the West. Nevertheless, there were emperors who opposed the innovation. In 726, Leo, a Byzantine, issued his first edict against images, ordering their destruction. Widespread revolts and controversies followed. Finally, Empress Irene convoked a council to reestablish the veneration of images. After the bishops first assembled at Constantinople in 786, the higher clergy reassembled in Nicaea in 787 in a conference that became known as the Seventh Ecumenical Council or Second General Council of Nicaea. Pope Hadrian I was represented by two legates empowered merely to inquire into the necessity for an ecumenical council. The last sessions were held in Constantinople, the Empress Irene presiding and then signing the profession of faith. Approved by this assembly was the use of icons, "for the honour rendered to the image passes to that which the image represents, and whoever adores an image adores the person it depicts." Individuals who proclaimed a doctrine contrary to this view were to be excommunicated. The fathers of this ecumenical council did not ask Pope Hadrian to confirm the decrees, and although he favored the view espoused, the pope did not issue an endorsement. [^26]

The issue, however, was still not resolved. In the East, the iconoclastic Emperor Leo V (813-820) convoked another council which condemned the decision registered at Nicaea and promptly persecuted the defenders of the veneration of relics. Leo V was followed by other emperors who favored the decision of Nicaea. Finally, in 843 a Byzantine council rendered a verdict which brought the virtual defeat of iconoclasm.

In the West the triumph of the veneration of relics was not forthcoming. Charlemagne's scholars were greatly disturbed by the decree of Nicaea. By the king's command, they prepared a lengthy systematic refutation of the council's decisions—the Caroline Books. Images should not receive the veneration due to living persons, critics wrote. Nor should Christians burn candles or incense before images. Christ and his disciples forbade such veneration. This state paper also denied the ecumenical authority of the council of 787, complaining that it was convoked by a woman and presided over by her. Another council met at Frankfurt in the summer of 794. In attendance were more representatives than had assembled at Nicaea. Not since the exceptionally large gathering at Chalcedon, three hundred years earlier, had there been such an imposing assembly. These Latin bishops condemned the doctrine that images were lawful and the proper object of admiration. They not only denied the ecumenical nature of the Nicaean assembly but declared that the decision which had been registered there encouraged heretical notions. In all respects, the council of Frankfurt was as ecumenical as the first eight general councils. Papal legates attended, endorsed the condemnation, and were not chastized by the pope. Since it would have been imprudent for Pope Hadrian to challenge or condemn the action of an assembly directed by the autocratic Emperor Charlemagne, the Roman Pontiff tactfully remained silent, not repudiating the action of the Council of Frankfurt nor uttering an approval of the Council of Nicaea. After the disintegration of the Carolinian Empire, the decision of Frankfurt was reversed, but it wasn't until the eleventh century that the Christians of Northern Europe acknowledged the ecumenical nature of the Second General Council of Nicaea. [^27]

Tardy recognition was further given to the Eighth General Council. More than two centuries passed before this assembly gained recognition as being ecumenical. When the utility of its disciplinary decrees coincided with the prevailing view in the church, the ecclesiastical leaders proclaimed the authoritarian nature of the assembly. [^28]

It is evident that not one of the first eight general councils conform with the current definitions of the essential characteristics of an ecumenical council. Not one of these councils were convoked, presided over, and confirmed by the pope. Except for the influence exerted by Pope Leo I on the pronouncement issued from the Council of Chalcedon, the early ecumenical councils were politically controlled by the emperors.

Moreover, the composition, the temporal direction, and procedure of these gatherings and the conflicting decisions registered by the assembly of bishops is evidence of a departure from the precedent set by the apostles. It is not surprising that from the fourth to the seventh centuries there was no general agreement as to which councils were ecumenical. Eventually, those councils whose decisions harmonized with what became accepted dogma gained recognition as general councils. [^29]

Decisions of the Councils

Nevertheless, the ecumenical councils promoted a semblance of uniformity of belief in the Medieval church. The first two general councils defined the nature of God as Three Beings, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of one essence. When the problem of the nature of Christ emerged, four ecumenical councils were convoked to resolve this issue. After each of these four general councils were held, various interpretations of their decisions were registered, necessitating the further clarification of the problem and the summoning of another group of bishops. These councils rejected the view that there must have been two distinct persons in Christ, the human and the divine. By concluding that Christ was born of the "Mother of God" and not that Mary was the "Mother of Christ," it was argued that the heretical tendency of making Christ two persons could be lessened. As stated in the equivocal creed of Chalcedon:

We, then . . . teach men to confess one and the same Son, our Lord Jesus Christ . . . consubstantial with the Father; . . . begotten before all ages of the Father . . . born of the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, according to the manhood, . . . Only-begotten, in two natures, inconfusedly, unchangeably, indivisibly, inseparably, the distinction of natures being by no means taken away by the union, but rather the property of each nature being preserved . . . not parted or divided into two persons, but one and the same Son and Only-begotten.

After six general councils finally established a norm of belief in regards to the Trinity and Christology, the Seventh Ecumenical Council approved the adoration of relics and the Eighth issued disciplinary decrees.

In 1123 a new series of general councils were inaugurated. All the remaining Medieval ecumenical councils were held in the West and were summoned not by the emperors but by the pope. The western bishops at first assembled primarily to reform the church by defining proper discipline, such as condemning pluralism and marriage of the priest, and forbidding laymen to possess benefices or tithes. Although these early western general councils seldom defined doctrine, the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215 declared transubstantiation an article of faith and required annual confession and communion of all members. At the end of the Middle Ages the Seventeenth General Council of Basel-Ferrara-Florence (held between 1431 and about 1445) concluded that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and Son and that purgatory exists, thereby resolving two more age-old controversies.

The most fruitful ecumenical council in issuing dogmatic definitions was the Council of Trent. In light of the charges leveled against the Catholics by Protestant reformers, many Roman Catholic leaders recognized the need of creating a more unified body of doctrine. Therefore, the pope convoked a general council, consisting primarily of Italian and Spanish clergy. Sporadically, for eighteen years (1545-1563), in three major sessions, prelates met in the Austrian city of Trent and in Bologna, defining doctrines of the church and formulating rules of reform.

After three centuries elapsed without a decision being registered by a general council, the pope summoned the higher clergy to Rome; and in 1869-70 the First General Council of the Vatican was held. At this gathering the subject of the nature of the papacy was freely debated. Only a few bishops denied papal infallibility. Recognizing the inevitable results of the conference, most of the outspoken critics returned to their dioceses and a large majority of the bishops voted in favor of definitions regarding revelation, papal primacy, and the infallibility of the pope. At this Twentieth Ecumenical Council, the church leaders declared that since the pope was invested with apostolic authority, when he spoke as an officer in the church and defined doctrine regarding faith and morals, he possessed an infallible power.

Another century elapsed between the convoking of the Twentieth and the Twenty-First Ecumenical Council. When the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council opened in Rome on October 11, 1962, approximately 2,800 Catholic and Protestant leaders were on hand. Pope John XXIII explained the purpose of the gathering by saying that "through the methods of research and through the literary forms of modern thought," the church should take a "step forward toward a doctrinal penetration and a formation of consciences in faithful and perfect conformity to the authentic doctrine." Since this announcement was interpreted by many Catholics as an invitation to update the life and thought of Roman Catholicism, numerous suggestions were introduced for the reforming of the church at all levels—administrative, theological, liturgical, canonical, and spiritual.

Before the work of the delegates had been completed, John XXIII died. A few days later, a new pope was elected who adopted the name of Paul. One of the first decisions of Paul VI was to support a continuation of the general council.

The reform spirit of the members of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council was demonstrated by the preparation of a comprehensive decree on the liturgy which received papal sanction. The council, for example, approved the use of the vernacular in the administration of the sacraments and in the public portions of the Mass. The impact of this decree was clearly visible when Roman Catholics gathered in St. Louis at the Kiel Auditorium in August, 1964, and for the first time witnessed a Mass in which English was used during a large portion of the celebration. During most of the ceremony, the priest who was celebrating the Mass faced the congregation, instead of the altar. For the first time, Protestant hymns were also sung during this Catholic sacrament. Laymen touched the bread that was served as the "Host" before receiving it from the priest; and the bread served communicants was in the form of whole wheat biscuits, rather than the traditional pure-white wafers. A few months later, on November 29, the English version of the Mass was adopted throughout the United States.

The Papacy

The fourth centralizing force which eventually became the primary source in the unification of Roman Catholic beliefs and practices was the papacy. Prior to the fifth century, there is no evidence that any bishop of Rome had risen to a position of commanding importance. Some Roman bishops assumed central leadership and occasionally such leadership was recognized by other church officials and groups in the Roman Empire, but such direction was sporadic and weak. Moreover, there are records indicating that powerful bishops residing outside Italy employed the same type of moral persuasion to stimulate unity as did the early bishops of Rome. After the transfer of the Roman capital to Constantinople, the West was deprived of political leadership and, as previously mentioned, the bishop of Rome emerged as the civil and ecclesiastical ruler. In the fifth century, under the direction of Leo I (440-461), the policy was established that the bishop of Rome was the successor of Peter, obtaining the authority possessed by that chief Apostle; and at the Council of Chalcedon (451), the legates of the pope secured recognition of papal primacy. Nevertheless, because of the strength of the absolute emperors and feudal lords, there were long periods during the Middle Ages when the pope's influence was confined to sections of Italy. After the tenth century debasement of the papacy and after the early feudal centuries of moral degeneracy, the papacy emerged to supply the church with central leadership. Freeing themselves from secular control, the church achieved a new independence. At the Concordat of Worms (1122) the church regained the right to choose its officials, obtaining a temporary recognition of its ascendancy over secular powers.

While Innocent III was pope (1198-1216), the bishop of Rome exercised greater authority than that achieved by any predecessor. Devoid of formidable political antagonists, Innocent III dictated to kings in Germany, France, and England. Summoning armies into the field, he channeled the crusading spirit to ferret out what he considered heresy. Assuming the title, "Vicar of Christ," he united the monastic orders under his control. He claimed and exercised the right to investigate the election of all clergy, to correct irregularities, and to depose higher clergy and transfer them from their sees. Innocent III also extended his influence into the universities; and after investing his representatives, the "missi," with his authority, he invaded the local churches, correcting abuses and thereby establishing an effective instrument of centralization.

Although the papacy exercised its greatest influence in the Middle Ages during the thirteenth century, the unity which was achieved was marred by the papal schisms of the fourteenth century and by the reappearance of powerful monarchs who attempted to inaugurate a new caesaropapism. Gradually, in the fifteenth century, the papal schisms were healed, and the papacy again began to reassert itself, but unity was interrupted by the moral laxity and conspicuous worldliness and corruption of popes and cardinals. When the Reformation shattered the crystallization of Christianity, the Catholics responded by inaugurating their own reformation, the pope convoking the most productive ecumenical council at Trent. The papacy reformed, and a group of ambitious, talented, and conscientious leaders began directing the affairs of the church, enforcing the decisions of Trent and establishing the greatest unity the Catholic church had achieved. After papal primacy and infallibility were officially endorsed by the First General Council of the Vatican, the practice was set that doctrine should be defined by the sole authority of the pope. Consequently, the only source today of doctrine or laws which are binding upon the Roman Catholics as a whole are the papal bulls, or the decrees or the decisions of ecumenical councils or other bodies which have the official sanction of the pope. [^30]

Growth of Canon Law

The history of the unification of Roman Catholic theology is also seen by a study of the growth of canon law. Sporadically during the Middle Ages, scholars selected and recorded specific teachings from the scriptures, the writings of church fathers, the decisions of councils, and the decrees of popes. After this information was adopted by a group of church leaders, the work became the general law of the church for a particular region. As early as the sixth century, Dionysius Exiguus formulated a code which became authoritative in many areas. During the same era, Pope Adrian I (772-795) sent an official collection, the Hadriana, to Charlemagne which became a popular guide in the Carolingian Empire. Another code became popular in the ninth century in Spain, known as the Pseudo-Isidorian collection. Many other local collections were formulated in the eighth and ninth centuries which served as guides for belief and conduct. However, since the collections of canon law were based on conflicting teachings, they all differed. A solution to the problem of creating a systematized canon law for the entire church was undertaken by many theologians. About 1140, Gratian, a conscientious monk, compiled a code to be employed as a textbook for the universities, called the Decretum. After its approval by the pope its influence spread. Other codes followed, containing corrections and revisions of earlier collections. Finally in 1582, another official version was published which remained unchanged until 1918. [^31]

Consequently, after the eleventh century, the crystallization of Medieval theology and ritual commenced. Select teachings of the fathers obtained a new authority through the writings of scholars such as Peter Lombard; the ecumenical councils, by defining proper discipline and declaring dogma, settled thorny problems which had plagued Christians for centuries; the popes obtained a new influence; canon law was created; and modern Roman Catholicism was born.

VII. Beliefs of Modern Roman Catholicism

Concept of God

Although diversity of ritual and practice has continued in the modern Roman Catholic church and a wide latitude of belief is permitted in some regions where Catholicism has been feebly superimposed over paganistic religions, educated Catholics agree on many fundamental principles. Catholics are monotheists, believing in only one God. They are also Trinitarian, insisting that in the Godhead there are three persons of one substance, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. God, they profess, is a pure spirit, meaning a non-material being without a body or without being subjected to material limitations. God, they add, is omniscient, omnipresent, and omnipotent and is the Creator who has produced everything out of nothing.

Although Catholics agree that God knows everything, including the acts of every man, they disagree on whether or not God has decreed the actions of men. The Dominican School teaches that men sometime act on the decrees of God. God, they argue, has decreed all things from the beginning and moves man's free will so that man cooperates with him. In the case of righteous acts, there is a connection between the motion given by God and the consent of man's will, but when individuals perform unrighteous acts, Dominicans reason, God knows that man will sin and withholds his influence. Some Catholics who disagree with the Dominicans ask the question, "If God has issued a predetermined decree, how can the will act independently?" Denying the concept of decree, most Catholics endorse the Jesuit school of thought. God, according to the Jesuits, knows what man will do, not because he has decreed the event, but because he has the knowledge to predict man's actions accurately. And when Catholics say they believe in predestination, they mean that God infallibly foresees and preordains all future events, including the final fate of all men. [^32]

As Catholics continue to unfold the mystery of the Trinity, they explain that Jesus is true God, was begotten not made, being born of the Father before all ages. The Savior was made man, invested with bodily form by the Holy Ghost and the Virgin Mary. He came to earth to provide for the salvation of all men, suffered, was crucified and buried, and rose again on the third day, after which he ascended to heaven. Eventually, they declare, Christ will return in glory to judge the living and the dead. [^33]

Sources of Religious Truth

At the Council of Trent, church leaders clearly described the modern Roman Catholic position regarding the sources of religious truth. The prelates at this ecumenical council unitedly rejected the popular Protestant view that the Bible was the sole norm of faith, insisting that the doctrines of the church were founded upon scriptures and tradition. They acknowledged the Vulgate as the only authorized version of the Bible and denied personal or individual interpretation of the Word of God, reserving for the church the right of Biblical interpretation. [^34]

According to Roman Catholics, tradition is the word of God not recorded in the scriptures and is a proper interpretation of the messages of the Bible. Since Catholics insist that the fulness of the gospel was revealed by Christ to the apostles, they reason that no information will be unfolded that was not understood by the early Christian leaders. Moreover, Catholics state that the pope does not uncover that which was unknown to the apostles, but the Roman pontiff possesses the authority to describe accurately the teachings of Christ as unfolded in the meridian of time.

Attitude Toward the Fall and Atonement

The decisions made at the Council of Trent regarding the Fall, original sin, atonement, and justification have also remained the orthodox Roman Catholic position on these doctrines. Catholics maintain that the first man, Adam, rebelled against God's commandment, thereby incurring the wrath and indignation of God. Because Adam was defiled by the sin of disobedience, they assert that all men suffer a two-fold consequence—Adam's posterity inherit the original sin and suffer death. After agreeing that the transgression of Adam was infused in all his posterity, Catholics contend that this imputed sin can be removed by Christ. But they deny a popular Protestant view that justification is solely through faith, meaning that nothing else is required. Justification, Catholics declare, is the product of faith and works. When orthodox Catholic theologians advocate that justification is a gift of God, they define the process of salvation by insisting that man's free will is moved and aroused by God and cooperates in preparing itself to receive God's grace. After Christ reconciled us to God, Roman Catholics conclude, the merit of the atonement is applied to adults and infants by the sacrament of baptism properly administered. [^35]

Life Beyond the Grave

In light of the most popular Protestant beliefs of twentieth century America, one of the most peculiar aspects of Catholic theology is the concept of life after death. Roman Catholics teach that immediately after death men are judged by God in what is known as the "particular judgment," after which the spirit (or soul as they usually state) goes to one of four places: heaven, purgatory, limbo, or hell. Heaven is regarded as a place where men enjoy eternal bliss, live in the presence of God, and see God, experiencing the beatific vision. According to members of this church, purgatory is a place or state of cleansing where the soul is punished in preparation for entrance into heaven. Only individuals who are assigned to heaven will suffer purgatorial punishment, and only a few individuals, such as Mary have bypassed purgatory en route to eternal life. Catholics generally believe that purgatorial punishment is more severe than men can endure in life, being almost as horrible as the everlasting pain men endure in hell. Eventually, Catholics reason, purgatory will no longer exist. They conclude that after the last or "general judgment" when men are resurrected with a perfect body, individuals who have not been released from purgatory will be doomed to hell.

Roman Catholics further believe that while on earth individuals can secure a reduction of the period in which they and their loved ones are assigned to purgatory. Although they claim that individuals secure a remission of sins through the sacraments of baptism and penance, they believe that men must pay a penalty in purgatory for all sins committed on earth. Some saints, Catholics teach, have entered heaven with a surplus of good deeds, which have been placed in a spiritual treasury (sometimes called the Treasury of Merits), and these credits can be transferred by the authority of the church to aid sinners. This transfer of credit or the commutation of temporal punishment due to sin is called an indulgence. In other words, indulgences are procured by men on earth to reduce the period in which men suffer in purgatory; and since the Catholics teach that the church leaders have authority to designate the term in which the punishment can be reduced, indulgences vary in value, the specific value being designated on the indulgence in years and days. Since Catholics believe there is no special time element in the hereafter, the years listed on the indulgences refer to the period individuals would have to perform penance on earth to receive satisfaction for the sins they have committed. Toward the end of the fifteenth century, a pope declared that the efficacy of indulgences extended to purgatory for the living and the dead; but the church has never taught that men on earth know the duration of purgatorial punishment. Therefore, Catholics believe that there is a safety or insurance feature in obtaining as many indulgences as possible. Catholics further believe that when the priests perform masses for the dead they help the souls in purgatory.

Although most Catholics believe that limbo is a place reserved for individuals who die without receiving a remission of the original sin, the Roman Catholic church has never established this concept as an official doctrine. Nevertheless, many Catholics hold that unbaptized infants, Old Testament prophets, and others who do not deserve a sentence to everlasting punishment in hell will go to limbo. Some Catholic theologians also maintain that when baptism of water becomes a physical or moral impossibility, eternal life may be obtained by a "baptism of desire," a special baptism initiated by God that enables the righteous of all ages to receive God's grace. [^36]

The Seven Sacraments

Since the fifteenth century when the Council of Florence determined the official position of the church regarding the number of sacraments, Roman Catholics have held that there are seven sacraments or outward signs in which the grace of God is dispensed to man. Baptism is regarded as one of the most important ordinances in the church. Baptism, Catholics declare, cleanses man of the guilt of the original sin and washes away all individual sins, regenerating the recipient with grace for his entire life. A third purpose of this sacrament in the views of the Catholics is to prepare individuals for entrance into the church. When describing the mode of baptism, modern-day Catholics teach that the ordinance is performed when water is placed on the candidate's head while the priest says, "I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost."

Since Catholics conclude that baptism is necessary for salvation, they emphasize that infants should be baptized and that in cases of emergency anyone can perform the ordinance, a Protestant minister, a layman, or an atheist. They further teach that in the event of premature birth, the fetus, no matter how small nor what its state of development, must also be baptized. Since they claim that no one knows the exact moment real death occurs (meaning the separation of the soul or spirit from the body), baptism can be performed several hours after the cessation of heart action, but prior to the general decomposition of the body. If no signs of life are visible in the person who is to be baptized, the individual performing the ordinance is instructed to insert at the beginning of the prayer the following words: "If you are capable of being baptized."

A sacrament designed to increase the grace of God planted in man during baptism is confirmation. The delegates at the Council of Trent contended that confirmation could immediately follow baptism, but suggested postponing the ordinance until the candidate was seven years of age. As the years passed, the age of twelve became the age when the sacrament of the Holy Ghost was usually extended to the worthy members. Although Catholics believe that this ordinance should be performed by a bishop, in cases of emergencies, confirmation can be administered by a priest.

Recognizing that men sin after receiving the sacraments of baptism and confirmation, Catholics offer the membership of the church the sacrament of penance that enables individuals to receive periodically a remission of sins. Before individuals receive this absolution, Catholics teach that contrition (which consists of a sorrow of mind, hatred of sin, abstention from sin, and resolution not to sin in the future), confession to priests, and satisfaction as specified by the priests must occur. Members are instructed to confess at least once a year, and frequent confession is recommended. Today, confessions usually take place in a confessional, a small booth located in the Catholic cathedrals. The booth consists of two compartments, one for the confessor and the other for the priest. A person need not confess to his own pastor, and the priests are required not to divulge any information which has been unfolded to them. By complying with this sacrament. Catholics sincerely believe that the priest has the authority to absolve individuals from venial sins. Priests do not claim, however, power to remit more serious sins, called mortal sins (the sins of blasphemy against God).

One of the most sacred sacraments is the Lord's Supper which is offered to the members of the church during the climax of the Mass. The Mass includes the offering of many prayers, the giving of many blessings, the reading of scriptures, and frequently the preaching of a sermon. During this ceremony which greatly varies in length and ritual, Catholics believe that Christ is literally re-crucified on the altar. During this unbloody sacrifice, Catholics soberly declare, the Savior makes the same sacrifice he performed on the cross. Although they teach that the Savior does not die a second death, they conclude that he repeatedly satisfies God's justice by taking upon himself the sins of mankind. Moreover, Catholics insist that after this re-crucifixion, the priests transubstantiate the prepared wafers into the actual body and blood of Christ, after which Christ is distributed to the membership of the church. Members are bound to receive the communion during the Easter season and when in danger of death are urged to partake frequently the body and blood of Christ.

Another sacrament, extreme unction, prepares men for death and assists the afflicted receive the healing influence of God. The delegates at the Council of Trent declared that the anointing of the body with oil by the bishops was to be given only to the dying, but church leaders today have extended this sacrament to the afflicted who are not on the verge of death, thereby replacing the sacrament of last rites with the sacrament of anointing with oil.

Two of the sacraments are not intended for all members of the church—holy orders and marriage. Holy orders is the ordination of the clergy which is administered by the bishop; and proper marriage, according to Roman Catholics, is a sacrament performed when the marriage is witnessed by the priest before the altar. Catholics further believe that any other ceremony in which their members participate is not a marriage in the eyes of God. Although divorces are not permitted in the Roman Catholic church, the clergy possess the authority to annul marriages, declaring that a man and woman were never properly wed. [^37]

Veneration of Saints

Another distinguishing feature of the Roman Catholic religion is the practice of venerating saints, the most revered saint being the Virgin Mary, the mother of Christ. Two of the most recent decrees of the popes have been issued without sanction of a council and have defined the church's position regarding the distinguished mother of the Savior of mankind. In 1854, Pope Pius IX proclaimed the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception. From the moment of her conception, the Roman pontiff decreed, Mary was preserved free from original sin. A century later, in 1950, Pope Pius XII declared that the ancient belief in the Assumption of the Virgin Mary was a formal doctrine of the church, explaining that immediately after Mary's death, her body was re-united with her soul and was transported to heaven.

In addition to honoring Mary, Catholics revere Joseph, the beloved husband of Mary, famous members of the early Christian Church, and many influential leaders who have lived since the death of the apostles. Spokesmen of this church insist that sculptured images of the saints are aids to worship and teach that members should invoke or pray to the saints, declaring that saints can help men obtain benefits from God.

Sacramentals

Roman Catholics further believe that the church has power to set apart or bless many things which in turn excite righteous thoughts and encourage good works. Among the sacramentals in this church are the sign of the cross, the use of holy water, candles, ashes, palms, crucifixes, images of the saints, and rosaries. [^38]

VIII. The Spirit and Dogma of the Eastern Orthodox Church

Although the historical roots of the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches are similar, the organization and beliefs of these two denominations differ considerably. The Eastern Orthodox church is a family of societies, such as the Armenian, Bulgarian, Greek, Romanian, and Russian churches. There is no administrative center for this church. All the autonomous societies are free in their inner life and management and are administered independently by a council of bishops called a synod. All orthodox churches are also in full communion with each other and are united in doctrine and liturgical life.

Doctrinal Diversity

While the autonomous Orthodox societies are united in doctrine, this denomination has classified only a few beliefs as dogma. In fact, one of the striking characteristics of this church is the wide latitude of belief that exists among the laity and clergy. This denomination has not held a general council (such as the Council of Trent) which has defined church doctrine on many subjects. Their religious leaders have not issued numerous doctrinal decrees as have Roman pontiffs. And the church has not sanctioned an exposition of faith describing the fundamental tenets of their denomination.

Orthodox theologians freely speculate on subjects such as the nature of the Fall, the consequences of the atonement, and the meaning of salvation. While the church has taken no particular stand on these subjects, members generally reject the Roman Catholic concept of the fall of Adam, the nature of Christ's atonement, and the means of salvation. Some suggest that sin separates God and man and that salvation is the tearing down of this partition. By becoming free from sin and death, man can enter into a complete communion with God. [^39] Rejecting the concept of predestination, Orthodox theologians assert that man plays a vital role in the salvation experience. While they emphasize rebirth, sanctification, and transfiguration of man, numerous opinions regarding these principles are circulated among the membership of this communion. [^40]

What is the nature of life beyond the grave? is another subject that has not been defined by specific doctrines. Members of this faith reject the Roman Catholic belief regarding purgatory, treasury of merits, indulgences, offering masses for the dead, and a hell where some individuals suffer everlasting punishment. Most members of the Orthodox church believe in a literal resurrection of the body. Many members believe in a universal salvation of mankind and speculate that eventually all men (and even Satan and fallen angles) will repent, follow Christ, and enter a heavenly state. [^41]

Principal Dogmas and Practices

The Eastern Orthodox church has specified that scripture and tradition provide the basis for their beliefs. Members believe that the Bible is the primary rule of faith and insist that the scriptures should be interpreted in light of tradition. Great emphasis is placed on the writings of church fathers and the decisions of the first seven ecumenical councils. Decisions of other general councils that have been approved by the membership have become authoritative living tradition.

One of the principal doctrines of the Orthodox church is the dogma of the Trinity. According to members of this society, the concept of the Godhead is a mystery. Nevertheless, they insist that God has manifest himself in three forms, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and these three persons are of one substance. They believe that Christ possesses two inseparable natures, a human and a divine, and was begotten by the Father from eternity. Since they hold that the Father was the "sole First Cause" of both the Son and Holy Spirit, they contend that the Latin church incorrectly inserted in the Nicene Creed the word "filioque" (and the Son). [^42]

Some members of the Eastern Orthodox church make no distinction between sacraments and sacramentals and, therefore, do not limit the number of sacraments to seven. They believe that four sacraments, baptism, chrismation, Lord's Supper, and confession, are obligatory. Baptism in this society consists of threefold immersion in water and is followed by the sacrament of chrismation, the anointing of the baptized person (usually an infant) with consecrated oil. After baptism, all worthy members (including small children) are admitted to communion. In the Roman Catholic church the "first communion" occurs shortly before a person is confirmed.

Members of this denomination further believe that the sacrament of the Eucharist (Lord's Supper) represents the bloodless sacrifice wherein Christ's sacrifice on the cross is repeated in mystical fashion. Like Roman Catholics, they further maintain that during the Mass an actual transformation of the bread and wine takes place, that the resurrected Christ appears, and that Christ is actually conveyed to communicants. [^43]

Members of the Eastern Orthodox church are also known for their emphasis on the veneration of pictures of Christ and the saints. Sculptured images, however, are forbidden on the basis that such representations sometimes lead to idol worship. Believers who enter their churches to attend services first approach a wall of paintings, kiss the Christ icons, second the Mary icons, and then the icons of the angels and saints. The veneration of icons is further manifest in the homes of these people. Active members of this denomination hang pictures of individuals who are venerated in the eastern corner of their living rooms and bedrooms. When other members enter the room where the icons have been placed, they usually make the sign of the cross and bow after which they greet the host. [^44]

Orthodox priests are permitted to marry before ordination, but married priests can not become bishops. Outside of America, the priests (lower clergy) are bearded; and in America, the leaders of the church and monks have retained the practice of wearing beards.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The most popular, yet scholarly single volume works on the Reformation are Roland Herbert Bainton, The Reformation of the Sixteenth Century (Boston: Beacon Press, 1952) and Harold John Grimm, The Reformation Era (New York: Macmillan Co., 1954).
[^2] Roland H. Bainton, Here I Stand: A Life of Martin Luther (New York: New American Library, 1950), 35, 36, 53.
[^3] Norman Sykes, The Crises of the Reformation (London: Geoffrey Press, 1950), 18-20.
[^4] Philip Schaff, History of the Christian Church (7 vols., New York, 1908), V, Part II, 742-43.
[^5] Clyde Leonard Manschreck, Melanchthon, the Quiet Reformer (New York: Abingdon Press, 1958), 21-22.
[^6] Harold J. Grimm, "Social Forces in the German Reformation," Church History, XXXI, No. 1 (March, 1962), 8, 10, 12.
[^7] Bainton, Here I Stand, 56-60; W. J. Kooiman, By Faith Alone: The Life of Martin Luther (New York: Philosophical Library, 1955), 50-57; Robert Herndon Fife, The Revolt of Martin Luther (New York: Columbia University Press, 1957), 245-71.
[^8] Harold J. Grimm, ed., Luther's Works (Philadelphia, Muhlenberg Press, 1957), XXXI, 25-33. See Theses 20, 21, 27, 38, 43, 44, and 82. Quoted by permission.
[^9] Ibid., 30.
[^10] Ibid., 261-70, 311, 321-22.
[^11] John Dillenberger, ed., Martin Luther: Selections from His Writings (New York: Doubleday and Co., 1961), is the source which I employed to study Luther's Reformation treatises of 1520.
[^12] Ibid., 192, 195, 199, 200, 203.
[^13] The translation of the Augsburg Confession cited in this work is one prepared by a Joint Committee of The General Council, The General Synod, The United Synod of the South, and The Joint Synod of Ohio. Quoted by permission.
[^14] James Mackinnon, Calvin and the Reformation (New York: Russell and Russell, 1962), 215-16.
[^15] Benjamin Breckinridge Warfield, Calvin and Augustine (Philadelphia: Presbyterian and Reformed Publishing Co., 1956), 228-29, 233, 236.
[^16] Emil G. Kraeling, The Old Testament Since the Reformation (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1955), 9-13. Quoted by permission. See also Rupert E. Davies, The Problem of Authority in the Continental Reformers (London: Opworth Press, 1946), 34-39.
[^17] John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, Henry Beveridge, trans. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1957), I, 71 (1:7:4). Quoted by permission.
[^18] Ibid., I, 22.
[^19] Kraeling, op. cit., 25, 40.
[^20] Heinrich Schmid, The Doctrinal Theology of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, C. A. Hay and Henry E. Jacobs, trans. (Minneapolis, Minn.: Augsburg Publishing House, 1961), 555-56.
[^21] Calvin, op. cit., II, 558-71 (4:17:3, 4, 9, 10, 18, 19).
[^22] Schmid, op. cit., 250.
[^23] Calvin, op. cit., II, 512-54 (4:15; 4:16); Egil Crislis, "Calvin's Doctrine of Baptism," Church History, XXXI, No. 1 (March, 1962), 47, 50-52; Ronald S. Wallace, Calvin's Doctrine of the Word and Sacrament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1957), 184-85, 191-96.
[^24] Philip Schaff, Creeds of Christendom (3 vols., New York: Harper and Brothers, 1919), III, 181, 185, 189.
[^25] The Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America (Philadelphia, n.d.), 9-170.
[^26] James Arminius, The Writings of James Arminius, W. R. Bagnall, trans. (3 vols., Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1956), I, 247-48; II, 470-71; III, 459. Quoted by permission.
[^27] Ibid., I, 526: II, 472-73.
[^28] Ibid., III, 453-58.
[^29] John Thomas McNeill, The History and Character of Calvinism (New York: Oxford University Press, 1954), 264.
[^30] G. J. Hoenderdaal, "The Life and Thought of Jacobus Arminius," Religion in Life, XXIX, No. 4 (Autumn, 1960), 540, 546.
[^31] Harold S. Bender, "A Brief Biography of Menno Simons," Menno Simons, The Complete Writing of Menno Simons, Harold S. Bender, trans. (Scottsdale, Pa.: Herald Press, 1956), 4-29, 668-73. Quoted by permission. Cornelius Krahn, "The Conversion of Menno Simons: A Quadricentennial Tribute," The Mennonite Quarterly Review, X, No. 1 (Jan., 1936), 46-54.
[^32] Simons, op. cit., 737, 756-57.
[^33] Ibid., 168, 301, 450-51.
[^34] Ibid., 130-31, 504.
[^35] Ibid., 131, 134-36, 707.
[^36] Ibid., 133.
[^37] Ibid., 240-41.
[^38] Ibid., 62, 109-110, 159-60, 189, 232, 666-67, 734, 1042.
[^39] Ibid., 182-83.
[^40] 40. Ernst Benz, The Eastern Orthodox Church: Its Thought and Life (Garden City, New York: Doubleday and Co., Inc., 1963), 48.
[^41] 41. Ibid., 52.
[^42] 42. Ibid., 56.
[^43] 43. Ibid., 32-38; Zankov, op. cit., 114-19; Arthur Douropulos, "What is a Greek Orthodox?" Religions in America, Leo Rosten, ed. (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963), 82-83.
[^44] 44. Benz, op. cit., 2.
