Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER TWO

The Religious Revolt in Continental Europe

The doctrines of the Roman Catholic church were not formalized without opposition. Periodically, reformers criticized Catholic theology, arguing that decisions of councils and decrees of popes negated apostolic doctrines. Critics contended that divine direction was replaced by force, simplicity by ritual, and revelation by rationalism, speculation, and compromise. Believing that a syncretized religion supplanted the gospel of Jesus Christ, resolute leaders earnestly sought a return to the original purity of New Testament Christianity.

One of the most apparent consequences of the activities of sixteenth and seventeenth century reformers was the creation in Western Europe of numerous Protestant churches. During the Reformation, the major denominations of colonial America were constituted; and although the revolt did not restore New Testament Christianity, the reorientation of Christian thinking paved the path toward the reestablishment of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I. Underlying Factors of the Protestant Reformation

The Spirit of Inquiry

The historical roots of an ecclesiastical revolt were laid in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and early sixteenth century. During these years, men gradually turned their attention from authority, the institutional church, and heaven to individualism, independence, and life on this earth. The humanistic spirit of the Renaissance, the emphasis on the study of man and his accomplishments, prompted many to seek a new relationship with God. The spirit of inquiry and critical investigation fostered intellectual freedom. Many gained a new sense of dignity. Many sought a new type of power, and many discovered a new concept of liberty. Meanwhile, the invention of printing by movable type caused a multiplication of books and more rapid circulation of ideas. The vernacular translations of the Bible were issued and read by increasing numbers. As men studied the scriptures, they reevaluated their religion. After freeing their imagination from prevailing definitions of tradition and authority, many undermined some of the teachings of the church fathers, the decisions of some of the general councils, and the decrees of popes, replacing these sources of doctrine with a single norm of faith, the Holy Scriptures. [^1]

Nationalism

One of the many significant indications of this new outlook was man's growing interest in nationalism. People's pride in their country and allegiance to their peculiar institutions grew, precipitating dissatisfaction with the power exercised by the pope and the higher clergy in purely secular matters. Many resented the pope's claim to depose rulers and bestow territories on others. Some concluded that the pope interfered with the progress of their nation. As the years passed, the opposition of many to the universal claims of the church increased to the point that primary allegiance of the majority in some countries shifted from the church to the state.

Mercantilism

Meanwhile, an economic conflict emerged between the church and the new nations. During this age, the mercantile theory increased in popularity. The mercantilists concluded that wealth in the form of specie, gold and silver, was necessary in order to develop a powerful nation. Wealth could be secured by exporting more than a country imported. By selling more to foreigners than a country purchased, money would flow into the national treasury. On the other hand, mercantilists reasoned, programs which caused money to flow from a country weakened that nation. At the end of the fifteenth century, the wealth of the church was considered enormous and vast sums were pouring from various parts of Europe into the treasury of the pope (who was considered by some a foreigner in a foreign state) or were being removed when the higher clergy were transferred to another realm. In the age of mercantilism, this movement of specie out of a nation was regarded as impeding the growth and independence of the country. At the same time, economic minded politicians recognized the advantages of creating a national church so that the wealth flowing to the pope could be diverted to the treasuries of the state.

Dissatisfaction with Standardization Movement

Another evidence of the new spirit which engulfed the minds of many was the dissatisfaction which emerged following the standardization of Catholic theology and practices. By the end of the fifteenth century, influential religious leaders had created a uniformity of doctrine that had not been existent in the early Middle Ages. Although for generations groups had endorsed particular beliefs, the crystallization movement of the late Middle Ages had transferred what had been orthodoxy in some areas into heresy. The strength of the church forced men to endorse publically one doctrine, but inwardly many clung to the traditional religion. Even though the forms of worship had become set in formalized liturgy, conducted by a clerical hierarchy, many remembered that alterations had been imposed on them. Eventually, many regarded orthodox routines as unsatisfactory forms of worship.

The "Unscriptural Innovations"

To be more specific, the Reformation was a reaction against certain beliefs and practices regarded as unscriptural innovations in Catholicism. The Reformers rejected the Roman Catholic concept of purgatory, limbo, treasury of merits, and indulgences, being especially critical of the abuses associated with the distribution of indulgences. The method of obtaining indulgences varied, but during the immediate pre-Reformation period many popes expedited the raising of funds by increasing the ease of obtaining and at the same time increasing the value of indulgences. Sometimes popes declared that by simply viewing relics of the saints and contributing simultaneously to the church, one could receive "a promissory note." At times, each relic was assigned a precise value in which the viewer and contributor would have his punishment reduced. In the Castle Church at Wittenberg, Germany, the college town where Martin Luther taught, there was a collection of thousands of relics. Those who viewed these items on a designated day and made the stipulated contribution were informed that they would receive from the pope indulgences for the reduction of purgatorial punishment for themselves or others of 1,902,202 years and 270 days. [^2] One pope specified that each relic viewed in another church would reduce one's stay in purgatory by four thousand years. Since the greatest collection of relics were in Rome, individuals could benefit most and secure more indulgences by making pilgrimages there than by traveling to any other region.

Meanwhile laymen were taught that they could benefit in life and in purgatory by priests saying masses for them, the blessings varying according to the numbers and magnificence of the Mass and the amount contributed for the performance of the rite. The impact of this teaching is evident by the rapid multiplications of chantry chapels, erected in cathedrals, monasteries, and college and parish churches in the years preceding the Reformation. That many priests in the fourteenth and fifteenth century devoted much of their time in offering such masses for the delivery of souls from purgatory is evident by some of the extraordinary requests. For instance, Henry V of England provided in his will that 20,000 masses be offered to benefit his soul in purgatory. A wealthy lord in London left sufficient money to the church so that two priests could say Mass daily for his soul for fifteen years. An English lady, Alice West, requested priests to perform 4,400 masses within two weeks after her death, bequeathing what amounted to be only one penny for each offering.

The practice created such a demand for priests that bishops sometimes ordained men who were poorly educated and incompetent. Some of the mass-priests received extremely low remuneration; and at times, when there was a lack of work, they became vagrants degrading the priesthood which they held. [^3]

In addition to eliminating many Catholic concepts regarding life after death and work for the dead, the reformers rejected as sacraments or dispensors of grace five of the seven Roman Catholic sacraments: penance, confirmation, marriage, extreme unction, and holy orders. Although the religious rebels sanctioned as sacraments baptism and the Lord's Supper, they refused to acknowledge that Christ was re-crucified in the Mass and his body replaced the bread when the priest declared, "This is my body." The directors of this anti-Catholic movement also stripped the pope and other ecclesiastical leaders of their authority and rejected the church as a necessary institution through which men had to pass in order to secure salvation and be reunited with God.

Abuses of the Church

The historical roots of the Reformation also stem back to the corruption and abuses of the Roman Catholic church. In addition to recognizing the abuses associated with indulgence absolution and offering of masses for the dead, the reformers condemned the method in which the Catholics venerated relics. Prior to the Reformation, relics of the saints and of Christ were plentiful. There developed a great rivalry between religious centers, religious leaders in one area attempting to secure a greater collection than could be gathered in another region. A lucrative business centered on the locating and selling of former possessions of the saints, something which the saints had touched or the body of one considered to have lived a holy life. As the practice developed, the bodies of martyrs were uncovered, dismembered, and the fragments, a finger, arm, leg, rib or skull, distributed. Each part of the body was supposed to possess a supernatural virtue, a power to heal or some other power which would benefit man. As the centuries passed, the number of false relics increased. After unearthing bones, it was sometimes impossible to determine if the skeleton were that of a saint or a sinner, yet the bones were often pronounced as those of a holy man of God and placed in the church collections. At one time there were at least three crosses regarded as the True Cross of Christ. During a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, Frederick the Wise of Saxony is reported to have collected over five thousand sacred relics, including "a thorn from the crown of thorns, a tunic belong to John the Evangelist, milk from the Virgin's breast, a piece of Mt. Calvary, a piece of the table on which the Last Supper was eaten, fragments of the stones on which Jesus stood when he wept over Jerusalem, . . . pieces of the rods of Aaron and Moses, a piece of Mary's girdle, and some of the straw from the Bethlehem manager." [^4] In one of the churches in Wittenberg, Germany, there were 17,443 relics. Included in this famous collection was the thorn that had brought blood to the brow of Jesus, part of Mary's gown, four strands of Our Lady's hair, a tear that Jesus shed at Lazarus' tomb, thirty-five splinters from the cross of Christ, three pieces of myrrh and one piece of gold brought by the Wise Men to the baby Jesus, a strand of the beard of Jesus, a nail which had been driven into the hand of Christ, a piece of the loaf of bread which had been employed during the Last Supper, a rock on which Christ stood prior to ascending to heaven, a twig from Moses' burning bush, and numerous bones of the saints. [^5]

The reformers also reacted against the unscriptural bases and abuses which had crept into the practice of venerating the saints. Although the Roman Catholic church did not teach that the saints should be worshipped, only venerated, members of the church were worshipping the apostles, early Christian leaders, and others designated as saints. Catholics made the saints magical instruments for the healing of the sick and for their material advancement. The veneration precipitated excessive ritualistic consecration of churches, wasteful pilgrimages, and numerous other superstitious practices. Since veneration had led to abuses, critics studied the New Testament to determine if saints acted as our intercessors with the Father. The investigation resulted in the conclusion that to pray or to call upon the saints was a dangerous practice which obscured the office of Christ and led to paganistic worship.

Simony and pluralism were also recognized by the reformers as abuses which plagued the dominant religion of Western Europe. Today, Catholics admit that the buying and selling of church offices was a major evil of the Middle Ages. In spite of exhortations against simony by reform popes and councils, the abuses continued. However, there were periods when ecclesiastical offices were secured by paying the stipulated sum with the approval of the highest ecclesiastical authorities. Some of the fourteenth and fifteenth century popes not only failed to censure the selling of offices in the curia, but secured their office after extensive employment of bribes. The clergy also were permitted to hold a number of prominent lucrative offices at the same time, serving as absentee officials. One thirteenth century English clergyman presided over at least ten parishes simultaneously, drawing the revenue from each parish and appointing substitutes to perform his work while reaping an income as absentee incumbent. Bishops secured the appointment to many sees, and their non-residence made it impossible to provide the people with the ecclesiastical services they desired. The English Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, a contemporary of Luther, was a prominent advisor of Henry VIII, being Lord Chancellor of England. While serving in this capacity, Wolsey was Archbishop of York, held the sees of Durham and Winchester in succession, became the papal legate, and drew pensions from sees in France and Spain. The evils of simony, pluralities, and absenteeism coupled with the moral laxity of some of the clergy and lack of piety on the part of others undoubtedly caused men to consider the authority claimed and power exercised by the ecclesiastical leaders and to demand a change.

The monasteries were also in need of reform. The worldliness, moral laxity, and lack of sincerity of too many of the regular clergy also caused many pious Christians to become alarmed and demand a purification. Moreover, the role and the status of the regular clergy had declined noticeably. Others in increasing numbers had occupied positions which had formerly been held by the regular clergy because of their superior education. The monasteries also had ceased to serve as centers of manuscript production and of historical writings. Priests in chantry chapels were performing one of their duties of celebrating masses for the dead. Meanwhile, manual work had declined and idleness had increased in the monasteries. Increasing financial difficulties of the orders curtailed their activities in caring for the poor. Consequently, some Christians concluded that monasteries were no longer useful, practical, or necessary and were economic liabilities in society.

Anti-clericalism

Another underlying factor of the ecclesiastical revolt was anti-clericalism. Fifteenth and early sixteenth century writings are filled with complaints of the vulgarity, the immorality, and the ignorance of not only the regular, but also the secular clergy. People complained that monetary exactions supported unworthy priests, and many were suspicious of the growing power of a church whose leaders lacked piety. The debasement and secularization of the papacy had provided an example of incompetency which had been followed by too many of the priests. People reacted by subverting their allegiance to the Latin clergy. Refusing to support faithfully the ecclesiastical hierarchy, many Christians of that age rendered their ultimate allegiance to the political authorities, welcoming a transfer of power from the church to the state.

Hope for a Better World

Then there were peasants who promptly translated the action of ecclesiastical reform into economic and social terms, hoping that a reformation could enable them to enhance their status in society. There were wealthy merchants and land lords who conscientiously believed that an ecclesiastical change could benefit the masses and the nation. Although there were patricians who recognized that they might not benefit economically nor socially from a religious revolt, some concluded that they would continue to exercise considerable authority under a new system that would benefit mankind. As one modern historian has aptly stated, "The Reformation provided many people in all classes with a dynamic hope that their difficulties could be solved." [^6]

Religious Indifference

Religious indifference or lack of religious zeal on the part of many was another of the numerous, complex historical roots of the Reformation. There were many who failed to attend church or who rendered insincere worship. Suspiciously, some viewed the church as an enemy of progress and of human development.

The fact that the Reformation struck so suddenly in so many different parts of Europe is evidence that a deep path leading to a religious revolt had been carved. Numerous sixteenth century Europeans were prepared to support those who dared lead a revolt against the Roman Catholic church. The stage was set for a reorientation of Christian thinking and practice.

II. Martin Luther—Instigator of the Reform

The courageous leader who ignited the flames of the rebellion was Martin Luther. Luther was born in a small village in Saxony in 1483. After attending the University of Erfurt, he rejected the profession of law and his father's aspirations by taking vows in an Augustinian monastery. His celebrated journey to Rome occurred in 1510 or 1511, and although he was displeased because of the worldliness of the clergy in Rome and disturbed by the apparent abuses which afflicted the church, he made no attempt at that time to alter the situation. Returning to the monastery in Germany, he continued his normal routine, and shortly thereafter was transferred to the University of Wittenberg. Possibly while praying in an Augustinian monastery or while preparing lectures on the Bible at the University of Wittenberg, Luther adopted a concept of salvation that undermined the basic claims of the church to which he belonged. The Roman Catholics emphasized that salvation was to be secured partially by means of the sacraments and authority of the church. While the Roman Catholics believed that one proceeded to heaven through the gates of the church, Luther concluded that the church was not the instrument of grace and salvation. Salvation is a gift of God. "Salvation comes, not from the sacrament, but from faith," he averred; and this heretical view could not be surpressed in the mind of an impatient, outspoken critic such as Martin Luther. An irrepressible conflict was approaching between a resolute leader and a powerful church.

Luther was motivated to action when John Tetzel began peddling indulgences in a neighboring town. Tetzel had been assigned to raise money to help defray the expense of rebuilding St. Peter's Cathedral in Rome and to assist Albert of Brandenburg, archbishop of Magdeburg and Mainz, defray the expense involved in securing his ecclesiastical office in Mainz. Since pluralities were forbidden, Albert had to obtain a special dispensation from the pope to hold both archbishoprics and this was granted only after Albert graciously made the required payment. Half of the money collected by Tetzel was to be paid to the creditors of Albert and half was to be sent to the pope, but Tetzel failed to notify the people that half their donation was to be given to medieval financiers. Tetzel also had been instructed to advise Catholics that by donating to the building program (the amount varying from one to twenty-five gold florins, depending upon one's status), the contributors would receive, by the pope's authority, complete remission of all sins, restoring one to the state of innocence which had been secured by baptism. If an individual chose, he could obtain the special indulgence for the deceased which would automatically liberate them from purgatory. Seldom had people been promised so much for such a relatively small donation. It is not surprising that many townsmen of Wittenberg traveled across the border, returning with what they regarded as authoritative guarantees.

Many in Wittenberg were aroused by Tetzel's activities. Archduke Frederick of Saxony had forbidden Tetzel to enter his territory. He had his own special collections of relics and his special day, All Saints' Day, when valuable indulgences were granted. The money collected from this source was employed to support the University of Wittenberg and other worthy German projects. Tetzel, however, collected money from his subjects and sent part of the gold across the Alps to help build a "foreign basilica." Meanwhile, Luther recognized the abuses associated with the distribution of indulgences by Tetzel. He was critical of the careless and mechanical method in which they were issued. True penance, including repentance and confession, were not insisted upon by Tetzel as conditions for the securing of the indulgences. Instead, Tetzel's distribution of indulgences was a greedy, church sponsored program designed to raise money. Luther also recognized that the masses incorrectly concluded that men were purchasing a remission of sins, failing to differentiate between remission of punishment and remission of guilt. Moreover, he repudiated the sales talk that indulgences could release men from purgatory. Eventually, criticism led to action. [^7]

The Event Initiating the Reformation

The first flames of the revolt were ignited on the eve of All Saints' Day, October 31, 1517. Boldly, Luther posted his Ninety-Five Theses on the massive doors of the All Saints' Church, undoubtedly without realizing the repercussions it would have on the history of mankind. Luther began mildly by noting the abuses associated with indulgence absolution. He branded as error the claims of some vendors that "man is absolved and saved from every penalty by the pope's indulgences." Then his tone sharpened, when he stated that the pope can only remit all penalties which he has imposed. God only can remit sin. There is no divine authority for preaching that the "soul flies out of purgatory" immediately as "the money clinks into the money chest." It is not the teaching of the church, he continued, that those who obtain indulgences for themselves or others do not need to repent. Those who conscientiously repent, he sternly declared, do not need letters of indulgence. Yet, Luther did not state in the propositions that indulgences should be disregarded, but cautiously warned that it was difficult to extol their virtues without relaxing the demand for sincere penance. "Christians should be taught that one who gives to the poor, or lends to the needy, does a better deed than he who buys indulgences." By works of love, we improve; by obtaining indulgences we merely escape certain penalties. Then, he exploited previous papal decrees by denying the assumption that the pope had authority to reduce purgatorial punishment. If the pope has the authority to eliminate punishment for those who contribute, he argued, why doesn't he, for the sake of love and justice, release everyone from purgatory? [^8]

By writing and circulating the Ninety-Five Theses, Luther sought an academic debate on the propositions, undoubtedly hoping that the discussions would be a means of correcting the abuses in the church. He probably sincerely believed, at that time, that "if the pope knew the exactions of the indulgence-preachers, he would rather" reduce the church of St. Peter to ashes than build it with "the skin, flesh, and bones of his sheep." [^9] Luther, therefore, made no attempt to keep secret the authorship of the propositions.

After the printed theses was circulated throughout Germany, a storm erupted. Men divided into major camps. Some believed that the statements did not denounce Catholic dogma, but aptly pointed out apparent abuses. Others concluded that the propositions repudiated established doctrine and rejected papal authority.

Although Luther had not specifically eliminated all value of the indulgences in his Ninety-Five Theses, his radicalism became evident as he penned polemic defenses of his beliefs, and as demands were made by church officials for Luther to state his position regarding the issues, he prepared for debate. When interviewed in 1518 by Cardinal Cajetan, the papal legate, Luther not only refused to recant but exasperated the inquisitor by insisting that a pope could militate against the scripture and could err, as Peter had done, and that a theologian had the prerogative to appeal against the head of the church to the Word of God. Since Luther denied that indulgences were the means through which Christ's merits were imparted to others, he was forced into rejecting a papal bull. "Retract these statements," Cajetan demanded. "I cannot recant," the monk insisted. "I only know that we must obey God rather than men." Shortly thereafter, in a debate held at Leipzig in the summer of 1519, John Eck, another professor who was a skilled theologian, arrogantly trapped Luther into confessing that councils could err, as one did which declared heretical certain teachings professed by John Huss. Again Luther insisted that the final authority of doctrine was the Bible. Neither the pope nor councils can render final definitions of beliefs, Luther contended, for God has given each individual the right to understand the Word of God. Meanwhile, Luther had written that indulgences were positively harmful, that the pope could not reduce purgatorial punishment, and that history clearly revealed that popes and councils had issued numerous, conflicting, erroneous decrees. In June, 1520, the monk, who was branded as the "son of iniquity" by the pope, was condemned by a papal bull and threatened with excommunication unless he recanted. [^10]

Establishing the Theological Tone of the Reformation

After learning that the breach between him and the papal church was apparent, Luther published the Open Letter to the Christian Nobility of the German Nation. "Christendom has suffered woeful corruption," Luther warned the ruling class of Germany. The pope has usurped his authority by denying that the secular force has any power over the church, by claiming that he alone is competent to expound the scripture, and by insisting that it is his sole right to summon councils and approve their decisions. "Many heretical, unchristian, and even unnatural laws," Luther further concluded, "are contained in canon law." Then to bolster his plea that the leaders of Germany should reform the church, the professor undermined the authority claimed by the Roman Catholic church by contending that all Christians had God's authority, that they were all priests, and that any congregation could select one of their number and command him to exercise this authority on behalf of others. Other than being an office bearer, there was really no difference between laymen, priest, prince, bishop or pope, he argued.

After describing numerous innovations in the church and unfolding the doctrine of priesthood of all believers, Luther concentrated on the nature of the reforms which should be undertaken by the rulers of Germany. The papacy, the papal court, and the monasteries should be reformed. Bishops should no longer be compelled to swear allegiance to the pope. No one should ever again kiss the pope's feet. Rome's pillaging by controlling benefices should cease. No secular matter should be referred to Rome. Pilgrimages to Rome should be disallowed. All festival days and the canonization of saints should be discontinued. The clergy should be permitted to marry; and since annates (part of the first year's revenue derived from a benefice payable to the people) impoverish the people, a national law should be enacted abolishing this source of papal revenue. Other steps should also be taken to stop the flow of money from Germany. [^11]

Following the publication of this address to the German nobility, Luther prepared a tract, the Pagan Servitude of the Church, better known as The Babylonian Captivity of the Church, in which he criticized the sacramental system of the Roman Catholics and introduced his views on the subject. It is evident that while reviewing the scripture and attempting to reconstruct the correct form of belief and practice, Luther was unable to resolve some questions and requested others to discuss the issues so that decisions could eventually be reached. It is also apparent that Luther was re-evaluating and altering conclusions which he had published in works appearing in 1518 to 1519. Nevertheless, a new theological system was quickly being formulated which was to endure for generations.

Although Luther did not reject the usage of many of the sacraments of the Roman Catholic church, in this critique Luther approved only two sacraments as dispensors of grace, the Lord's Supper and baptism. However, in his analysis of the sacrament of the Eucharist, he argued that transubstantiation was a recent innovation in Catholicism. He also condemned the leaders for withholding the wine from the laity, censured the pomp and ceremony of the Mass, and denied that Christ was the "victim of the altar." He was less critical of the Catholic position regarding baptism, concurring that the scripture taught that this ordinance was essential, it being the "fulfilling and completion of justification." Even though he noted that the word "baptism means 'immersion,'" and that the ordinance signified death and resurrection, he did not insist on this mode. Then, in spite of the fact that Luther argued that the all-important feature of the ordinance was the faith of the recipient, he sanctioned infant baptism because "infants are helped by vicarious faith: the faith of those who present them for baptism." He also endorsed infant baptism because he determined that infants may be recipients of the gift of faith through God's grace.

Shortly after publishing this attack on the Roman Catholic church, Luther issued another tract which he entitled, The Freedom of a Christian. Although the controversial German again appealed to the pope, requesting him to direct the reform, Luther further antagonized the Roman official by calling the church a "licentious den of thieves," referring to the Roman Curia as "more corrupt than any Babylon or Sodom," and insisting that the church was so corrupt that "even Antichrist himself, if he should come, could think of nothing to add to its wickedness." After stripping the pope of his authority, by again denying his infallibility and claim of primacy, Luther continued to emphasize his interpretation of the priesthood of all believers. Moreover, Luther asserted that men are not saved by works, by sacraments, nor by any institution, but by "faith because of the pure and free mercy of God." Although he did not condemn men for performing good works, he rejected the "idea that righteousness is to be sought through them."

By issuing the three reformed works in 1520, Luther set the theological tone of the Reformation and sounded the slogans of the new religious era, "the priesthood of believers," "scriptures sole norm of faith," and "justification by the grace of God." By his publications, Luther also secured the breach with Rome so that there was no hope of reconciliation. For Luther there was to be no retreat, and on January 3, 1521, he was excommunicated. Undaunted, the former Augustinian monk directed the reform without papal assistance, seeking the support of the German rulers and people. The time was ripe for an ecclesiastical change. Many were prepared to join this anti-Catholic movement. Success was imminent. A new religion suddenly emerged in the towns and farm communities of Germany, a religion which eliminated what were considered offensive abuses and innovations of the Latin church.

In 1525, Luther published what he regarded as one of his best theological treatises, The Bondage of the Will. In this reply to Erasmus' Freedom of the Will, Luther discussed his views regarding the nature of salvation, and destiny of man, indicating that he was greatly influenced by the concept of predestination as popularized by Augustine and as taught by many Catholic contemporaries.

Luther concluded that man was born in sin, inheriting from Adam an evil disposition. Because of the original sin, all men are totally depraved. By nature, man has no inclination to serve God nor to develop true faith in God. The natural man may appear to be an honest husband, a conscientious citizen, an honorable leader, but in reality, he is seeking his own riches, glory, works, and selfish designs. He is unable to seek or care for the things of God. In the sight of God, natural man is not righteous. Although man is evil by nature, Luther continued, God, through the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, elects or saves some of his children, glorifying them, changing their disposition, and making it possible for them to perform good works. In other words, the German reformer taught that salvation is not the product of man's works, but solely the result of God's grace and will. Good works are the product of the faith implanted in man. Moreover, Luther declared, "God foreknows and foreordains all things . . . He cannot be deceived or obstructed in his foreknowledge and predestination . . . Nothing happens but at his will." Consequently, "there can be no 'free-will' in man, or angel, or in any creature." [^12]

Emergence of Lutheranism

Luther continued to direct the Reformation by publishing in 1529 the Shorter Catechism, which was a brief analysis of the principle doctrines he espoused, and the Larger Catechism, intended primarily for the ministers. Before his death in 1546, Luther also prepared a church service, crystallized his reform measures, and translated the Bible into German.

A Lutheran "Articles of Faith"—The Augsburg Confession

In 1530, one of Luther's colleagues at the University of Wittenberg, Philip Melanchthon, wrote the most complete description of the tenets of the new theology, the Augsburg Confession. This statement of belief, based upon the teachings of Luther and approved by him, has remained to this day the most comprehensive orthodox description of faith of the Lutheran church. [^13] Included in this confession are many declarations of belief which harmonize with orthodox Catholic theology:

The decree of the Council of Nicaea concerning the Unity of the Divine Essence and concerning the Three Persons, is true, . . . that is to say, there is one Divine Essence which is called and which is God: eternal, without body, without parts, of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness . . . and yet that there are three Persons, of the same essence and power, who also are co-eternal, the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost.

Since the Fall of Adam, all men . . . are born with sin . . . and . . . this disease, or vice of origin, is truly sin, even now condemning and bringing eternal death upon those not born again through Baptism and the Holy Spirit.

Baptism . . . is necessary to salvation.

Through Baptism is offered the grace of God.

Children are to be Baptized, who, being offered to God through Baptism, are received into His grace.

It is lawful to use the Sacraments which are administered by evil men.

There are other statements in the Augsburg Confession which are tenets of a revised theology, being doctrines which were espoused by some Catholics in the Middle Ages but not held as orthodox Catholic teachings in the sixteenth century, precisely as interpreted and emphasized by the Lutherans:

Men cannot be Justified [obtain a forgiveness of sins and righteousness] before God by their own strength, merits or works, but are freely justified for Christ's sake through faith, when they believe that they are received into favor and that their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake, who by His death, hath made satisfaction for our sins. This faith God imputes for righteousness in his sight. . . . This Faith is bound to bring forth Good Fruits . . . because of God's will, but not that we should rely on those works to merit justification before God.

Man's will has some liberty for the attainment of civil righteousness, and for the choice of things subject to reason. Nevertheless, it has no power, without the Holy Ghost, to work the righteousness of God, that is, spiritual righteousness; since the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God [1 Cor. 2:14]; but this righteousness is wrought in the heart when the Holy Ghost is received through the Word. These things are said in as many words by Augustine.

Our works cannot reconcile God or merit forgiveness of sins, grace and justification, but that we obtain this only by faith.

At the Consummation of the World, Christ shall appear for judgment, and shall raise up all the dead; he shall give to the godly and elect eternal life and everlasting joys, but ungodly men and devils he shall condemn to be tormented without end.

The Body and Blood of Christ are truly present [under the form of bread and wine], and are distributed to those who eat in the Supper of the Lord.

The Church is the congregation of saints, in which the Gospel is rightly taught and the Sacraments rightly administered.

In the Confession, many abuses were described such as the denial of the wine to the laity, the forbidding of the clergy to marry, the rule that monks take monastic vows, the excessive powers exercised by the bishops, the vows and traditions concerning foods and days which were "instituted to merit grace and make satisfaction for sins," and the performing of "needless works, as particular holydays, particular fasts, brotherhoods, pilgrimages, services in honor of saints, the use of rosaries, monasticism, and such like [actions]."

Expansion of Lutheranism

In the sixteenth century, Lutheranism spread like a raging fire, transforming abruptly the religious complexion of northern Europe. Earlier, Christianity had been imposed upon the pagans in this region; and in Luther's day, political leaders again directed a change in the religious behavior patterns of their subjects. Primarily motivated by a genuine conversion to Lutheranism, an awareness of the abuses and innovations of Catholicism, and a desire to increase their wealth by funnelling ecclesiastical revenue into the royal treasuries, powerful monarchs succeeded in directing a program of replacing Catholicism with Lutheranism. In Denmark, Sweden, and Finland, the Lutheran movement became the state and only dominant religion. In Norway and Iceland, Lutheranism was imposed upon the people by an occupying sovereign Denmark; and throughout the Scandinavian countries, the Augsburg Confession in its pure or revised form was adopted as the standard of faith.

Although Lutheranism also spread into sections of Central Europe and the Low Countries, it failed to prosper there as it did in the North. Nevertheless, Luther's influential writings were read by many in Central Europe. After being awakened to the fact that an apostasy plagued Christianity, many turned from Catholicism and extended their support to various reformed churches.

III. John Calvin—Father of the Reformed Churches

While Luther witnessed the penetration of his theology into Northern and Central Europe, another opponent of Catholicism emerged who became the most influential reformer of the sixteenth century and one of the most prominent leaders in the history of mankind, John Calvin. After obtaining an excellent education, studying jurisprudence, theology, and the humanities, Calvin claimed he was suddenly converted. He concluded that God had elected him and that he was truly saved by the grace of God. This religious experience, probably occurring between 1529 and 1535, was the turning point in his career. After endorsing a concept which Luther had popularized, Calvin rebelled against Catholicism and left his native land of France, traveling to Switzerland. In 1536, Calvin published in Basel a work which had a profound impact on the religious thinking of mankind, The Institutes of the Christian Religion. Calvin continued to revise and enlarge this work until the final edition appeared in 1559. Written as a book of instruction and as an apology, the Institutes is a comprehensive textbook of Calvin's theology.

Calvin was greatly influenced by the teachings popularized by the German reformer, employing as references in his first edition of the Institutes Luther's Catechism and Babylonian Captivity of the Church. In addition to agreeing with the Lutheran analysis of the abuses and innovations of Catholicism, Calvin endorsed the Lutheran concept of sovereignty of God, original sin, total depravity, slavery and impotence of the will, justification solely through the grace of God, sanctification as the fruit of faith, and the Bible as the sole norm of faith. [^14] However, Calvin did not frequently turn to Luther or other Protestant theologians as authorities. Since he regarded the scripture as the only source of divine truths, Calvin centered his arguments on his interpretation of the Word of God. When he attempted to restore Christianity in its unadulterated form, the French theologian emerged with many interpretations that were not in harmony with the views espoused by the German.

Concepts of God Compared

Whereas the Catholics and Lutherans taught that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were of one essence, but that there were distinctions between the three members of the Godhead, Calvin concluded that the distinctions of divine activities in no way impeded "the absolute simple unity of God." Insisting that all of God was in Christ, Calvin rejected a popular contemporary view that Christ was an inferior manifestation of God. This doctrine, that the three essences were equal, stimulated bitter controversy during the Reformation era and became one of the distinguishing features of Calvinism. [^15]

Conflicting Views Regarding the Bible

Although Calvin and Luther condemned tradition as a source of doctrine, the two reformers adopted different views toward the accuracy of the single norm of faith. Luther's theology was constructed around his interpretation of the teachings of Paul. After reading passages in the Old and New Testament which seemed to him to conflict with Paul's writings, Luther concluded that the books of the Bible were not of equal authority. On occasions, Luther declared, God's message was directed to an individual and at other times he spoke for the benefit of all men. Moreover, since the Word of God emerged out of different situations, Luther reasoned, one must determine if the Biblical message is truly God's word, spoken by him. "There are two kinds of 'Word' in the scripture," Luther continued. "One does not concern me or have aught to do with me." Therefore, Luther was not an advocate of Bible infallibility. He did not rank James, Hebrews, and Jude in the same classification as Romans, Galatians, and Ephesians, regarding the former works as of secondary authority. Luther's test in determining the reliability of the works in the Bible was, do the teachings contained therein conform with the doctrines included in the Pauline Epistles? [^16]

Calvin, however, believed that the scripture was infallible, that it was the pure word of God, the words being conveyed to his generation as if spoken from the very mouth of God. "Scripture exhibits clear evidence of its being spoken by God," he insisted, "and, consequently, of its containing his heavenly doctrine." [^17] Calvin refused to evaluate, to criticize, or to recognize conflicting teachings in the Bible, adopting interpretations that created one harmonious message. On the other hand, he was forced to admit that there were minor errors in the Bible, such as Paul's misquoting (in Ephesians 4:8) Psalms 68:18.

Calvin also endeavored to minimize the allegorical element in the scriptures, advising others that they should seek inspiration for interpretation from the same Holy Spirit that inspired the author of the work. Nevertheless, unlike Luther, Calvin concluded that we sometimes need human assistance to understand the Word of God. "Although the Holy Scriptures contain a perfect doctrine," he advised others, "every person, not intimately acquainted with them, stands in need of some guidance and direction . . . It is the duty of those who have received from God more light than others to assist the simple in this matter . . . in finding the sum of what God has been pleased to teach us in his word." [^18]

For many years, the Lutherans failed to develop the liberal views of their founder regarding the Bible. Instead, many were influenced by Calvin, and in the seventeenth century, many Lutherans argued that since the author of the Old and New Testament was the Holy Spirit, the work was perfect. [^19]

Conflicting Views of the Lord's Supper

After considering the Biblical teachings regarding the Lord's Supper, Calvin was not satisfied with the Catholic and Lutheran analysis of this sacrament. Although he shared the Lutheran view that Christ was not sacrificed during the Mass and that the priest did not turn the bread into the body and blood of Christ, Calvin rejected the German's view that the body and blood of Christ are around the elements, his body being present and "truly distributed and taken together with the bread and wine." (In other words, the Lutherans concluded that the bread and wine remained bread and wine, not losing their substance and natural essence, but that during the sacrament all who partook of the emblems received the true body and blood of Christ.) [^20] Calvin also refused to endorse the views of another reformer, Zwingli, who held that the sacrament was taken purely in remembrance of the body and blood of Christ. Calvin decided that Christ's body is not adjacent to the bread and wine during the sacrament but remains in heaven beyond this world, retaining all his properties during the rite. Nevertheless, Calvin argued, Christ is spiritually present during the Holy Supper, and we are united with him on that occasion. This union was not regarded as a mere mental contemplation, for, as Calvin insisted, during this spiritual communion we partake of the body of Christ. The French theologian realized that it was difficult to conceive of God in heaven (incidentally without a body), with all his properties, dispensing not only his love but also his flesh and blood to feed our souls, but he solved the dilemma by referring to the communion as another of the great mysteries of God which man cannot comprehend. [^21]

Calvin also disagreed with the Lutheran and Catholic concept that even the unworthy received the body and blood of Christ when they partook of the sacrament. The author of the Institutes concluded that the body of Christ was distributed only to the faithful.

Conflicting Views of Baptism

Is baptism essential for salvation and does this ordinance free one from original sin? were other theological issues which divided the ranks of Christendom during this turbulent era. Luther endorsed the Catholic concept that Adam, by his fall, not only corrupted all his posterity but made all men participants of his guilt. He also shared the Catholic conviction that baptism was essential for salvation, conferring regeneration, faith, and salvation, but denied that baptism remitted the whole essence of original sin. Luther decided that although baptism removes the "guilt" of original sin the "material of sin" remains. However, since the Holy Spirit is given in baptism, the ordinance tends to create within man new notions, reducing his desire to sin. Consequently, Luther determined, baptism worketh forgiveness of sins. Sin remains, but its influence is not so pronounced. [^22]

Calvin, on the other hand, concluded that baptism is not essential and does not confer salvation, but agreed with Luther that the ordinance does not free man entirely from the consequences of original sin. In baptism, Calvin argued, the believer is assured that the condemnation derived from the original sin is remitted. Although the sin remains, it no longer has dominion over us. Instead of conferring regeneration, baptism merely symbolizes that God has promised us a remission of both the guilt and the penalty incurred by the guilt.

Moreover, Calvin concurred with Luther that baptism has no efficacy where faith is not present in the recipient. Since faith is a gift of God, the effect of baptism depends upon God. Baptism is a sign of the forgiveness of sins, he continued, evidence of a renewal of life, and a symbol indicating that a covenant is made. Nevertheless, he held, as did Luther, that infants should be baptized. Why did Calvin believe that those who could not profess faith nor make a covenant should be baptized? Calvin again agreed with Luther's concept that there was a relationship between circumcision in the Old Testament and infant baptism in the New Testament, for both were signs indicating a promise in a covenant. Christ, Calvin further argued, wanted infants to be brought to him, so why shouldn't we extend baptism to them as a symbol of our communion with him? This ordinance also benefits parents, for they then know that God's mercy will extend to their children. It benefits children, for they are reminded that they are members of the church and are adopted by God before acquiring faith. It is true, Calvin acknowledged, that there is no specific mention of infant baptism in the New Testament, but silence is not proof, he argued, for there is no record that women should be admitted to the Lord's Supper. [^23]

Disputes Centering on God's Role in the Salvation Experience

Whereas Catholic theologians were divided on the roles of man and God in the salvation experience—some believed that salvation involves the actions of men coupled with the gift of God while others concluded that salvation was solely the result of the will of God—Luther declared that by God's mercy some of his children were saved from hell and were elected to inherit heaven. According to the instigator of the Reformation, the only role man played in the salvation experience was to recognize his depraved disposition in preparation for the cleansing grace of God. Meanwhile, Calvin argued that God decreed that some men were to inherit heaven and others hell. Even though Luther refused to state that God decreed men to eternal damnation, the fate of all those who were not saved by the grace of God is an inevitable eternal burning in hell. In other words, there are similarities, but also differences, in the concept of predestination as taught by Augustine, Luther, Calvin, and sixteenth century Roman Catholics. It is also apparent that not all Lutherans held to the concept of predestination as taught by the founder of their religion. In 1592, a group of influential divines endorsed the Saxon Visitation Articles which was a repudiation of John Calvin's interpretation of predestination, but indirectly also was a rejection of Luther's opinions. Lutherans recorded in this creed that "God created no man for condemnation"; and wills "that all men should be saved." Therefore he desires all to accept the gospel, and all sinners who repent will be saved. If men fail to partake of this gift, the Visitations declared, it is their fault, not the fault of the Creator. [^24]

The Planting and Spread of Calvinism

Shortly after publishing the first edition of the Institutes, John Calvin traveled and preached in many Swiss villages, finally stopping in Geneva in 1536. At first, temporary success in Geneva was followed by banishment, but in 1541, Calvin was invited by the political leaders of the town to return. Under his persuasive leadership, government and society were rapidly transformed, and a powerful theocracy emerged in Geneva.

Calvin's historical importance, however, does not lie primarily in his accomplishments in this small Swiss town, but in the impetus he gave to the Reformation and in the theological tone he inculcated in the movement. The French reformer reconstructed Geneva into an influential school where reformation principles could be taught. Referring to Geneva as the "city of God," John Knox declared the Swiss town to be the "most perfect school of life . . . on earth since the days of the apostles." After many talented leaders were indoctrinated with Calvinism, they fanned from Geneva, spreading John Calvin's religious convictions throughout Europe. The theology which Calvin popularized is clearly visible in the creeds of many reformed churches which emerged during this era of ecclesiastical revolution such as the Dutch Reformed church, the German Reformed church, the French Huguenot church, the Presbyterian church, and the Congregational church. Consequently, shortly after Lutheranism emerged in Western Europe, Calvinism penetrated Germany, the Netherlands, France, England, and Scotland.

A Popular Expression of Calvinism—The Westminster Confession

A popular exposition of the theology of John Calvin was prepared in England during the seventeenth century Civil War, The Westminster Confession of Faith, 1646. This creed, written by English religious leaders and Scottish commissioners was adopted as the standard of faith by the Scottish and American Presbyterians. Since the American Congregationalists also endorsed the theology described in that creed and since most pre-Revolutionary church members in this land were Calvinists, the Westminster Confession aptly describes the most popular doctrines held by orthodox American colonists. Included in this statement of beliefs is a description of the "infallible" Bible which is the sole norm of faith; of the Trinity of "one substance" and of a God who is a "pure spirit, invisible, without body, parts or passions;" of the fall of man; of the two sacraments, baptism and the Lord's Supper; of the state of man after death and resurrection, of the last judgment; and of the Five Points of Calvinism, total depravity, predestination or election, limited atonement, irresistibility of grace, and perseverance of the saints. [^25]

IV. James Arminius and Man's Responsibility

One of the most famous and misrepresented second-generation opponents of Calvinism was the Dutch theologian, James Arminius (1560-1609). After studying in the Netherlands where Calvinism had previously been planted, Arminius was sent by officials in the city of Amsterdam to Geneva to study under Theodore Beza. While lecturing at the University in Geneva, Beza advanced the theology of John Calvin, including the popularization of new concepts. God's decree of election, Beza taught, occurred prior to the fall of man; and man's fallen state was another aspect of the eternal plan. In 1588, after returning to his native land, Arminius accepted a call to the pastorate of a Reformed church in Amsterdam and became professor of Divinity at the University of Leyden in 1603. While serving as pastor, Arminius agitated a controversy which had been flaring by announcing that Beza's (and Calvin's) definition of election undermined the importance of good works, prayer, and conversion.

God has decreed the election, Arminius declared, of "those who repent and believe" and who persevere in righteousness to the end. Although God dispenses faith, man can resist this faith. Therefore, the decree of condemnation is meant only for those who reject God's call. "Unbelief is partly to be attributed to the fault and wickedness of men, and partly to the just vengeance of God, which deserts, blinds and hardens sinners." Men will be condemned because "light has come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light." Furthermore, Arminius reasoned, because of the sovereignty and omniscience of God, he knows those individuals who will believe and will remain faithful and those who will fail, but this does not mean that God has unconditionally decreed such fate. [^26]

Arminius did not teach, however, that salvation depended upon man's will to be saved. Quoting the words of Christ, "Without me ye can do nothing," Arminius concluded that our will is not free to perform righteous acts unless assisted by grace. Grace is necessary to illuminate the mind and to create in man an inclination to do that which is good. This gift of God, he added, makes it possible for man to endorse and then preserve his salvation. [^27]

In addition to revising the Calvinistic concept of election in favor of another Medieval concept that man cooperates in a limited way with God in the salvation experience, the Dutch theologian denounced the Calvinistic concept of limited atonement in favor of the view expressed in the Lutheran Saxon Visitation Articles of 1592. Christ did not die solely for the elect, the scholar contended, but died for all men. Nevertheless, he agreed, the efficacy of the atonement, "freedom from the condemnation of sin, and its dominion," is applied only to those who believe and persevere in the faith. [^28]

The Five Points of Arminianism

The disciples of Arminius immortalized the name of the Dutch theologian and developed their own five points in contrast to the Five Points of Calvinism. The orthodox Calvinistic concept of the decrees of God was replaced by the doctrine that (1) "the eternal decree of salvation refers to those who shall believe and persevere in the faith." The Calvinistic concept of limited atonement for only the elect was substituted with the belief that (2) Christ's atonement was sufficient for all men, but only the faithful benefit from the act. Irresistibility of grace and perseverance of the saints were denied in favor of the view that (3) men can reject the call by God and (4) can fail to persevere to the end, but "the faithful are assisted by grace in temptation and are kept from falling" by desiring God's help and by living righteously. Arminians endorsed one Calvinistic concept that (5) "man can do nothing truly good until he is born again through the Holy Spirit." [^29] These five views, coupled with an emphasis on the role that man must play to secure salvation, spread rapidly; and although they were condemned in the Netherlands, a new church emerged in that land and exists today as the Remonstrant Brotherhood.

The Infiltration of Arminianism into Many Protestant Societies

As the years passed, many anti-Calvinists, who did not necessarily endorse the precise theology of James Arminius, adopted the name Arminian. In England, liberal Anglicans who emphasized man's role in gaining salvation called themselves after the Dutch theologian; and John Wesley, founder of Methodism, also declared that he was an Arminian. From England, the philosophy spread to America; and a number of colonists, who were members of the Congregational, Presbyterian and other Calvinistic churches, liberally interpreted tenets in their creeds in favor of the Arminian view that man is partially responsible for his salvation. [^30]

V. Menno Simons—Influential Anabaptist Leader

Another influential voice heard by some Christians in the early stage of the Reformation was that of Menno Simons. Born four years after the effectual discovery of America by Christopher Columbus, Simons matured in the province of Friesland, located in the northwestern corner of Continental Europe. While Simons was still a young boy, his parents, who were Dutch peasants, decided to consecrate their son to the service of the Catholic church which made it possible for Simons to receive a good education. After his ordination in 1525, the twenty-eight year old priest was assigned to a parish in the area where he had previously lived; and for twelve years, Simons conscientiously fulfilled his priestly responsibilities.

Meanwhile, in 1525, Conrad Grebel organized in Zurich, Switzerland, a group of believers in adult baptism. From Zurich the movement spread rapidly into southern Germany; and in the midst of severe persecution, Anabaptist traveling preachers extended their message to other parts of Europe. As early as 1530, lay preachers re-introduced a popular Medieval concept of adult baptism in East Friesland, baptized Catholics, and then witnessed the execution of many of their converts.

At the same time that Anabaptist views were being circulated in East Friesland, the writings of Luther were being read and popularized by Dutchmen. The exposure of innovations and abuses of Catholicism caused doubts to arise in the minds of many orthodox Catholics, including Menno Simons. He first began to wonder if Christ was recrucified during the Mass and if the miracle of transubstantiation occurred. Where could he turn to determine the truth? Eventually, Simons sought an answer in the scriptures, and concluded that there was a conflict in the teachings of the Roman Catholic church and the message inscribed in the Bible. As far as he was concerned, he was forced into choosing which of the two was the highest authority, realizing that the church proclaimed that those who rejected its teachings would be consigned to eternal punishment. In the midst of his trials, Simons was comforted by the words of Luther that violation of the teachings of men would never lead to eternal death. Sometime about the year 1528, Menno Simons concluded that he would employ the Bible as his sole source of information for religious truths. Then, in 1531, a tailor was executed in a neighboring city for endorsing believer's baptism and being baptized a second time. Previously, Simons had not seriously questioned infant baptism, but this event caused him to investigate the subject, which led him to acknowledge that the Catholics and leading Protestant reformers were teaching incorrectly on this subject.

However, even though Simons had rejected the Catholic position on two sacraments, he still continued to officiate at the Mass and to baptize infants; but his conscience condemned him, reminding him that such action was hypocrisy. Finally, he felt impelled to sound his convictions. Courageously, the evangelical priest faced the threat of execution and eternal death by denouncing doctrines of the dominant church. In 1536, Simons left the Catholic church; and although a number who befriended him were executed, Simons succeeded in defying the authorities and found a retreat in a neighboring province in northern Holland. There he studied, wrote, received ordination as an elder or bishop, and preserved a collapsing Anabaptist movement. Then the new leader of the Anabaptists shifted his labors south to Amsterdam and from there to northwestern Germany and to the region north, along the Baltic seacoast. In 1561, twenty-five years after his renunciation of Catholicism, the Dutch leader of the Anabaptists died. [^31]

Beliefs Popularized by Menno Simons

Although Simons and other Anabaptists of the Reformation era did not produce a systematic analysis of their theology, Simons did publish numerous tracts, instructing others on various doctrines and condemning what he regarded as errors of belief or practice. One of the major themes popularized by this Dutchman was that an apostasy in primitive Christianity had occurred as predicted in the New Testament. Paul foretold, Simons averred, that "in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils." The scriptures teach, Simons continued, that this falling away would occur before the second coming of Christ. There is ample, visible evidence that the Church of Christ has been replaced by the "church of the Antichrist," for "false doctrines of the learned ones, the many mutually contradictory councils, decretals, statutes, doctrines, and commandments of men" have been substituted for the gospel of Christ. [^32] According to Simons, the granting of indulgences; belief in transubstantiation, purgatory, infant baptism, and invocation of deceased saints; distinctions regarding food; the ceremony of the Mass; pilgrimages, the use of holy water and icons; ministers preaching for filthy lucre and stipulated salaries, the employment of Godfathers or sponsors; and the permitting of the ungodly to partake of the Lord's Supper are the most apparent unscriptural innovations revealing the reality of the apostasy. [^33]

Since Simons was one of the few reformers to adopt adult baptism, he wrote many works describing his reasons for rejecting infant baptism. Although he agreed with others that because of the fall of Adam all men are "wholly depraved and children of death and of hell," born of sinful nature and inclined to evil, he rejected the Catholic doctrine that baptism removed the guilt of original sin. This original sin, Simon concluded, is removed only by the merits of the atonement of Christ being applied for our benefit; and the merits are applied through faith not by baptism. Nor do we receive a remission of sins by baptism, Simons argued, but by faith, for where there is no faith there is no promise. However, he insisted that those who have faith will indicate their obedience by being baptized. [^34]

Infants, he continued, are not required to show a sign of obedience. Christ did not baptize but blessed children. His apostles taught that baptism was reserved for those who believe; and before one is regenerated, the Word must be heard and believed. Therefore, infant baptism is unscriptural. It is true, Simons reasoned, four families are mentioned in the scriptures as having been baptized, but we know that three of the families consisted of believers. There is no evidence that in the other family there were infants, and the Biblical word "household" does not include minor children. Even though Origen and Augustine asserted that the apostles taught infant baptism, they cannot prove this from the scriptures; meanwhile, other early Fathers wrote that the practice was rejected by the disciples of Christ.

Although infants inherit an evil disposition, have no faith, and are not baptized, if they die in this state they are not consigned to hell, Simons proclaimed. "Oh, no! they are saved . . . solely by grace through Christ . . . and . . . are . . . heirs of God and of eternal life." Therefore all Christians may rejoice and comfort in the fact that their children and even the children of the unbelievers will be saved. [^35]

After considering the popular Lutheran and Calvinistic argument that circumcision of boys was replaced by baptism of males and females, Simons replied that there is no scriptural evidence of this transformation. We do not become children of any covenant by baptism, he declared, but solely by election of the grace of Christ. Infant baptism as practiced by nearly the "whole world" is "nothing but a ceremony of Antichrist, open blasphemy, a bewitching sin, a molten calf; yes, abomination and idolatry." [^36]

In conclusion, Simons wrote that baptism is a token of obedience, a sign indicating our faith, and since infants cannot comply with such a rule and cannot have faith, they should not be baptized. Moreover, "if faith always brings forth good fruits . . . what fruits of righteousness . . . do our little children bring forth?" In answering this question Simons stated that infants do not demonstrate the operation of faith, but instead show by their actions that they have inherited the evil seed of Adam. Furthermore, the Dutch apologist wrote that if individuals arrived at the years of discretion and failed to obtain faith, they would be damned. [^37]

Menno Simons popularized other distinguishing characteristics of Anabaptist theology. He emphasized that the infallible Word of God as contained in the Bible was the sole norm of faith. He said that the church was a community of believers who proclaimed the word of God and performed good works. He held that a gathering of saints possessed the authority to call preachers to the Lord's service and that ministers were to be ordained by the laying on of hands by elders or members of the congregation. He advocated the separation of church and state, endorsed believer's baptism (but not by immersion), and concluded that Anabaptism was a restoration of primitive Christianity. [^38]

Since Menno Simons became one of the most eminent leaders of the Anabaptist movement, some of the followers of this Dutch apologist began calling themselves "Menist" and eventually this wing of the Anabaptist movement adopted the name Mennonite. The Mennonites dogmatically adopted Simons' teaching that "a plain and humble soul will never show off in gold, pearls, or costly apparel"; will be "honest, chaste, sober; and will never drink, talk, sing, and dance with shameless women." [^39] They also endorsed his concept of nonresistance and non-swearing of oaths and separation from the world. Frequently, in their attempt to live the New Testament concept of having all things in common, these pietistic groups have organized into separate economic, political, and social units; and as they have struggled to adopt a literal interpretation of the Bible and to prevent absorption into the "worldly society," Mennonites have been plagued by the continual emergence of conscientious leaders who have sponsored conflicting views. Probably these Protestants have divided into more different sects than any other group of similar size in Christendom. The Reformed Mennonite church, the Church of God in Christ, the Amish, the Hutterian Brethren, the Evangelical Mennonite church, and the United Missionary church are only a few of the many small denominations whose historical roots can be traced to the accomplishments of Menno Simons.

VI. The Counter-Reformation

By 1560, Protestantism had been firmly planted in all countries north of the Alps, except France and the Netherlands and in these Catholic lands there were strong forces working in favor of the creation of reformed churches. Catholics responded to the ecclesiastical revolt by inaugurating their own reformation. To curtail the spread of Protestantism and to infuse a new religious spirit in the church, the Catholics organized several religious orders, the most influential being the Society of Jesus (Jesuits). Employing aggressive missionary tactics, the Jesuits fought Protestantism with almost every conceivable weapon and worked zealously to eliminate abuses and to ignite new spirituality within the church. The Catholics also prepared an index of prohibitive works, which included the scriptures in the vernacular and restored the inquisition as a weapon to destroy heresy. After creating many trails of human blood, the inquisitors witnessed the crushing of the seeds of Protestantism in Italy and several other sections of Western Europe. A third major agency of the Counter-Reformation was the influential Council of Trent, which eliminated much of the theological variety and confusion that had existed in the Latin church throughout the Middle Ages.

This Counter-Reformation or Catholic Reformation was extremely successful in curbing the advancement of Protestantism and in reforming the church. After 1560, only one other land, the Netherlands, became Protestanized, and a Catholic-awakening occurred in parts of Europe. While increased doctrinal unity emerged, many abuses in the Catholic church were purged. By the end of the first quarter of the seventeenth century, Catholicism again was the dominant religion in southern Germany, Poland, southern Netherlands, Hungary, Moravia, and Bohemia. In France the seeds of Protestantism failed to grow; and in Italy and Spain Protestantism was almost completely destroyed. Except for the expansion of Protestantism to America, it wasn't until the nineteenth century that another major advancement of Protestantism altered the religious complexion of the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] G. R. Elton, England Under the Tudors (London: Methuen and Co., 1956), 102-11.
[^2] J. E. Neale, Queen Elizabeth (New York: Doubleday and Co., n.d.), 1-3.
[^3] Norman Sykes, The Crisis of the Reformation (London: Geoffrey Bles, 1950), 80-85; Elton, op. cit., Chaps. V and VI. An excellent description of the inauguration of the English Reformation is also included in Philip Hughes, The Reformation in England (3 vols., London: Hollis and Carter, 1954), I, Chaps. III and IV; II, Chap. II.
[^4] A valuable collection of source material pertaining to the Edwardine religious reforms is The Two Liturgies, A.D. 1549, and A.D. 1552: with other Documents Set Forth by Authority in the Reign of King Edward VI, Joseph Ketley, ed. (Cambridge, 1844).
[^5] For a more detailed analysis of the Elizabethan Settlement see Carl S. Meyers, Elizabeth I and the Religious Settlement of 1559 (Saint Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1960).
[^6] The Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England are included in Thomas Rogers, The Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England, An Exposition of the Thirty-nine Articles (Cambridge, 1854). This articles of religion has also been included in a paperbound book which has recently been published, John H. Leith's Creeds of the Churches (New York: Doubleday and Co., 1963).
[^7] The best descriptions of the emergence of Puritanism and the nature of this movement are Marshall Mason Knappen, Tudor Puritanism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1939); William Haller, The Rise of Puritanism (New York: Harper Torchbook, 1957); and Perry Miller, The New England Mind: The Seventeenth Century (New York: Macmillan Co., 1939).
[^8] Knappen, op cit., 189-90, Quoted by permission.
[^9] A. C. M'Giffert, Protestant Thought Before Kant (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1936), 130-31; Scott Pearson, Thomas Cartwright and Elizabethan Puritanism (Cambridge:, The University Press, 1925), viii, 407.
[^10] Gais Glenn Atkins and Frederick L. Fagley, History of American Congregationalism (Boston: The Pilgrim Press, 1942), 28.
[^11] Robert G. Torbet, A History of the Baptists (Philadelphia: The Judson Press, 1955), 65-66, 69-72.
[^12] Ibid., Chap. I.
[^13] George Fox, The Journal of George Fox (Cambridge: University Press, 1952), 1-8, Fox's Journal is an indispensable source of information about his life.
[^14] Ibid., 7-11, 27, 33.
[^15] Ibid., 18-21; William C. Braithwaite, The Beginnings of Quakerism (London: 1912), 42, 70, 307.
[^16] Braithwaite, op. cit., 57.
[^17] Vernon Noble, The Man in Leather Breeches (New York: Philosophical Library, 1953), 136, 167.
[^18] Braithwaite, op. cit., 132, 512; Noble, op. cit., 275; Frederick B. Tolles, Quakers and the Atlantic Culture (New York: Macmillan Co., 1960), 24.
[^19] B. Rhodes, Three Apostles of Quakerism (Philadelphia: Henry Longstreth, 1886), 146.
[^20] Robert Barclay, An Apology for the True Christian Divinity, as the Same is Held Forth, and Preached, by the People Called, in Scorn, Quakers, (6th ed., London: T. Sowle, Raylton, and Luke Hinde, 1736), 5, 26, 80-83.
[^21] Ibid., 6, 106.
[^22] Ibid., 7-10, 110-11, 118, 132, 153, 263.
[^23] Ibid., 187-96, 273-74, 278.
[^24] Ibid., 104, 107.
[^25] Ibid., 12-13, 347, 355, 361.
[^26] Rupert E. Davies, The Problem of Authority in the Continental Reformers (London: Epworth Press, 1946), 57-58.
[^27] Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, Fathers of the English Dominican Province, trans. (3 vols., New York: Benziger Brothers, Inc., 1947), II, 1217 (Pt. 11-11, Q. 10, Art. 6). Quoted by permission of the copyright owners—Benziger Brothers, Inc.
[^28] Ibid., 1226 (Pt. 11-11, Q. 11, Art. 3).
[^29] Ibid., 1227 (Pt. 11-11, Q. 11, Art. 4).
[^30] Joseph Lecler, Toleration and the Reformation, T. L. Westow, trans. (2 vols., New York: Association Press, 1960), I, 150-55, 247.
[^31] Ibid., 159-61; William A. Mueller, Church and State in Luther and Calvin (Nashville, Tenn.: Broadman Press, 1954), 60-67.
[^32] Lecler, op. cit., 245.
[^33] John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, Henry Beveridge, trans. (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1957), II, 653 (IV :xx:3).
[^34] Ibid., 130-31, 504.
[^35] Ibid., 131, 134-36, 707.
[^36] Ibid., 133.
[^37] Ibid., 240-41.
[^38] Ibid., 62, 109-110, 159-60, 189, 232, 666-67, 734, 1042.
[^39] Ibid., 182-83.
