Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER THREE

The English Reformation

Whereas the earliest leaders of the Reformation on the Continent were Catholic clergymen or superior students of theology, the ecclesiastical reform in England was inaugurated by a king, Henry VIII. Throughout his life, the sensual but talented king showed a concern for religion, attending services in the royal chapel two or three times a day with faithful regularity. He was also a student of the scriptures, and numerous churchmen sincerely praised the Tudor king for his devotion to the church. After Lutheran literature drifted into England, despite attempts by the government to suppress these writings, Henry VIII issued a work condemning this "heresy," and because of his faithfulness in denouncing the German rebel, the pope graciously bestowed upon this ruler the title of Defender of the Faith.

Most Englishmen supported their handsome and popular monarch in his renunciation of Lutheranism. Although Lutheran views were items for discussion in Cambridge, London and other parts of England and though Lutheran literature increased in popularity in the 1520's, only a few outspoken theological critics emerged in England. Most of these early sixteenth century disciples of Luther either fled to the Continent or were executed. One of the best known English "heretics" was William Tyndale. After arriving in London in 1523, Tyndale was influenced by Lutheran arguments. Concluding that the Bible was the supreme authority of the church, he determined to translate the scriptures into English. To accomplish this goal, Tyndale found it expedient to move across the channel. Eventually, after completing the translation and issuing other publications, Tyndale was apprehended and burned to death.

I. Formative Forces in the English Reformation

The Exposure of Abuses

Although most Englishmen endorsed Henry's stand in support of orthodox Catholic theology, they held attitudes that unconsciously prepared them for a break with Rome. Many in England had almost lost all respect for the clergy. Most people were critical of the wealth, worldliness, and political activities of the higher clergy. They recognized the existence of pluralism, non-residency and simony. They ridiculed the incompetence and ignorance of the lower clergy and concluded (although often their beliefs were based on malicious gossip) that many of the clergy, especially the monks and nuns, were immoral.

The Anti-clerical Attitude of the English People

Anti-clericalism prompted some to attack the wealth of the church, including the extensive land holdings of the church. By means of bishops, abbots, and other clergy, the church held approximately one-third of all the land in England. Many objected to the payment of tithes to support what was regarded as a corrupt organization. Others complained that Englishmen should not pay annates and Peter's pence for such money was shipped to foreigners. Moreover, many no longer considered the monasteries as serving a useful purpose, but regarded this institution as an economic liability.

Nationalism and Materialism

Nationalism also became more evident in England in the years immediately prior to the Reformation. The sovereignty of the king was respected far more than the primacy claimed by the pope. It is also apparent that the Englishmen of the sixteenth century were not deeply religious in the sense that they placed their faith and church above social, political, and economic ambitions. Therefore, in pre-Reformation England there was a strange combination of anti-clericalism, material ambitions, and allegiance to orthodox Catholic dogma.

While there was an outward appearance of orthodoxy in England, the numbers who recognized the innovations in Catholic theology were increasing substantially. But the Luthers, Calvins, and Tyndales failed to ignite the English Reformation. This important religious movement was launched by action from the government; and a reformation of theology became a second stage of development. On the other hand, in Germany and Switzerland, pious reformers rallied the people by aptly revealing alterations which had occurred in the gospel of Christ, and then in the second stage of development, permitted the religious movement to be advanced by political leaders. [^1]

II. The Rise of the Church of England

The Annulment Issue

The occasion, although not the cause, which led to the English Reformation was Henry VIII's desire to secure an annulment of his marriage to Catherine, and to marry his mistress Anne Boleyn, thereby securing a legitimate male heir to the throne. Henry feared that a revolution might erupt if Mary, the daughter of Catherine, succeeded to the throne. Only once in English history since the Norman Conquest had a woman ruled, and she (Mitilda) occupied the throne during war-time conditions. In 1527, Catherine of Aragon was forty-two and five of her children, three who were boys, were still-born or died in infancy. Meanwhile, during the years when Henry was craving a male heir, he fell in love with his mistress, Anne Boleyn. Torn by love and regard for the future of his country, Henry decided that the death of his sons was evidence that as husband of Catherine, he was living in sin. Therefore, Henry sought an annulment of his marriage. Since the Catholic church does not grant divorces, Henry knew that Pope Clement VII would not permit this type of separation, but the monarch argued that since he had married (by special papel permission) his deceased brother's wife, he had not been properly married to Catherine. Previously, popes had granted annulments and Henry insisted that action be taken favoring his petition. However, Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, a nephew of Catherine, was not in favor of this action for it would have brought disgrace to his family. To further complicate the situation, the pope was a virtual prisoner of Charles V. Consequently, the desired action on Henry's petition was not forthcoming. After attempting for six years to secure a papal sanction granting an annulment, Henry began living with Anne Boleyn. In January, 1533, she was with child; and probably on January 25, Henry and Anne were secretly married. The ensuing May, Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, declared Henry's marriage with Catherine null and void and acknowledged the marriage with his former mistress. [^2]

The Gradual Break with Rome

Meanwhile, in an attempt to coerce Clement VII into yielding to his demands, Henry VIII had launched what became the preliminary steps to the English Reformation. Recognizing the public's dislike of the clergy and their complaints of economic exactions by the church, Henry VIII summoned Parliament, inviting the political elite to consider reforming the abuses within the church. In 1529, Parliament responded by enacting legislation forbidding pluralism and non-residence. Then, in the summer of 1530, many bishops and other leading clergy were summoned to the court of the king and were accused and found guilty of violating the statute of praemunire. This fourteenth century law forbade others to attain or sue in Rome or elsewhere "anything . . . which touches the king, . . . his crown, . . . or his realm." The fact that the meaning of the act was vague, as history clearly reveals, gave Henry VIII the opportunity to apply to this act a narrow interpretation that would intimidate the clergy. In December 1530, all the clergy were indicted, fined, and compelled to endorse Henry's demand that he was the "supreme head," although this title at that time appeared meaningless. The path toward secession had also been blazed in 1532 when the clergy were forced into accepting Henry as their supreme legislator, when annates were discontinued, and bills were introduced providing for the ordination of clergy to the office of bishop solely by English authorities.

Pressure on the English clergy, elimination of some abuses, and stripping the pope of revenue from England had failed to produce the papal dispensation. Finally, Henry could wait no longer. After learning that Anne was with child, the monarch concluded that his divorce and re-marriage was necessary so that the expected son could become the legitimate male heir. Recognizing that such action forced him to defy the highest authority in the church, Henry concluded that he was impelled to eliminate the pope from the Catholic church in England.

After learning of his excommunication in 1533, Henry instructed the bishops to deliver sermons advising the parishioners that, according to God's law, the pope is subject to the council and has no more authority in England than any other foreign bishop. The only authority previously exercised by the pope, Henry argued, was that granted to them by the king. Papal claims of power, he added, are human usurpations offensive to God. The monarch further declared that his views regarding the papacy were to be taught by abbots, priests, and other clergy. Complying with royal decrees, bishops and lower clergy circulated anti-papal propaganda, thereby preparing the people for an ecclesiastical revolt.

Early Characteristics of the Church of England

With Parliamentary sanction, Henry VIII directed the creation of a national church in England. It was during the Parliamentary sessions of 1534 that the momentous break with Rome was secured, for at that time the English sovereign was recognized as the head of the church in England, meaning the supreme leader. Provisions were also made by Parliament to transfer ecclesiastical revenue, which previously crossed the English channel, into the treasury of the state and all papal claims of powers and rights were denied.

The religious life of the people was not immediately altered by the inauguration of the English Reformation. The English people did not regard the initial reform measures by Henry as an ecclesiastical revolt. Few Englishmen recognized any ecclesiastical changes. Few opposed the innovations, and few became martyrs for the pope. The masses had not previously been in direct contact with the pope and welcomed the discontinuance of paying Peter's pence. Services continued without interruption or alteration. With the exception of a change in the organization of the church or the elimination of the Catholic dogma regarding the pope, his primace, infallibility, and authority, there was no disruption of Catholicism in England. The new church was Roman Catholicism without a pope (if one can employ the church name after its highest authority has been eliminated), or Catholicism with a king serving as a papal replacement. In addition to being recognized as the head of the church, the king and his advisors, working with Parliament, determined the organization, the liturgy, and basic doctrines of the church. The king obtained authority to appoint bishops, to control religious orders, and to grant dispensations. The king also cooperated with the bishops in governing the church. The highest clergy were ordained to their positions by the bishops who claimed that in spite of the separation, they had retained their authority, for as Henry argued, such power does not rest in the pope but in the church.

In addition to the elimination of papal authority, a few other ecclesiastical changes occurred during the reign of Henry VIII. Under the direction of Henry's leading adviser, Thomas Cromwell, the monasteries and all religious orders were suppressed, the confiscated property reverting to the state. The treasury of the king was thereby replenished, the aristocracy who purchased the estates were brought into increased allegiance to the Crown and Protestantism, the poor turned to the parishes for relief, and the monks and nuns adopted a new type of living. Then, in 1538, the clergy were ordered to encourage their parishioners to read the English Bible; and shortly thereafter, the priests were told to discourage pilgrimages, the burning of candles before images or relics, and the kissing of religious objects. Such proclamations ignited the flames of iconoclasm, leading to the destruction of numerous shrines, pictures, and effigies.

In order to insure additional doctrinal uniformity, the king, his advisers, and Parliament periodically issued official statements of what was to be regarded as orthodox doctrines, such as the Ten Articles (1536), the Bishops' Book (1537), the Six Articles (1539), and the King's Book (1543). In these instructions, the seven sacraments of the Catholic church were mentioned (although all were not specifically defended as sacraments) and many other orthodox Catholic beliefs such as transubstantiation, veneration of images and saints, prayers for the dead, and efficacy of good works were defended. There was, however, a marked degree of ambiguity regarding some beliefs and practices of the church. Silence on some subjects caused one group of Englishmen to read into the instructions that Anglicans need not believe such dogmas nor accept some practices as sacraments. Others concluded that the failure on the part of the English leaders to discuss some doctrines meant that the former belief was retained by the church. Therefore, gradually two wings emerged in the church, one faction leaning toward Continental Protestantism and the other dogmatically holding to orthodox Catholicism. Throughout the reign of the Defender of the Faith, however, the pro-Catholic element was the dominant faction of the national church.

While Henry VIII, with the assistance of his advisors and Parliament, was creating a new religion in England, he was also attempting to solve the succession problem. Everyone said that Anne Boleyn's child would be a boy, but to the dismay of the monarch and the populace, Anne gave birth to a princess who was named Elizabeth. After Anne gave premature birth to a male child in 1536, Henry desperately sought revenge. Possibly his conscience pricked him to acknowledge that he was living in sin, but his misgivings did not lead to repentance. Anne was accused of adultery with five men, one of whom was her brother. Historians do not know if the accusations were just; nevertheless, all the accused, including Anne Boleyn were found guilty and executed. Another wife was sought to further the king's ambition; and the day after Anne's execution, Henry was betrothed to Jane Seymour. Although this queen died in childbirth, her son lived, becoming the next king of England, Edward VI. Henry's other matrimonial adventures, which included three other women, were not productive of children. Therefore, in his will, Henry stipulated that the Crown was to be given to Edward. If Edward died without heirs, Mary was to become Queen, followed by Elizabeth. In 1547, a delicate, sickly, nine-year-old boy, who was being raised a Protestant, became king of England. [^3]

Ecclesiastical Reforms during the Reign of Edward

The undercurrent of Protestant theology which gradually increased during the reign of Henry VIII erupted during Edward's reign, seeping deeply into the beliefs and practices of the national church. Although Henry desired the government to be controlled by a council during the years when Edward was too young to rule, the council, with the young king's approval, permitted Edward Seymour, the Duke of Somerset, to become the domineering political figure in England. Somerset, Edward's uncle, was a convert to the basic principles of the Continental Reformation and exercised his authority to alter appreciably the beliefs and practices of the church, which trend was accelerated after his replacement, John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, directed affairs in the realm.

Between 1547 and 1553, the beliefs of the Church of England were clearly defined in favor of the Protestant view. By the repeal of the heresy laws, Protestants from the Continent were encouraged to migrate to England. The Statute of Six Articles, which had defended the Mass, a sacrament of one kind, and transubstantiation, was also repealed, and all restrictions on printing and use of the Bible were removed. The Mass was replaced by a communion service which transferred what had been a literal sacrifice into a commemorative act. The wording of the prayer in the Lord's Supper was changed so that communicants partook of the emblems in remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ. Transubstantiation, purgatory, indulgences, and veneration of images and relics were declared innovations repugnant to the Word of God. Numerous ceremonies and practices employing the use of holy water, ashes, and alms were eliminated, and the veneration of the cross was ordered to be discontinued. Pilgrimages were forbidden. Instructions to destroy all shrines and religious paintings and stained glass windows revealing religious scenes precipitated a new wave of iconoclasm. English language replaced Latin in the church services. Extreme unction and all other rites employing oil were eliminated. In confirmation not only the oil was eliminated but also the making of the sign of the cross. Confession to priests was no longer deemed necessary. Only two practices, in the strictest sense, were regarded as sacraments. The impact of Continental Protestantism in the Church of England is best summarized in the Forty-two Articles of Religion. This creed, prepared by Thomas Cranmer, was the first comprehensive statement of belief for the church and bears a striking resemblance to the creeds and popular doctrines proclaimed by the reformers in Germany and Switzerland.

Since the masses had not been prepared for such an ecclesiastical revolt, it is not surprising that the people viewed these developments with mixed emotion, some sincerely approving the innovations and others dogmatically opposing the new religion. Although there were rebellions against the new dispensation, the uprisings were crushed by the king's armies and the opposition failed to develop a sustained offense. Fear of reprisals, lack of religious zeal, materialistic attitudes, and allegiance to the sovereignty of the state were among the important factors which prevented effective, widespread organization by the pro-Catholic element in England. Although it is impossible to determine the extent of the conversions of the English people to Protestant theology during the reign of Edward VI, it is evident that, before the death of the boy king, the Church of England was protestantized. [^4]

The Counter-Reformation in England

Following the death of Edward VI in 1553 and the subsequent change in royalty, a counter-reformation occurred. Within six months, Mary, who had been reared a Catholic, succeeded in directing Parliament to repeal all the Edwardine religious legislation. Another act of repeal eliminated eighteen ecclesiastical laws enacted during Henry VIII's reign, the design being to restore the "status quo" of 1547. The ancient Catholic rites and ceremonies, including the Mass, were restored. Almost overnight, the pro-Protestant faction within the church changed from saints to heretics. With the reversal of the tide, a new group of martyrs laid down their lives before the arm of the state. Many fled England to become the Marian exiles. Northumberland, who plotted to prevent Mary from securing the throne, was executed and his chief advisers were sent to the Tower, replacing the pro-Catholic Anglicans who were released. In November 1554, the English cardinal and papal legate, Reginald Pole, announced that the schism had been healed and the Catholic church in England had been received back into communion with the Roman church.

The reestablishment of Catholicism was not enthusiastically supported by the masses in England. Since the Reformation was introduced, anti-clerical, anti-papal, and nationalistic attitudes had increased considerably. Influential gentry opposed the restoration of church property, for such action would have reduced their estates. Many were not in favor of a restoration of certain ecclesiastical exactions. The desires of the people and Parliament and various diplomatic developments interfered with Mary's plan to restore completely and permanently the Catholicism of the pre-Reformation era. Since the inexperienced and inept woman ruler reigned for only five years and did not provide her country with a male heir to the throne, Mary's restoration was of short duration. Her rule, however, clearly revealed that the English people did not favor a restoration of papal authority. When Elizabeth, a Protestant, was crowned queen, England awaited the inauguration of another dispensation.

The Elizabethan Settlement

Skillfully, the talented Queen Elizabeth undertook to settle permanently the religious issue. To prevent a Catholic uprising, immediately after Mary's death, Elizabeth issued a proclamation forbidding any religious alterations, continued to have Mass performed in her private chapel, and refused to endorse the title supreme head of the church. The delay was temporary, but served its purpose to increase her popularity and to rally behind her the support of various factions. Shrewdly, Elizabeth determined to proceed slowly and cautiously, awaiting favorable periods for the settlement of thorny religious issues. Being raised without Catholic indoctrination, she was living in a new generation and realized that orthodox Catholicism would decline in England with the passage of time. Nevertheless, appointments of the highest clergy had to be made and such decisions turned the church again toward Protestantism. Pressure from the Protestant element increased as the Marian exiles returned, and these reformers demanded a restoration of the reforms adopted during Edward's reign. To silence the zealous Catholics and Protestants, on December 27, 1558, Elizabeth forbade all preaching and teaching until further notice.

Then in 1559, when Parliament assembled, the Protestants emerged to dominate the proceedings, insisting upon an immediate settlement of the religious issue. An act was passed abolishing the Mass. The few monasteries which Mary had restored were again annexed to the Crown and all claims of papal power in England were refuted. Parliament approved the Edwardine Prayer Book of 1552, with a few alterations, as the only authorized liturgy. The queen was also recognized as the "supreme governor" of the church, but the doctrines of the church were not clearly enunciated at this time. Parliament broadly interpreted heresy as that which violated the "authority of the canonical scriptures," or decisions of the first four general councils or other councils whose decisions harmonize with the teachings found in the Bible. By these actions, the queen, her advisors, Parliament, and the clergy meeting in convocation shared in determining the nature of the new church, the only legal religion in England. [^5]

Following the creation of this national church, there was no precise body of doctrines formulated to which the people were required to subscribe. The prayer book was vague on many issues, and as the people worshipped they interpreted the words differently. Elizabeth insisted that the people attend the services of the Church of England and recognize her as the supreme governor of the church, but the monarch was not dogmatic in requiring the people to hold to a particular set of beliefs. By her theological lenience, the queen tried to prevent division and to win the support of as many individuals as possible. She directed the church along a road which neither led back to Rome nor the Protestantism of the Continent as outlined by the Marian Exiles.

The Anglican Exposition of Faith

It was not until 1571, twenty-three years after Elizabeth had become queen, that the monarch endorsed an Articles of Religion for the national church. The Thirty-nine Articles were similar to the Forty-two Articles which had been enacted during Edward's reign and were approved by the religious leaders of the church meeting in convocation, by Parliament, and by the "supreme governor." These articles provided the people with a norm of faith which was Lutheran (as found primarily in the Augsburg Confession) and Calvinistic in tone. However, even though there was some Continental influence found in the articles, there is also an apparent ambiguity in some statements that was probably designed to allow diversity within the church regarding controversial theological issues. The creed was usually explicit on issues endorsed by Lutherans and Calvinists but was generally vague when describing doctrines that divided these two large wings of the Protestant fold.

The English creed specified that the Creator is an invisible God "without body, parts, or passions [meaning unchangeable or incapable of suffering]," consisting of three persons of "one substance." Christ, the creed continued, was crucified to remove "original guilt" and "all actual sins of man" and to "reconcile his Father to us." After his resurrection with a body of flesh and bones, the Savior "ascended into heaven, and there sitteth, until he return to judge all men at the last day."

The articles of faith further stated that the Holy Scripture contains everything necessary to salvation. Without specifying that the Bible was inerrant, the creed declared that the church does not doubt the authority of the Old and New Testament and regards these books as canonical.

Some of the most ambigious statements in this creed were recorded in the descriptions of the nature of man and the meaning of predestination. Although the articles declared that Adam's sin was imputed to man, that man was by nature inclined to evil, and that man was "very far gone," the creed did not specifically state that man was totally depraved. The creed also did not mention man's role in the salvation experience but implied that man did not participate. The creed said that since man has no power to do good works pleasing to God, justification is solely the gift of God. Included in the description of predestination was the statement that "We must receive God's promise in such wise, as they be generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture; and, in our doings, that Will of God is to be followed." Conflicting interpretations of this dubious statement created divisions in the church and men influenced by the theology advanced by both John Calvin and James Arminius claimed to be the proper interpreters of the Thirty-nine Articles. There have been periods in which the tone of the Church of England has been Calvinistic, but during most of the history of this church, the majority of the Anglicans have granted man a responsibility in the salvation experience.

In describing the sacraments, the creed specified that sacraments are not only badges or tokens of men's profession, but are "sure witnesses and effectual signs of grace, and God's good will towards us." By means of sacraments, God invisibly strengthens our faith in him. There are two sacraments, the creed added, baptism and the Lord's Supper. Without mentioning whether or not baptism was essential, the confession of faith asserted that baptism is a sign of rebirth or regeneration. By this ordinance, the creed stated, our adoption as sons of God is sealed by the Holy Ghost, so that faith is confirmed and grace increased. Infant baptism should be retained, the creed added, and in the Lord's Supper, the body of Christ should be taken only "after an heavenly and spiritual manner."

The articles also declared that the visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in which the Word of God is preached and the sacraments correctly administered. Moreover, the exposition of faith reaffirmed the views pronounced by Luther and Calvin that transubstantiation, purgatory, worshiping and adoration of images and relics, and invocation of the saints are repugnant to the Word of God. [^6]

Throughout her reign, Elizabeth permitted a wide latitude of belief in the church, a distinguishing character of the Church of England which has continued to this day. Nevertheless, the queen insisted that all her subjects attend the services of the one church. To prevent schisms and rise of sects in England, the competent ruler employed the techniques of her predecessors. The most overzealous reformers and outspoken fanatics were apprehended and fined, imprisoned, banished, or executed. Meanwhile, a new generation who knew only one religion, the Church of England, emerged in the land ruled for nearly a half a century by Queen Elizabeth.

III. The Emergence of Puritanism

By exhorting others to study the Bible and by recommending individual interpretation of the Bible directed by the Spirit, the reformers opened the gates of controversy. There were many in England who were dissatisfied with the "compromise church" which arose during the age of Elizabeth. Many, especially the Marian exiles who had returned to their native land, demanded additional reforms, recommending that the services, polity, and interpretations of the Articles of Religion follow closely the program adopted by the Protestants on the Continent. During Elizabeth's reign, one group who desired to purge the Church of England of what were regarded as Catholic elements became known as Puritans. The distinguishing feature of early Tudor Puritanism was neither creed nor theory of church government but the desire for change. Although the leading dissenters disagreed on the precise nature of the reforms, many of the demands for change followed a common pattern. Following the Elizabethan Settlement, Puritans attacked liturgical garments worn by the clergy, especially the use of the cap and surplice, condemned the use of the cross as a symbol, criticized the use of the ring in marriage, disapproved of kneeling at the reception of the sacrament, and regarded much of the ritual in the church as paganistic or popish (Catholic). The earliest Elizabethan reformers also protested against suggestions of a real-presence of Christ in the Lord's Supper and denied that the bishop possessed spiritual powers superior to those of other ministers. Almost everyone in the realm, however, held that there should be only one church in England and that the church should be supported by the state. [^7]

Puritan Controversies

As the years passed, the Puritan movement became more varied and complex. After Elizabeth intervened in an ecclesiastical dispute and settled the affair in a manner not approved by some, Puritans asked, "Did the secular ruler have the power to compel the clergy to adopt a practice which was inimical to the cause of true religion? Was the church to settle its own affairs and set its own course, or were the intelligentsia of England to be reduced to the level of tutors in the households of the great?" Many Puritans answered these questions by declaring the church should be independent of royal control. The members of Christian churches should govern themselves. [^8]

One influential Puritan, Robert Browne, concluded that the only effective procedure for reforming the church was to separate from Anglicanism and organize independent congregations. In order for the church to free itself from all outside control, Browne reasoned, it must be completely independent of the actions of the state. Another prominent Tudor Puritan, Thomas Cartwright, rejected proposals of separation. Cartwright admired the ecclesiastical establishment in Scotland, and in 1572, recommended to Parliament that the Church of England be organized after the pattern adopted by the church of Scotland. Presbyterianism is the government sanctioned by the scriptures, Cartwright averred. The administration of the church should be transferred from the bishops to representative assemblies. Although he declared that the scriptures revealed the independence of the church from the state, he believed that the right and duty of the civil magistrate was to support and cooperate with the church. Yet, this cooperation was not to interfere with the spiritual autonomy of the church, for as Cartwright concluded, the supreme Head of the church is Christ, not an earthly monarch. [^9] The conflicting views concerning procedures which should be undertaken to inaugurate the desired changes and the type of government which should replace the episcopal system precipitated a major schism in Protestantism.

Three Kinds of Puritans

Early in the seventeenth century, there were three major groups of Puritans in England. The Presbyterians advocated a church patterned after the Scottish church. The Separatists or Independents renounced their connection with Anglicanism. Believing that men were thwarting the reformation and contaminating themselves by retaining their membership in a "corrupt" church, the Separatists formed independent congregations with a simplified service and organization. Another group retained the name Puritan and, by refusing to separate, zealously struggled to alter the church from within. Upon their arrival in America, the Puritans inaugurated the reforms which they had been clamoring for in England, establishing a church resembling the Separatist church previously planted in America by the Pilgrims. Therefore, although the early colonizers of Massachusetts Bay Colony held to the name Puritan, these settlers became Separatists, and eventually, the Christians in Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay acknowledged the affinity and adopted the name Congregational church. Meanwhile, in England, for about a century and a half, other Separatists who believed they were members of the church of Christ referred to their organization as the "Free Church" or the "Independent" church. [^10]

There was also a close relationship between Presbyterianism and Congregationalism for, by endorsing the religious views of John Calvin, these two denominations agreed on almost all theological issues. They differed sharply, however, in their church polity. While the Presbyterians held to a system of government based on representative assemblies, consisting of ministers and lay members who directed the activities of local churches, the Congregationalists believed in the autonomy of each congregation.

IV. Appearance of English Baptists

Another religion which stems partially from Tudor Puritanism and which is recognized by some historians as another kind of Puritanism, was the English Baptist denomination. In 1607 or 1608, a group of Separatists fled from England under the direction of John Smyth and settled in Amsterdam. There some of the Separatists were converted to the doctrines popularized by Menno Simons that only believers should be baptized and that converts (which did not include their infants) formed the body of Christ's church on earth. In 1611 or 1612, one of the followers of Smyth, Thomas Helwys, led a small group back to England where they planted near London the first English Baptist church. Since they endorsed the Arminian concept that Christ's atonement applied to all men, held that there was a possibility of salvation for everyone, and granted to man a role in the salvation experience, they came to be called "General" Baptists. Twenty-seven years later, in 1638, another party emerged from the Separatists and organized a second major stream of the Baptist religion. After adopting the Calvinistic concept of predestination and election, this group became known as the "Particular" Baptists. [^11]

Distinguishing Features of the Baptist Denomination

The two wings of the Baptist faith clung to the Separatist or Congregational view that each congregation of believers was vested with the authority to determine church membership and to select their ministers. Another characteristic of the Baptist societies was their endorsement of separation of church and state, a doctrine which was interpreted in such a way that these Protestants became leading advocates of religious liberty and influential objectors to state churches supported by public taxation. Although these first English Baptists baptized by sprinkling and pouring, they eventually concluded that the proper or scriptural mode of baptism was immersion. Therefore, autonomy of each congregation, belief in baptism by immersion, and separation of the church and state coupled with the popular Protestant tenets of the Bible as the sole norm of faith, salvation through the grace of God, resurrection of the righteous to a state of happiness and the wicked to everlasting misery, and a priesthood of believers became the distinguishing features of the Baptist religion. [^12] In other respects, Baptist history has been characterized by innumerable theological conflicts and countless divisions.

V. George Fox and the Rise of Quakerism

During the reign of a seventeenth century English monarch, Charles I, political turmoil erupted in England; and in the midst of the civil strife, one of the most peculiar religions to appear in England was instituted. Like many popular religions, it sprang from a great personal experience of a conscientious leader. The founder of the Society of Friends, George Fox, was born in 1624, was the son of a weaver, and became a shoemaker by trade. As a boy he attended the services of the Church of England; and at one time his orthodox parents seriously considered directing him into the Anglican ministry, but altered these plans and sent him to work as an apprentice to a shoemaker. His formal education was meager, and he read few books other than the Bible. The turning point in his life occurred when he was about nineteen. While on business at a fair, two Puritans, one who was a relative of Fox, engaged in a popular custom, "drinking healths." The practice had developed of men continuing to drink until one refused to order another round and the individual who quit was obliged to pay for all the liquor. When asked to participate in this vice by men considered Christians, Fox was shocked. After fleeing from the scene, the grieved young man spent the night in his bedroom in deep, prayerful meditation. Suddenly, Fox alleged, the voice of God spoke to him. "Thou seest how young people go together into vanity and old people into the earth," he claimed he was told. "Thou must forsake all, both young and old, and keep out of all, and be as a stranger unto all." [^13]

On September 9, 1643, at the command of God, Fox averred, he left home, breaking connections with old and young. Launching an earnest quest for religious truth, Fox listened to messages related by Anglican and Presbyterian ministers. He heard the words of Puritans and Separatists and investigated the Baptist faith. He sat in fields and orchards reading the Bible; and in an attempt to communicate with God, he fasted frequently and prayed fervently.

During his wanderings, the seeker confessed that he became increasingly disturbed with the sin prevalent in society and with what he considered the deficiencies of the religions of his age. Then, he testified, the Lord began revealing to him, "without the help of any man, book, or writing, . . . but by revelation," heavenly wisdom. I learned, he wrote, that the Lord does not dwell in churches, temples, or "holy places," but in the hearts of men. Everyone is enlightened by the "divine Light of Christ." Although it shines in all of us, most people, even Christians, deny this light, hate it, and refuse to communicate with God. And because of God's mercy, Fox added, all who are faithful will be restored to a state of innocence or perfection in which Adam was before the Fall. Eventually, the unpretentious traveler concluded that God cleansed him of all his sins.

After learning that formal education was not the necessary requirement for the ministry, Fox became critical of all professional clergymen and then rejected the creeds of all established religions. [^14] A man such as Fox who claimed such revelations could not be silenced. Instead of listening, he felt impelled to proclaim a vital message. Therefore, the wandering seeker became, in the eyes of his followers, a traveling prophet.

Fox Organizes a Religious Society

Believing that the harvest was white, that the seed of God lay in rich abundance on the earth, and that none were gathering the seed, Fox began promulgating his religious convictions in 1647. One year later, a few Separatists and Baptists in Nottinghamshire were converted and were organized into a Christian community. At first these people called themselves "Children of the Light," a name patterned after Fox's view that the Light of Christ directed all men along the path of eternal life, but after 1665, the official name of the church became the Society of Friends. [^15] Most people, however, referred to these Christians as Quakers. Once when Fox was interrogated by Justice Gervase Bennett, Bennett exhorted him to tremble at the name of the Lord; and in derision, officers of the law called Fox and his companions Quakers. One author has suggested that the nickname, which has become popular among members of this denomination, was derived from the delicate "trembling of Friends under the powerful working of the Holy Ghost," as manifest in some of the Quaker worship services. Possibly, Bennett had this in mind when he uttered the scornful epithet to Fox. [^16]

As the movement spread, savage persecution erupted. Fox and his disciples were placed in stocks, were whipped, were beaten, and were driven by irate mobs from many communities. Nevertheless, the zealous Quakers continued to preach in homes, fields, church yards, and meeting houses which were made available. In 1651, the Quaker leader was committed for a year to one of the vile prisons of that age. Imprisonment did not deter his missionary work, for Fox preached in cells and while confined wrote innumerable letters and tracts which were widely circulated. Other imprisonments followed, and numerous laws were enacted which deprived these peculiar people of an opportunity to worship in peace. Fox declared that in 1656 there were more than 1,000 Quakers in prison. In the winter of 1661 about 4,000 were in jail, and it has been estimated that between 1661 and 1689 about 12,000 Quakers were imprisoned and more than 300 died during this period in the dungeons of that age. [^17]

It appears that the religion thrived on this persecution, for the movement progressed during these turbulent years with incredible rapidity. By the spring of 1654, there were ninety societies organized in northern England and sixty traveling preachers were circulating the message unfolded by Fox in England and Wales. In 1660, out of a population of approximately five million, there were possibly from 30,000 to 40,000 Quakers in England. By the end of the seventeenth century, there were probably more than 50,000 Friends in Great Britain and approximately 40,000 living in the Western Hemisphere. [^18]

Characteristics of the Society of Friends

It is difficult to determine the reasons for the immediate popularity of Quakerism. The Friends' emphasis on equality and plainness of speech and dress appealed to many. It was the custom for inferiors in England never to address one of higher station by using "thou" or "thee"; and, consequently, by frequent use of these words, the Quakers insisted on the equality of all men. Moreover, the removal of the hat was a token of subservience; and, therefore, Quakers became noted for their refusal to submit to this custom. Fox also brought to many a religion that encouraged individuality in thought and expression. All members were granted the opportunity to participate in the meetings. Salaried preachers who delivered sermons were replaced by the membership who spoke or prayed as the Spirit moved them. After the Quakers assembled in their meetings, they strove in silence to communicate with God. There was no opening prayer nor song. The silence was interrupted when a man or woman arose to speak. According to their belief, the members would then convey to others the message revealed by the Spirit of God. Such a pattern of worship attracted numerous individuals who rebelled against the pomp and ceremony of some churches and the lengthy sermons uttered in others.

This religion, emphasizing equality and individualism, appealed primarily to the yeoman class who had previously disassociated themselves from orthodox Anglicanism. There were also a number of laborers and merchants who joined the society, but few gentry fellowshipped with these peculiar Christians.

As the years passed, Quakerism failed to prosper and was plagued with debilitating schisms. Since Fox argued that all men could proclaim the word of God, the members issued conflicting beliefs. Some Quakers concluded that an actual line or wire stretched from God to man, and that Satan sometimes tapped this line. When information was unfolded that some refused to endorse, the opponents of the belief insisted that the message was from the Devil rather than from God. Quaker leaders were unable to agree on principles or procedures that would enable the membership to differentiate between truth and error or human reasoning and messages conveyed by the Spirit of God.

There were, however, many distinguishing features of the Quaker faith that created a semblance of unity in their ranks for many generations. Quakers were noted for their rejection of the popular creeds of Christendom, the elimination of a professional and salaried clergy, their denunciation of all ritual and sacraments, their refusal to take up arms, take oaths, or support a state church. They replaced the priesthood by apostolic succession and priesthood of believers with a universal priesthood which included a ministry of women. In their meeting houses there were no organs, baptismal fonts, pulpits, altars, stained glass windows, nor paintings. Their theology centered around the belief in and obedience to the influence and direction of the spirit of Christ which extends to every man. This "Light of Christ" has been called the "Inner Light," "The Seed of God," "That of God in Every Man," "The Principle of God," "The Seed," and other such names. Quakers hold that this "Light" provides guidance to every man, transforming every man who unites with the "Seed" into a spokesman for God like the prophets of old. "Art thou a child of Light?" Fox would ask. "Yes," he would insist, "and you have the power to speak the word of God."

Prior to his death in 1691, George Fox promulgated the new faith in the British Isles, in the West Indies, in the North American mainland colonies and in Holland. Then, following the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the Quaker leader witnessed the passage of the Toleration Act of 1689 and the inauguration of a new religious era in English history. Quaker persecution abated and the members of this denomination eventually became respected citizens.

The founder of Quakerism did not produce a comprehensive articles of faith. Neither did he concentrate on solving the riddle of the Trinity or the miracle of the resurrection, and although his most distinct message was that of the "Inner Light," he is best remembered not as a theologian but as a humanitarian. Fox insisted on strict honesty, advocated Christian relationships with the American Indians, condemned slavery, recommended that governments should serve mankind and should not infringe upon the religious rights of any sect, proclaimed an advanced form of democracy which placed women on an equality with men, and emphasized man's responsibility to serve all of God's children.

Robert Barclay, The Quaker Apologist

The work of crystallizing and defending Quaker beliefs was undertaken by one of the early converts, Robert Barclay. Born in 1648 in Scotland, Barclay was reared in a family of devout Presbyterians. While in France, the young Robert was converted to Catholicism. After returning home, he attended a Quaker meeting, and in the midst of the silence, claimed contact with the Light of Christ, subsequently endorsing the Quaker religion. One year later, in 1670, after turning nineteen, he became a traveling preacher. Agitated when others charged the Quakers with denying the scriptures, Barclay grasped his pen and, in 1673, published a Quaker Catechism. This work, which was widely circulated, contained a summary of Quaker belief written in the language of the Bible and included prolific scriptural references. Two years later, the Quaker theologian again determined to correct false accusations by preparing the Theses Theologicae. Then, in 1676, he published an elaborate defense of his Theses, entitled An Apology for the True Christian Divinity, as the same is Held Forth, and Preached, by the People Called, in Scorn, Quakers. Other works on church discipline and government followed, and these writings became a standard exposition of Quakerism.

A Quaker Articles of Faith

Although the Apology was recognized by some Quakers as an authoritative statement of doctrine, this description of belief was not recognized as the highest authority in the church, for this creed and the scriptures were considered by Quakers as secondary to spiritual intuition. Moreover, the articles of faith was not an analysis of all major tenets held by Quakers, for in this work Barclay discussed primarily doctrines endorsed by Friends which differed from those held by other Christians. For instance, in the Apology there is no description of the Godhead consisting of "one God who is Spirit" and the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost being one, as is found in Barclay's Catechism and Confession of Faith. Nor is there in this work a description of heaven and hell where the righteous live in happiness and the wicked reside in a state of perpetual torment and misery as believed by some early Quakers and most other Protestants. Nevertheless, prior to the American Civil War, Barclay's Apology was still regarded by some groups united in yearly meetings as "a distinct creed" which every Quaker was to endorse in its entirety. [^19]

Since the Quakers believed that God sought to inspire all men and that this form of revelation was necessary for the building of true faith, Robert Barclay denied in his Apology that the scriptures were the sole norm of faith. All of God's will is not committed to writing, he insisted. It is true, the Quaker theologian reasoned, that the scriptures contain a full and sufficient account of all the chief principles of the doctrine of Christ, but such a declaration of doctrines is not to be esteemed as the principal ground for all truth and knowledge. The Bible is a "secondary Rule subordinate to the Spirit." Although Protestants deny current revelation, Barclay argued, they conclude that no man can declare that Jesus is the Christ unless God conveys this knowledge to them by means of the Holy Ghost. This faith is secured by revelation. Barclay also renounced the Protestant claim of Biblical infallibility. He realized that the original copies of that work had been lost and recognized the problem of transmission, including omission, additions, and translation from one language to another. The Scotch theologian further noted that scholars were undecided on the meaning of statements recorded by the ancient prophets. Since God does not intend man to place his faith on such work, Barclay declared, he has given to every man another guide, the "Inner Light." [^20]

Barclay further rejected the traditional view that Adam's sin was imputed to man. As a consequence of the Fall, he believed that man became subject to death and disease. Then when children transgressed, the seed of sin was transmitted to them from Adam. Therefore, man becomes corrupt by his evil actions. The natural man fights against God by his words, deeds, and imaginations. Although all men become evil or depraved, he further reasoned, they can reject this evil seed by uniting with the Spirit of God which is in them. [^21] Renouncing predestination and election, the Quaker apologist declared that God "invites, calls, exhorts, and strives with every Man, in order to save him," and all men who do not resist the call are saved. God, who is long suffering, has given to every man a day or time of visitation, Barclay continued. He also endorsed a universal application of the atonement, believing that Christ died for all men. Those who receive the Spiritual Light that is within them are spiritually born, obtain a remission of sins, become holy and pure, and perform righteous deeds. Employing Arminian terminology, he added that it is not by our good works nor by our will that we are saved, but Christ is both the gift and the giver, the cause producing the effect. By denying irresistibility of grace and perseverance of the saints, Barclay again noted the Arminian characteristics of early Quakerism. [^22]

When Barclay analyzed the Quaker view of the Inner Light he discussed one of the most distinguishing aspects of Quaker theology. All who live according to the direction of the "Divine Word in them," he averred, are Christians. Chinese and Indians are excused for not knowing of Christ because they have not received an opportunity to learn about him. Nevertheless, they can unite with the Spirit that is within them and live righteously. Such virtue is accepted by God. All men and women of integrity who labor to combat evil and walk according to the dictates of the Light of Christ, whether they be heathens, Turks, or Jews, will be saved. Righteous non-Christians are secretly united to God, and therefore become true members of his "Catholic Church." But belief in Christ and the scriptures and profession of such is necessary for membership in a "particular gathered Church." [^23]

In addition to emphasizing that the just will be saved regardless of their religious affiliation, Barclay insisted that unbaptized infants would not be sent to hell nor limbo, for, he reasoned, where there is no law there is no punishment. On the other hand, he did not teach that all infants who died departed to heaven, he considered the fate of all such persons a mystery. [^24]

The Quaker apologist also rejected all sacraments. Since there were no references to the word "sacrament" in the Bible, he did not believe in classifying certain practices under this designation. Moreover, he clearly expressed the Quaker view that men were not to perform a literal baptism of water, administer to others bread and wine, nor anoint the sick with oil. All such practices, he stated, should be administered only in an inward, spiritual manner.

In describing the unusual Quaker services, the foremost early Quaker theologian declared that true worship is not limited to "Times, Places nor Persons," and is "void of all outward and worldly splendor." True worship, Barclay concluded, should consist of waiting and watching for the Light of Christ and then proclaiming to others the word and will of God. [^25]

VI. The Heritage of the Reformation

Accomplishments of the Reformers

The Reformation was the dawning of a new religious era. During this age of reorientation of Christian thinking, many children of God sought to restore New Testament Christianity. In their attempt to reestablish God's church, the religious intelligentsia detected many abuses and innovations in Roman Catholicism. They perceived that God's truth had been mingled with the philosophies of men and that pagan forms of worship had survived, being exercised in the Latin church. They gleaned from the scriptures prophecies declaring an inevitable departure from the truth circulated by the disciples of Christ. They aptly convinced many of the reality of the apostasy from the divine Church and need for the restoration of early Christianity.

The leading reformers also altered the traditional form of worship, changing the Latin to the vernacular so that men might more intelligently worship God and obtain an enhanced understanding of their religion. Ritual was reduced and individual instruction of the congregation was emphasized, which also helped men gain a greater insight of their faith. By insisting that the Bible should be studied and employed as the paramount guide for religious understanding, influential zealots caused many Christians to think, to reason, and to endorse many teachings of Christ. The introduction of family reading of the Bible further increased men's understanding of the life and mission of the Savior. Many drew nearer to God and sought more earnestly to serve their Creator.

The religious upheaval also stimulated the Catholics to cleanse their church, for following the Catholic Reformation, an improved form of Catholicism was advanced in the world.

Moreover, the reformers created in Europe a new social and political structure, including a multiplicity of sects, which promoted the establishment of toleration and religious liberty. Therefore, by popularizing the reality of the apostasy, by emphasizing the sermon at the expense of excessive ritualism, by encouraging the study of the Word of God through a spiritual-led conscience, by sowing the seeds of religious liberty through the establishment of religious pluralism, by freeing many from clerical domination and advancing the spirit of inquiry, and by destroying in many lands the Catholic claim of papal supremacy and papal infallibility, the reformers blazed a path which led to the restoration of the "everlasting gospel."

Failures of the Reformers

The religious leaders of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, however, failed to restore New Testament Christianity. The vast majority of the founders of the Protestant churches did not claim direct revelation from God as did the apostles and prophets of former ages, but held that visions and revelations ceased with the death of the apostles. The leading reformers also erred because they held that the Bible was all-inclusive and should be the only norm of faith. The Bible was not written for the purpose of being a constitution upon which God's church was to be built. In the Four Gospels, there is a description of Christ's activities during his ministry. In Acts, there is a brief description of the history of the early Christian Church, with emphasis on the missionary activities of Paul. Other books in the New Testament are writings of church leaders addressed to Christians who had been organized previously into formal branches of the church. Some of the epistles dealt with temporary, current issues and were not written with the intent of becoming the source of the reestablishment of Christianity. The inspired prophets instructed the early Christians on problems which they encountered but did not reveal in the few letters which have survived all of God's word which his children need today. Nowhere in the New Testament is there a detailed description of the organization of the Church, including the duties of the officers. The Bible is not unmistakably clear on the prerequisites of salvation and exaltation, and the Bible is silent on many other important issues. The Bible of today is also in the language of scribes and translators. When men place their faith solely in that work, they place their faith in the Word of God as interpreted by unknown translators and in passages susceptible to the formidable array of interpretations. [^26] The Bible is not all-inclusive, nor is it an infallible guide as many reformers taught. It should not be regarded as the sole foundation for the erection of God's church. The foundation of New Testament Christianity was the apostles and prophets who were inspired by God and spoke by revelation.

By their interpretations of the Bible, the reformers also perpetuated many apostate doctrines. Many reformers clung to the Medieval God concept of the Trinity; some popularized a doctrine of predestination which undermined the importance of man's responsibility in seeking salvation; and most eliminated an intermediate state between heaven and earth life, advocating a concept of the hereafter that was further from the truth in some respects than that held by the Roman Catholics. Although the reformers rejected transubstantiation, many believed that when communicants enjoyed the emblems of the Lord's Supper, they partook of the body of Christ. The leading reformers also retained and popularized the medieval concept of the fall of Adam, arguing that Adam's sin was imputed to all men. Most reformers of the sixteenth century further failed to restore the practice of believer's baptism by immersion, retaining the practice of infant sprinkling; and even though the reformers recognized that an apostasy had occurred, which stripped the Latin church of its claim of special authority by means of apostolic succession, they failed to restore through proper channels the authority to perform God's ordinances. Protestant priesthood has emerged from the claim that any group of Christians who proclaim the Word of God has the authority to perform ordinances in the name of the Lord. Without sufficient Biblical information to direct them, the reformers also were unable to restore the type of organization taught by the apostles of Christ.

In addition to perpetuating apostate doctrines and rites, the majority of the reformers continued the medieval practice of intolerance. For thirty generations people believed that it was the duty of man to worship and conduct his life according to the pattern established by the Christian church. With only a few exceptions, from the fifth to the sixteenth century, one church dominated the ecclesiastical scene in Western Europe. Except for the persecuted Jews, the Spanish Mohammedans, and the Greek Orthodox, everyone was a Roman Catholic. During these centuries, religious liberty did not exist; the church and state were not separated.

In the Middle Ages, religious unity was regarded as an essential ingredient for unity of the state. Ecclesiastical diversity, it was believed, would lead to political turmoil. Since the church was one of the most influential institutions in the medieval society, heretics were regarded as threats to the entire social order. People believed that salvation came only by complying with the teaching of the church, and the church controlled and dominated the thinking and actions of the medieval man. There were few things that men learned that did not originate within the parish, and anyone who challenged the official Christian doctrine was subjected to prosecution by the state authorities. "He who resists the faith after accepting it," wrote Thomas Aquinas, in his Summa Theologica, which is still accepted by some Catholics as one of the most authoritative descriptions of Catholic doctrine, "sins more grievously against faith, than he who resists it without having accepted it, even as he who fails to fulfil what he has promised, sins more grievously than if he had never promised it." [^27] The sin of the heretic, the thirteenth century scholar further argued, is more serious than that of the counterfeiter of money, for the heretic corrupts the faith "which quickens the soul," whereas the forger of money only interrupts men's temporal affairs. Since capital punishment is decreed for counterfeiters of money, the death penalty should extend to those who commit the more serious crime, a crime, he implied, that leads men to hell. Heretics, therefore, "deserve not only to be separated from the Church by excommunication, but also to be severed from the world by death." [^28] Thomas Aquinas further reasoned that repentant heretics should sometimes be executed, for in the case of a secondary relapse they might again become a detriment to the salvation of others and without such punishment some might more easily relapse into heresy. [^29]

After the eleventh century, the custom became increasingly popular to burn heretics by throwing them into flames or by binding them to a stake and igniting a fire under their bodies. This practice continued during the Reformation era. In the opening stages of the religious revolt, Martin Luther condemned violent treatment of heretics. He insisted that force and fire should not be employed to bring men to Christ and said that heresy should not be struck with iron nor burned with fire but attacked solely with the Word of God. After the schism with Rome had been secured, however, Luther reversed his position. The leading instigator of the Reformation believed that he had correctly interpreted the scriptures and had witnessed the reestablishment of Christ's church. Eventually, he decided that those who fought against Lutheranism fought against God. Luther determined that his and the civil government's responsibilities were three fold: to promote the preaching of the gospel, to prevent and suppress the circulation of erroneous doctrines, and to entice as many as possible to embrace the "truth." [^30]

After a momentary relapse, the intolerance of the Middle Ages was revived in Germany. By 1531, Luther viewed all dissenters of his faith with contempt. At that time, he agreed with state policy that since Anabaptists had committed blasphemy and sedition, they should be treated as rebels; and he concurred that the followers of Zwingli should be banished. His defense for the reversal of policy was based on the same source which originally caused him to plea for religious liberty, the scriptures. Therefore, as conditions changed, the Bible message was conveniently reinterpreted. [^31]

Following the death of Luther, German reform leaders also encouraged the state to remain the religious administrator of the people. It was argued that princes were invested with the authority to see that the "true faith" was everywhere "taught, professed and practiced." [^32]

Many other influential reformers shared Luther's conviction that although the church should be independent of the state in its administration, civil government had a responsibility to regulate man's eternal conduct, including his religious behavior patterns. The civil government was designed to support the external worship of God, John Calvin proclaimed, to preserve the pure doctrine of religion, to defend the constitution of the church, and to provide that the "true religion, which is contained in the law of God," be not "openly violated, and polluted by public blasphemy." [^33] Implementing this policy, Calvin required the state to control the religious activities of the people by suppressing all deviations from his interpretation of the scriptures. Indeed, he insisted that the civil government's chief preoccupation should be the enforcement of the "true religion." Since this popular reformer declared that the ecclesiastical leaders should serve as interpreters of the law of God and should instruct the civil authorities on matters pertaining to "heresy" and the "true religion," the government established in Geneva was a theocracy.

In many of the countries which fell under the influence of Protestantism, the only Christians who were not persecuted were the members of the new dominant church or those who remained silent on matters of religion. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Mennonites, Anabaptists, Jews, Quakers, and many other Christians were savagely persecuted in Protestant lands. Lutherans were sometimes persecuted in Calvinist countries and Calvinists were subjected to oppression in lands governed by Lutherans.

During the age of the Reformation, mankind was not prepared to embrace the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Men do not ordinarily abruptly change their pattern of thinking nor living. History clearly reveals that important movements are preceded by extensive periods of preparation. In addition to the rebirth of learning and the Reformation, other movements, other developments, and other periods of reorientation of thinking were necessary before conditions were ripe for the "restitution of all things."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John Smith, Captain John Smith Works, Edward Arber, ed. (2 vols., Westminster, 1895), II, 957-59.
[^2] Susan Myre Kingbury, ed., Records of the Virginia Company of London (4 vols., Washington, 1906-35), III, 4-5.
[^3] Ibid., 12-14.
[^4] Peter Force, ed., Tracts and Other Papers, Relating Principally to Origin, Settlement, and Progress of the Colonies in North America (4 vols., New York: Peter Smith, 1947), III, No. 2, 10-19.
[^5] Kingsbury, op. cit., III, 172-73.
[^6] Ibid., IV, 413.
[^7] Ibid., III, 468-69, 491.
[^8] H. R. McIlwaine, ed., Minutes of the Council and General Court of Colonial Virginia (Richmond, 1924), 107-08, 194, 472.
[^9] Philip Alexander Bruce, Institutional History of Virginia in the Seventeenth Century (2 vols., New York, 1910), I, 217.
[^10] Edward W. James, ed., The Lower Norfolk County Virginia Antiquary (4 vols., New York: Peter Smith, 1951), II, 12-14; Force, op. cit., III, No. 14, 22.
[^11] Matthew Page Andrews, History of Maryland: Province and State (New York, 1929), 112.
[^12] William Waller Hening, ed., The Statutes at Large: Being a Collection of All the Laws of Virginia (13 vols., Richmond, 1819-23), I, 532-33; Bruce, op. cit., I, 222-26, 230.
[^13] McIlwaine, Minutes of the Council and General Court, 410; Bruce, op. cit., I, 222.
[^14] Hening, op. cit., I, 532-33.
[^15] Ibid., II, 165-66, 180-83.
[^16] McIlwaine, Minutes of the Council and General Court, 410, 492, 506-07.
[^17] "Note," The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, VII, No. 2 (Oct., 1899), 168-72.
[^18] Bruce E. Steiner, "The Catholic Brents of Colonial Virginia: An Instance of Practical Toleration," Ibid., LXX, No. 4 (Oct., 1962), 389-91, 397, 409.
[^19] Bruce, op. cit., 247-50.
[^20] Ibid., 262-63.
[^21] Hening, op. cit., III, 168-69, 358-59.
[^22] George M. Brydon, Virginia's Mother Church and the Political Conditions under which it Grew (2 vols., Richmond, Va.: Virginia Historical Society, 1947), I, 258-59; II, 46, 63, 76; H. R. McIlwaine, Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia (4 vols., Richmond, 1925), IV, 65, 81, 86.
[^23] Robert Beverly, The History and Present State of Virginia (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1947), 261-62. Quoted by permission.
[^24] For a more comprehensive analysis of the rise of dissent in Virginia prior to 1740 see Milton V. Backman, Jr., "The Influence of the Frontier on the Religious Revolt in Virginia," (Master's thesis, University of Utah, 1955).
[^25] Wesley M. Gewehr, The Great Awakening in Virginia, 1740-1790 (Durham: Duke University Press, 1930), 52. A contemporary account of the revival in Hanover County is included in Samuel Davies, The State of Religion Among Protestant Dissenters in Virginia (Boston, 1751), Early American Imprint Series, Clifford K. Shipton, ed., Evans Microcard No. 6657, hereafter cited as Evans No.
[^26] Davies, op. cit., 19-29, 42.
[^27] Ibid., 18-19, 42; Gewehr, op. cit., 74-76.
[^28] Gewehr, op. cit., 89-90, 92, 99-101.
[^29] G. W. Beale, A History of the Rise and Progress of the Baptists in Virginia by Robert B. Semple (Richmond, 1894), 77-79, 390; Lewis Peyton Little, Imprisoned Preachers and Religious Liberty in Virginia (Lynchburg, Va.: J. P. Bell Co., 1938), 522-23.
[^30] A compilation of accounts of Baptist oppression occurring in the years immediately prior to the Revolution obtained from county records, diaries, letters, and other original sources is found in Lew Peyton Little's Imprisoned Preachers and Religious Liberty in Virginia.
[^31] G. MacLaren Brydon, "New Light Upon the History of the Church in Colonial Virginia," The Protestant Episcopal Church Historical Magazine, X, No. 2 (June, 1941), 90-91, hereafter cited as Historical Magazine.
[^32] The most valuable source of information on religion in New Netherlands is Hugh Hastings, ed., Ecclesiastical Records State of New York (6 vols., Albany, 1901). The most comprehensive secondary work on the subject is Frederick J. Zwierlein, Religion in New Netherland (Rochester, 1910) and an excellent summary of ecclesiastical conditions in New Netherlands prepared by the same author is "New Netherland Intolerance," The Catholic Historical Review, IV, No. 2 (July, 1918), 186-216.
[^33] Hastings, op. cit., I, 115, 130.
