Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER FOUR

From Uniformity to Religious Liberty

Historians generally agree that colonial America was the outpost of Europe. The history of the Thirteen Colonies is partially the account of the transplanting of European, especially English, institutions to a primitive frontier. Although most of the immigrants to the New World were so poor that they were unable to pay their passage to the colonies, they carried with them a rich heritage, including a wealth of social, political and religious baggage. The immigrants transported to America the major religions of Western Europe. They carried to this land the Old and New Testaments, the major creeds of Christendom, and the writings of the European apologists. They also transplanted to the colonies a prejudice against Catholicism, paganism, and non-conformists. Most early Americans could not conceive of a society in which religion prospered solely by individual initiative. A large majority of the first settlers could not accept the right of dissenters to proclaim views which conflicted with their interpretations of orthodox beliefs. Most concluded that religious orthodoxy was an indispensable ingredient in preserving peace and order in society. Disunity, it was generally held, was a menace to free government. Therefore, many believed that religious liberty and separation of church and state could create in the New World a lawless society and would inevitably result in the damnation of numerous souls. Only a few early immigrants contended that all men or even all Christians should be granted liberty of conscience, and few desired a system of voluntary support of religion.

The history of colonial America also includes the story of the gradual alteration of the seventeenth century European way of life. With the passage of time, with cultural blending, and with the Old World institutions being molded by the new frontier environment which was some-what isolated from Europe, the behavior patterns of the settlers were gradually altered. Eventually, a new way of life emerged and a unique religious situation developed in America.

Today, the United States and many other countries in the world are noted as lands of liberty where freedom of thought, action, and belief are exercised provided they do not infringe upon the rights of others. Some individuals conclude that among America's greatest contributions to the modern world are the popularization and practice of the three worthy principles: separation of church and state, the voluntary support of religion, and religious liberty. These characteristics have not always been a part of our heritage, for the keynote of religious conditions in colonial America was an established church. Prior to the American Revolution, there were tax-supported state religions in nine of the Thirteen Colonies. In the South and in New York City, the Church of England was the public supported religion; and in New England, outside of Rhode Island, the Congregational church was the legal establishment. Furthermore, in four colonies—Virginia, Massachusetts (including Plymouth), Connecticut (including New Haven Colony), and New Netherlands (which became New York, New Jersey, and segments of other English colonies)—there was a determined attempt for many decades to maintain ecclesiastical solidarity. The desire to preserve uniformity of belief led to the enactment of intolerant laws, similar to those enforced in Europe, and precipitated the persecution of numerous dissenters. An analysis of the ecclesiastical history of these four colonies clearly reveals that for many years conditions were not favorable for the promulgation of the Restored Gospel of Christ. Very gradually the atmosphere changed in these four regions, and limited toleration and pluralism preceded the adoption of the principle of religious liberty, the free exercise of one's religious convictions.

I. The Anglican Establishment in Virginia

In 1607, the first permanent English settlement emerged along the shores of the James River. At the time Jamestown was founded, no country in Europe divorced the church from the state, nor extended to all men religious liberty. South of Virginia, Roman Catholics had echoed the political philosophy of Europe and had instituted their faith as the only legal religion in Latin America. There the Inquisition and Index stifled freedom of religious expression. It is not surprising, therefore, that the conservative founders of Virginia established a government designed to promote that which was regarded as the will of God. To accomplish this objective, the Virginian leaders, with the sanction of the settlers, united the church and state and worked for the preservation of religious unity. For many years, the Virginians strove to establish a society in the American wilderness which, in their opinion, was a profile of the most desirable characteristics of the English civilization.

After arriving in the New World, all the first settlers of Virginia demonstrated their loyalty to the Church of England by partaking the emblems of the Lord's Supper according to the rites of that organization. According to John Smith, worship at Jamestown was first conducted under an awning made by stretching an old sail between sturdy trees. The seats were made of wooden planks, and the pulpit was a bar of wood nailed to two trees. During inclement weather, the congregation shifted into a crude tent. This was the first English church in America until the men built a "homely thing like a barn set upon cratchets, covered with rafts, sedge, and earth." Smith also wrote that daily prayer was held morning and evening, every Sunday two sermons were delivered, and every three months communion was held. After the first minister, Rev. Robert Hunt, died, daily prayers were continued and a sermon was delivered nearly every Sunday by one of the settlers. A few years later, ministers from England resumed direction of the ecclesiastical affairs of the frontiersmen. [^1]

Efforts to Preserve Solidarity

Shortly after arriving, the settlers also complied with the orders of the king and Privy Council in England by subscribing to the Oath of Supremacy and Oath of Allegiance. By the provisions of the Oath of Supremacy, the colonists swore that the king of England was sovereign, that the pope of Rome did not have authority to depose the king, that they would continue to bear the faith of their majesty, and that they would defend the king and faith with their utmost power against any conspiracies. Then by taking the Oath of Allegiance, the colonists declared that the king was supreme in spiritual and ecclesiastical matters and promised allegiance to the royal head of the national church of England. [^2]

In 1609, a new charter was issued by James I to the Virginia Company of London, a joint-stock company which was financing the commercial enterprise, transferring political control of the colony from the king to the company. Laws and ordinances for the colonists were then prepared in England by the company officials and were sent to America to be enforced by the individual whom they appointed governor. The first acting governor under the new charter, Thomas Gates, was promptly instructed to make certain that God was correctly worshipped and that the sacraments were administered according to the constitution of the Church of England. For the honor of God and the preservation of peace, Gates was further charged with the responsibility of punishing all atheism and schisms in the church. [^3]

Between 1611 and 1616, Thomas Dale, a most conscientious governor, almost constantly directed the affairs of the settlers. Because of his determined attempt to enforce a series of harsh laws which had been framed in England, the legislation came to be known as the Dale Laws. The decrees specified that those who spoke impiously of the Trinity or any article of the Anglican faith were to suffer capital punishment. Those who failed to attend church were to suffer a monetary fine for the first offense, whipping for the second, and imprisonment for six months for the third conviction. All new immigrants, the Dale Laws continued, were to be examined by the minister regarding their faith. Those professing heretical views were to be instructed. If the nonconformists refused to endorse the orthodox beliefs, they were to be whipped until they recanted. Severe penalties were also imposed for those who failed to keep the Sabbath day holy, committed adultery or fornication, bore false witness, stole or committed other similar sins. [^4]

In the monumental year 1619, representative government was instituted at Jamestown. This first legislative assembly in America consisted of a governor and council, appointed by the company, and representatives elected by the freemen (voters) of the various plantations. Although the General Assembly was granted authority to frame laws for the welfare of the people, the governor and company officials were authorized to veto all undesirable legislation.

After assembling in the choir seats of the church, the politicians opened the legislative session with prayer, subscribed to the Oath of Supremacy, and then voiced their approval of the prevailing religious practices. To preserve uniformity of belief and practice, the legislators enacted a series of ecclesiastical laws. Ministers were charged with the responsibility of reading divine services and reporting any un-Christian activity within the colony. Settlers were required to attend services of the only legal religion, and if they failed to comply, they were to be fined. If willful neglect was evident, bodily punishment was to be applied. [^5]

Thus, a third change in the political structure of Virginia did not result in ecclesiastical reform. The administrators retained the authority to imprison nonconformists and if the dissenters failed to reform, the political leaders were authorized to ship the recalcitrants back to England. [^6] All services continued to be administered according to the rites of the Church of England, and the settlers were obliged to contribute to the financial support of the Anglican clergy. [^7] The courts also attempted to enforce the ecclesiastical laws and policies. One Virginian, in 1626, was fined two hundred pounds of tobacco for failure to attend church for three months. Others were fined for nonattendance at church and failure to help repair a meeting house. Some colonists were ordered by the courts to pay their taxes for the upkeep of the clergy and maintenance of the houses of worship. [^8] The Virginian ecclesiastical program coincided with the philosophy of that age—all men, it was believed, should be required to support the state religion and toleration should be granted only to those who were not considered as serious threats to the established religious order.

A fourth alteration of the government in Virginia occurred in 1624, when the English court dissolved the Virginia Company and made Virginia a royal or crown colony. The king, instead of company officials, appointed the governor and councilors; and although no provision at that time was made for a retention of representative government, a desirable precedent had been set. The settlers demanded and secured the continuation of a popular assembly. Therefore, as far as most settlers were concerned, in the new royal colony there was no significant alteration of the political situation nor was there a change in the ecclesiastical policies. By order of the English government and approval of the Virginian politicians, religious exclusiveness continued according to the canons and constitution of the Church of England.

As the years passed, it became increasingly difficult for the authorities to enforce the colonial laws. The settlers scattered far from the fort at Jamestown into the virgin forests. There they cleared the land, sowed and plowed, and lived on isolated farmsteads. It was impossible for the arm of the law to stretch into many regions of the Virginian wilderness. Meeting houses were not erected near the homes of many frontiersmen. Ministers were not available to serve most of the inhabitants. Statutes demanding church attendance and financial support of the established religion were not enforced in some areas of the colony, and the authorities were unable to prevent the rise of dissenters in the vast empty fields of Virginia.

Persecution of the First Organized Groups of Dissenters in Virginia

Many of the early settlers and clergy of colonial Virginia were Puritans, individuals who desired to reform the church but faithfully attended the services of the Church of England. Since Puritans were not classified by English law as "dissenters" until about 1662, these reformers for several decades were regarded by Virginians as faithful Anglicans. One group of Puritans who settled south of the James River in Nansemond County inaugurated Puritan reforms and established an independent congregation. In 1642, these Virginians, who had become Separatists, sent a representative to Boston to secure ministers for their community. Three prominent New England Puritans were solicited, and the divines arrived in Virginia with letters of introduction from Governor John Winthrop of Massachusetts to Governor William Berkeley of Virginia. William Berkeley, a devout, conservative Anglican, refused to permit the rise of dissent. Responding to the governor's demands, the legislature of Virginia passed a law in 1643 requiring all ministers to conform to the orders and constitutions" of the Church of England in their public and private teachings. In order to preserve the unity of faith, it was also decreed that all nonconformists were to leave the colony. [^9] Two of the New England clergy promptly returned home, but one remained. Defying the law, the Separatists in Nansemond County continued to conduct meetings contrary to the rites of the Church of England; and their numbers increased. In 1645, the state banished one of the Separatist ministers, a former Anglican, Rev. Thomas Harrison. The members of Harrison's congregation complained to the Puritans in England, who following the English Civil War (1642-1649), had seized temporary political control under the leadership of Oliver Cromwell. The English Puritans ordered Governor Berkeley to reinstate Harrison, but Harrison did not desire to return. Meanwhile, other action had been taken against the Independents in Nansemond County. Some of the Separatists were imprisoned; many were disarmed, being deprived of protection in case of Indian attacks; and they were ordered by the court to "desist from their frequent meetings and usual assembling . . . contrary to the laws and Government of the Colony." [^10] Two of the Separatist leaders, Richard Bennett and William Durand, fled to Maryland, where they requested asylum for themselves and their followers. Replying to their petition, the Maryland governor granted these dissenters the right to settle in that colony. At a location they named "Providence," near the present site of Annapolis, almost three hundred refugees secured the religious opportunities they desired. [^11] The Puritan exodus of 1648-49 eliminated the first threat to the religious unity of the Old Dominion.

In the middle of the seventeenth century, another body of dissenters challenged Virginia's attempt to maintain religious solidarity. Quaker missionaries commenced preaching in the 1650's, converting a few settlers. Immediately, opposition developed. Quakerism was regarded by the Virginians as a hostile movement, "inimical of the welfare of the community." The legislators decreed that Quakers promulgated "lies, miracles, false visions, prophecies and doctrines" which were designed to "destroy religion, laws, communities, and all bonds of civil societie." Quaker secret services, Anglicans insisted, were meetings in which peculiar people plotted to overthrow the government. These nonconformists furthermore, refused to take oaths or to pay tithes designed to support the established religion. They refused to help build fortifications for the defense of Virginia, and when the colony was attacked by Indians, they refused to defend themselves or others. [^12]

Responding to what was regarded as the threat of Quakerism, the General Court ordered two Quakers to leave the colony in 1657. While waiting for a ship, the missionaries were not allowed to circulate literature nor correspond with any citizen. A few years later, a group of Quakers were arraigned before a Virginia court. In defense of their actions, the dissenters courageously proclaimed, "Quaker consciences must obey the law of God, however they suffer." The judge was not influenced by this plea, but sternly pronounced, "There is no toleration for wicked consciences." [^13]

Meanwhile, the General Assembly, acting to preserve ecclesiastical uniformity, passed a series of oppressive laws between the years 1660 and 1664. Ship captains were forbidden to land Quakers in Virginia. All Quakers who landed in Virginia were to be imprisoned without bail. When released, the dissenters were to leave with all speed and not return. If they returned after being banished twice, they were to be punished as felons. No Virginian was to entertain a Quaker nor distribute or publish their literature. [^14] Quakers "and other separatists" sixteen years or older were forbidden to gather in numbers of five or more under the pretext of joining in a religious worship. Every settler was to have his child baptized by an Anglican minister, and those who failed to comply with these laws were subject to heavy fines. [^15]

Court records reveal that some action was taken to enforce this legislation. Virginians were fined for failure to present their children for Anglican baptism. Captains of ships were fined for bringing Quakers to Virginia and were ordered to remove the dissenters from the colony. Individuals were fined and whipped for entertaining Quakers. Quakers were imprisoned; and during the administration of Governor William Berkeley, members of the Society of Friends suffered general persecution. [^16]

Had the ecclesiastical legislation been strictly enforced, Quakerism and all other forms of dissent would have been exterminated. Dissenters would not have been permitted to preach nor worship in the colony. They would have been fined, beyond their ability to pay, for failure to attend Anglican services at the prescribed times. They would have been deprived of the opportunity to serve as local officers or as members of the General Assembly. In practice, however, the laws were only sporadically enforced. Often action against nonconformists was left to the discretion of the local authorities. Some administrators refused to execute ecclesiastical laws, and some dissenters lived in the frontier where they assembled without being detected by those who sought to preserve religious unity. [^17]

Practical toleration was also extended to dissenters such as the Brent family who provided genuine service to the colonists. These Catholics who resided in northern Virginia did not promulgate their faith nor sponsor further Catholic immigration into the colony, but they did act as guardians of the frontier, were talented lawyers and administrators, and were close friends of other gentry. Although there were attempts by local authorities to enforce an act providing a severe penalty for nonattendance at Anglican services, in the case of the Brent family, influential legislators and judges refused to execute the law. [^18] Nevertheless, the oppressive laws and the hostile attitudes of the settlers toward dissenters prevented many non-Anglicans from colonizing Virginia in the seventeenth century and caused others to escape persecution by seeking peace in other parts of the New World.

Significant Beginnings of Toleration

In the 1680's, an extension of toleration in England benefited the dissenters in Virginia and other colonies. One year following the Glorious Revolution of 1688, Parliament enacted the Toleration Act which was a watershed in the history of religious freedom. This act granted Trinitarian Protestants the right to own their own meeting houses, provided they met with the doors unlocked and certified the place of meeting with specified authorities. They were also granted the right to have their own teachers and preachers. Even though the right of religious worship (but not political equality) was granted by law only to Trinitarian Protestants, in practice, limited toleration was extended to Roman Catholics, Arians, Unitarians, and other religious groups in England.

Since it was generally understood and sometimes specifically stated in colonial charters that Americans were not to frame laws repugnant to the laws of Parliament, the Toleration Act of 1689 was employed by dissenters of Virginia to obtain increased opportunities. In the 1690's courts ruled that Quakers had the right to hold religious meetings and to own church property. In that decade, a few members of that society were fined for failure to pay their ecclesiastical rates, but most Quakers were unmolested and secured the right to worship as they believed. [^19]

Meanwhile, Presbyterians, who had migrated into Virginia in the 1680's, desired recognition of their right to hold services and support a minister of their faith. In 1691, after Rev. Josias Mackie had been settled as pastor of Lynnhaven parish in the present Princess Anne County, the Virginia council ruled that no one in Virginia had the right to preach contrary to the canons of the Church of England. Appealing the decision on the basis of the Toleration Act, Mackie secured the right to preach in two different buildings, one near the Elizabeth River and the other near the Lynnhaven River. This verdict by the court established an important precedent. Mackie was the first legally settled Presbyterian minister in Virginia and the first nonconformist preacher to be granted the privilege to teach permanently in the Old Dominion. In 1699, Rev. Francis Makemie, the most famous colonial Presbyterian minister in the New World, known as the father of American Presbyterianism, also complied with the provisions of the Toleration Act and registered two meeting houses in Accomac County. The court ruled that since Makemie had complied with the English statute, he also could preach in the specified homes. [^20]

Although the Toleration Act led to an extension of toleration in Virginia, it did not create in that colony conditions favorable for the growth of most non-Anglican denominations. Intolerant ecclesiastical laws and policies continued in the eighteenth century. By an Act of 1705, anyone convicted of denying the Trinity (which was interpreted as the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost being of one essence) or of rejecting the divine authority of the scriptures was to be denied the right of holding any office in the colony. A second conviction was more severe, the nonconformist was to be imprisoned for three years. [^21] After the Council in 1725 officially repealed the Acts of 1642 and 1662 which forbade non-Anglicans from teaching and preaching in Virginia, a new policy restricting proselyting activities of dissenters was adopted and remained in effect until 1776. Prior to the American Revolution, dissenting ministers were not to preach until they presented their credentials to the court and were informed by the court or legislature of the specific locations where they could teach others; and dissenters were not to organize congregations except in the areas designated by the Virginian authorities. All taxable settlers, Anglicans and non-Anglicans were also required to pay taxes for the support of the state church. Moreover, by law, all colonists were required to be married by an Anglican clergyman and pay a fee to the preacher for his service. In the western counties where there were few Anglican clergymen, administrators allowed Presbyterian ministers the right to perform marriages, but insisted that they give to the Anglicans the money collected for performing this ceremony. [^22]

Virginia's experiment in limited toleration did not immediately result in the decay of religious uniformity. After persecution declined, the Quakers failed to increase in membership; and after the Presbyterians had settled two ministers, they did not increase significantly in numbers. Robert Beverly, an early eighteenth century historian, aptly described the religious situation in Virginia in 1700: "The People are generally of the Church of England, which is the Religion established by Law in the Country, from which there are very few dissenters. Yet Liberty of Conscience is given to all other Congregations pretending to Christianity, on condition that they submit to all Parish Duties." Beverly recognized the existence of only five congregations of non-Anglicans in the colony at that time, three small groups of Quakers and two congregations of Presbyterians. "'Tis observ'd," Beverly concluded, "that those Counties where the Presbyterian meetings are, produce very mean Tobacco; and for that reason can't get an Orthodox Minister to stay amonst them; but whenever they cou'd, the People very orderly went to Church. As for the Quakers, 'tis observ'd by letting them alone, they decrease daily." [^23]

During the first three decades of the eighteenth century, the dissenters also failed to prosper in Virginia. In 1700, a group of French Huguenots sought refuge in that colony and were granted the right to settle and worship according to their desires. But the French Protestants voluntarily scattered among the English population and exercised slight influence on the established church. In the second decade of the eighteenth century, a group of Baptists from England settled in the southeastern part of the colony. These Christians were followed by a few German Protestant immigrants, but these denominations did not prosper. Meanwhile, after the death of the first two legally settled Presbyterian ministers, the members of this religion became so small that no pastors immediately replaced their original preachers. Prior to 1740, there were only a few small, widely scattered groups of nonconformists in Virginia. [^24]

First Major Growth of Dissent in the Old Dominion

Unconsciously, the American Indians played a peculiar role in fostering pluralism in the Old Dominion. Without warning, in the fall of 1711, a party of Tuscarora Indians massacred about 120 frontier inhabitants of North Carolina and burned numerous plantations. When news of this tragedy was circulated in Virginia, the colonists were seized with fear. Revealing to the General Assembly the defenseless condition of the frontier, Governor Alexander Spotswood demanded that action be taken to protect the Virginians from possible Indian attack. It was decided that a buffer zone of settlers should be created between the Indians and the old residents. To entice immigrants into the perilous wilderness, the government granted free or inexpensive land and tax exemptions to those who were willing to fight in case of attack.

Shortly after the raids by the Tuscaroras, Governor Spotswood invited forty-two Germans to settle above the falls of the Rappahannock River, which proved to be a progressive step in the defensive policy of the frontier. Twelve German families, members of the Reformed church, settled in the frontier where they were granted the right to import ministers and worship in peace. The General Assembly endorsed the governor's actions by exempting the Germans for several years from the payment of public, county, and parish levies and ordered the erection of a fort near the homes of these pioneers. In 1717, other German immigrants obtained homesteads along the Rappahannock River; and in that same decade, a few German Lutherans settled within sight of the Blue Ridge Mountains in the area known today as Madison County.

The same liberal land policies that were formulated to foster immigration into the Piedmont frontier were extended beyond the Blue Ridge Mountains to the Shenandoah Valley. The Assembly granted on liberal terms vast tracts of land in the valley to land companies, so that industrious promoters would seek and locate settlers for western Virginia. During this era, numerous German Protestants and Scotch-Irish Presbyterians were migrating to America. Heeding advertisements, many of these Christians decided to colonize the fertile valley lying between the Blue Ridge Mountains and the Alleghenies. Beginning in the mid-1730's, the first formidable group of Virginian dissenters established their homes in the Great Valley. The result of the migration was the establishment in western Virginia of a heterogeneous society in race and religion which was not sympathetic to the way of life prevailing east of the mountains.

Since the immigrants provided a genuine service to the other settlers, the government did not disapprove of the rapid influx of nonconformists into the Great Valley. The Anglican political leaders welcomed the dissenters on condition that they give allegiance to the established government and pay taxes to support the state religion.

While the immigration into the Shenandoah Valley was gaining momentum, the first widespread and intense religious revival in American History, the Great Awakening, altered the complexion of religion in the eastern part of Virginia. The flames of this American revival were ignited about 1740 and burned brightly for several years. Itinerant preachers, roaming the fields and plains of the New World, aroused many from religious apathy. They preached of the necessity of a new birth, warned men of the eternal punishment awaiting the unconverted, and encouraged physical demonstrations. Some converts of the revivals in Virginia increased their activity in the Anglican church, but others desired a religion which advanced the spirit of the Awakening. After separating from the Church of England, a group of settlers in Hanover County embraced Presbyterianism. This organization became the center of Presbyterian activity in eastern Virginia and inaugurated the first movement east of the Blue Ridge Mountains that seriously impaired the dominance of the established church. [^25]

The success of the Presbyterians in Hanover aroused members of the established church. Influential Anglicans regarded the Presbyterian itinerant revivalists as irresponsible preachers and the movement as one designed to create discord and anarchy in Virginia. Therefore, measures were sought to impair the efficiency of their missionary activities. Since the Presbyterians in Hanover County had failed to register their meeting houses and the itinerant preachers from the north had neglected to comply with the provisions of the Toleration Act, local authorities issued indictments for itinerant preaching and fined members of this denomination for failure to attend Anglican services. Several Presbyterian missionaries fled the colony, leaving these Christians without spiritual leadership, but after registering their meeting houses in 1747, these individuals were excused from the services of the Church of England.

Accomplishments of Samuel Davies

In 1748, Samuel Davies became pastor of the Presbyterians in Hanover. Immediately upon his arrival, Davies registered four places of worship in and about Hanover and secured permission to preach at these designated houses of worship. After recognizing that there was too much work for one minister, the elder requested one of his former classmates, John Rogers, to assist him. Rogers also complied with the provisions of the Toleration Act, but was denied the right to preach in Virginia on the pretense that he had improper credentials.

After this denial, several small groups of Presbyterians petitioned the Virginian courts in an attempt to obtain recognition that one of the buildings in their community might be used as a meeting house, but these petitions were also rejected. Davies reported that the rulings by the courts discouraged other bodies of Presbyterians from submitting petitions; and for several years, Davies was the only Presbyterian who legally had the right to preach in eastern Virginia. After securing permission to preach in other counties, the influential "father of the Hanover Presbyterians," strove to administer to the needs of more than 375 families living in five eastern counties, some of these farmers living from twenty to forty miles from the nearest registered meeting house. [^26]

Davies was not only an effective organizer and persuasive preacher, but he was also a leading figure in advancing the cause of religious liberty. Some Virginians challenged the right of the Presbyterians to worship in the colony, arguing that the English Toleration Act had not been officially endorsed by the General Assembly. In answer to the critics, Davies obtained from British authorities a decision that the influential act of 1689 did apply to the colonies and that the dissenters of America were protected by this law in the same manner in which the nonconformists of England were protected. He failed though to secure a liberal interpretation of another English act passed in 1711, which granted dissenters the right to preach in more than one county. Davies held that by this law, legally recognized Protestant clergymen had the right to preach anywhere in the colony; but the policy continued that dissenting preachers could legally preach only in meeting houses specifically designated to each minister by the courts. [^27]

Beginning in 1752, the Virginian court acceded to the petitions of Davies, permitting other Presbyterian ministers the right to preach in designated locations of eastern Virginia. With three assistants relieving him of part of his large circuit, Davies directed a more rapid growth of the Presbyterian movement east of the Blue Ridge Mountains. The revival continued until Davies left Virginia in 1759 to accept the presidency of the College of New Jersey (Princeton). [^28]

Growth of the Baptists in the Old Dominion

The departure of Davies marked the beginning of the rapid rise of another denomination in Virginia, the Baptists. In 1760, there were only five Baptist congregations, five ordained ministers, two licensed preachers, and less than five hundred members of this denomination in the Old Dominion. Sixteen years later, the Baptists were the second largest denomination in Virginia with a membership of approximately 4,500. [^29]

Baptist Oppression

This remarkable increase in church membership primarily due to conversions from other faiths did not occur without forceful opposition from members of the state religion. In the decade preceding the American Revolution, Baptists of Virginia were more savagely persecuted than were members of any contemporary denomination within the Thirteen Colonies. Baptists were frequently harassed, ridiculed, and socially ostracized. Baptist preachers were whipped by local authorities, dragged from meetings and beaten by irate mobs, pelted with stones, and submerged under water until nearly dead.

By refusing to secure permission to preach from resident ministers and failing to register their meeting houses, Baptist elders neglected to comply with the ecclesiastical policies and laws of Virginia. Beginning in 1768, local authorities acted to prevent itinerant preaching within their jurisdiction. In that year, nine Baptist preachers were imprisoned for about three to six weeks in two different counties for disturbing the peace and preaching without authorization. Undismayed by this punishment, Baptist ministers and laymen continued to circulate their beliefs illegally; other imprisonments followed. On at least fifty-eight occasions, between 1768 and 1774, forty-three different Baptist preachers were arrested and sentenced to jail where they were confined from a few weeks to five months. [^30]

Although religious liberty was not a reality in all parts of colonial Virginia, the oppression of dissenters can be exaggerated. Since there had been a significant advancement of toleration in the eighteenth century, many Christians residing in the Old Dominion at the end of the colonial period worshipped in peace. When the Revolution erupted, about one-fifth of the population or possibly 100,000 Virginians lived in the Shenandoah Valley and of these Christians, few were members of the Church of England. [^31] Dissatisfied with the ecclesiastical conditions which prevailed, the nonconformists continued their struggle to secure legislation which would advance toleration and introduce religious liberty. A change was imminent, for when the Americans proceeded to organize a nation, conditions were favorable for the inauguration of a new religious era in Virginia.

II. The Decline of Solidarity and the Growth of Toleration in New York

The Dutch Reformed State Religion in New Netherlands

Shortly after the English founded Jamestown, the Dutch launched a commercial enterprise, establishing a series of fur trading posts along the Hudson River. For many years, there were too few settlers in the colony to support a minister. Not accustomed to organizing and worshipping without a pastor, the economic-minded colonists failed to establish any religious institutions. In 1626, two church officials, known as comforters of the sick, were sent to New Netherlands to baptize, perform marriages, console the sick, and read the scriptures at religious services. Two years later the first ordained minister arrived, after which the settlers were ordered to attend the services of the Dutch Reformed church and to support financially their pastor. [^32]

The Rise of Pluralism but the Retention of a Policy of Uniformity

Disappointed with the growth of the colony and fearing invasion by the English, the government officials in the Netherlands decided to strengthen their North American colony by encouraging foreigners of various faiths to settle there. In 1638, nonconformists were encouraged to establish their homes in New Netherlands on condition that they financially support the state religion and not hold services contrary to the practices of the Reformed church. "No other religion," a decree of 1640 read, "shall be publicly admitted in New Netherland except the Reformed, as it is at present preached and practiced by public authority in the United Netherlands." [^33]

After dissenters settled in New Netherlands, the Dutch Reformed religion remained the only legal religion. The policy to prevent "heresies and schisms" by refusing nonconformists the right to organize was again clearly restated in 1656: "The Director General and Council strictly forbid all such public or private conventicles and meetings, except the usual and authorized ones, where God's Word, according to the Reformed and established custom, is preached and taught." [^34]

Although the ecclesiastical restrictions were enforced, immigrants from many nations representing various faiths settled in New Netherlands. "No religion is publicly exercised but the Calvinist," wrote Isaac Jogues, a Jesuit visitor to New Amsterdam (New York City) in 1644, but "there are besides Calvinists in the Colony Catholics, English Puritans, Lutherans, [and] Anabaptists." He also reported that on Manhattan Island and its neighboring settlements there were four or five hundred men who professed many different religions and spoke eighteen different languages. [^35]

Until 1641, the Dutch Reformed church was the only religious organization in New Netherlands. In that decade English Puritans were permitted to establish their churches in the colony. The Dutch authorities recognized that the beliefs and practices of these Christians harmonized with their religious views, for both groups based their articles of faith upon the scriptures as interpreted by John Calvin. The laws were thereby liberally interpreted to read that the English Puritans were members of the Reformed church, but the lenience did not extend to other denominations. [^36]

Lutherans who settled in New Netherlands were sometimes required to attend the services of the Reformed church. After there were sufficient numbers to organize a church, they petitioned the officers of the colony, requesting permission to hold public meetings. Their pleas were denied. Lutherans were informed that they could hold family worship services, but could not worship outside their own homes. When these Christians attempted to settle a pastor, the Lutheran minister was ordered to abstain from holding any meetings and was forced to leave the colony. [^37]

Immediately after the Quakers appeared in this colony in the mid 1640's, they were branded as "instruments of the Devil" and their religion was labeled an "abominable heresy." When the first Quaker preachers proclaimed their message to the inhabitants of New Amsterdam, the townsmen reacted as though they were listening to Satan himself; promptly seizing the lady missionaries, clamping them in prison, and then expelling them from the colony. One colonist aptly expressed the attitudes of the people of his age toward these dissenters by writing that after "a ship with Quakers on board . . . hoisted anchor," it sailed towards New England. "We suppose they went to Rhode Island," he determined, "for that is the receptacle of all sorts of riff-raff people and is nothing else than the sewer (latrina) of New England. All the cranks of New England retire thither. We suppose they will settle there, as they are not tolerated by the Independents in any other place." [^38]

The threat of a Quaker infiltration into the colony aroused the intolerant governor of New Netherlands, Peter Stuyvesant. Settlers of this colony, the governor decreed in 1658, are not to admit, lodge, nor entertain members of this "heretical" sect. When the governor learned that the ordinance had been violated, he executed the law. Men were fined and banished for being hospitable to Quakers; and as in many other parts of the New World, members of this society who sought to preach or worship were imprisoned and banished. [^39] The Quakers succeeded, however, in holding their peculiar meetings in sections of Long Island and other areas where the effective jurisdiction of the law did not extend.

In the middle of the seventeenth century, a few Jews also settled in the Dutch colony. Some of the inhabitants promptly demanded that these non-Christians be expelled, for as they argued in their petition, "These people, have no other God than the unrighteous Mammon, and no other aim than to get possession of Christian property, and to win all other merchants by drawing trade towards themselves." Since there was a shortage of capital in the colony and the Jews were considered a financial asset, the administrators permitted these people to remain, but in accordance with the laws of New Netherlands, the Jews were not permitted to build a synagogue. [^40] On occasions, they were also restricted in their business activities, being deprived of the opportunity to trade with some of the other settlers and forbidden to establish retail shops.

The Advancement of Toleration under English Rule

After the English conquered the Dutch colony in 1664, there was a marked change in the ecclesiastical policy of the colony renamed New York. The English realized that it would be impossible to maintain ecclesiastical uniformity. By the terms of the surrender, the Dutch were guaranteed religious liberty. The English also carried orders guaranteeing Anglicans the right to worship according to the rites of the Church of England. Moreover, the English did not want the old settlers to leave. Intolerant policies would have depopulated and weakened the colony. Therefore, individuals who were not members of the Reformed church were granted the right to hold public services and to settle ordained ministers. The new policy as stated in one body of laws read: no congregation was to be disturbed in their private meetings and no Christian was to be "molested, fined, or imprisoned, for differing in judgment in matters of religion." [^41]

Under English rule, the Lutherans secured pastoral leadership, conducted their first unmolested public meetings, and erected their first meeting house in the Dutch community. In 1671, the Quakers held their first public meeting in New York City and the following year built their first meeting house in New York on Long Island. "Through patience and quietness," the New York Quakers testified in 1680 to members of their society in London, "we have found of a truth that the Lord takes care of his people. Our testimonies go forth without any hindrance and return unto us not wholly empty." [^42]

Although toleration increased significantly after the English seized New Netherlands, the English sought to establish the Church of England as the state supported religion. For several years, the Dutch who controlled the Assembly blocked the passage of legislation designed to create an Anglican establishment, but finally endorsed an act "to settle and to maintain" a minister in the city of New York and in the counties of Richmond, Westchester, and Queens. Even though the act did not state that the Church of England was to be the tax-supported religion in the colony, the Anglican governors interpreted the act as meaning that the national religion of England was the established church in the four lower counties of New York. Although Trinity church in New York City was supported in the colonial period by public taxation, the act was not effectively enforced in the other regions.

A few other ecclesiastical laws and policies enacted by the English shortly after their conquest of the Dutch colony created conditions in New York inimical to the twentieth century concept of religious liberty. By the Duke Laws (which were applicable to Long Island and Staten Island until 1674 and were then extended to the entire colony), only ministers ordained by a Protestant bishop or minister could legally preach or officiate in New York. In the latter part of the seventeenth century, a few Quaker missionaries, who were not recognized as legally ordained ministers, were imprisoned for violating the laws of the colony. Moreover, the noted Presbyterian minister Francis Makemie and his companion were arrested in 1706 for preaching in New York without first securing a license. During the trial, Makemie insisted that the English Toleration Act protected Protestants in New York as it did in Virginia. Even though the jury rendered a verdict of not guilty, Makemie complained that during the proceedings he had been imprisoned and was forced to pay the expense of his imprisonment and trial which amounted to eighty-one pounds sterling. [^43]

The guarantees of religious rights did not extend to non-Protestants. Catholics, for instance, were not guaranteed freedom of conscience. Since office holders in the New York colony were required to take an oath condemning transubstantiation, invocation and adoration of saints, and the sacrifice of the Mass as taught by the "Church of Rome," Catholics were denied the opportunity to render political service. By law, although it was not enforced, Catholic priests were excluded from the colony; and shortly before the Revolution, one Catholic wrote that members of his church lived in constant fear of penal prosecution. [^44]

The few cases of persecution occurring after English occupation do not properly reflect the changing religious atmosphere in New York. As in other colonies, there was a significant increase of toleration in this province during the eighteenth century. By the end of the colonial period, New York was noted as a melting pot of the religions of Europe where numerous religious groups worshipped God in peace. Travelers to New York frequently described the cosmopolitan nature of the colony, especially that of New York City. A Scotchman visiting Manhattan Island in 1774-75 wrote: [^45]

They have three English churches, three Presbyterian, two Dutch Lutheran, two Dutch Calvinists . . . besides a French church, an Anabaptists, a Methodist, a Quaker meeting, a Moravian church, and a Jews synagogue.

Another traveler of the same era briefly summarized the ecclesiastical conditions in the colony by writing: [^46]

Besides the religion of the church of England, there is a variety of others: dissenters of all denominations, particularly Presbyterians, abound in great numbers, and there are some few Roman Catholics.

III. The Congregational Commonwealth in Massachusetts and Connecticut

The Pilgrim Migrations

In the first decade of the sixteenth century while the English were colonizing Virginia and the Dutch were exploring the Hudson River Valley, a group of Separatists fled from religious oppression in England and settled in the only country of Europe where they knew they would receive toleration, the Netherlands. The state religion of the Dutch was very similar to the faith of the Separatists, and although the Dutch had not created religious liberty in their land for all Christians, they granted toleration to many denominations.

In 1609, some of the English dissenters, who had lived in Amsterdam for several years, moved to Leyden, a small village located a few miles from Amsterdam. There they worked and worshipped in peace, but became increasingly dissatisfied with conditions in their new homeland. The Dutchmen did not observe the Sabbath as the Pilgrims thought the day should be observed. The Separatists desired to retain their English culture, but recognized that they were being absorbed into the Dutch civilization. Their children were marrying into Dutch families and some were enlisting in the Dutch army and navy. Then, there was the threat of an imminent war, matching Spain and the Netherlands. Spanish victory would have meant the inauguration of the horrors of the Inquisition, and the Separatists feared the Catholics more than the English king. At the same time, they were struggling to earn a living. Therefore, they concluded that they might improve their economic situation, preserve their faith, and retain their nationality by migrating to some other land. Two representatives were selected to travel to England and make the necessary arrangements.

When the project was launched, few men acquainted with the problems of colonizing America would have predicted success, for it was a desperate undertaking. These dissenters had no friends in court and practically no money. They were few in number, inexperienced in the task which confronted them, and were members of a despised sect. Undaunted by the magnitude of their problems, the two Separatist representatives located a financier for the enterprise, Thomas Weston, and obtained permission to settle in what was then northern Virginia, possibly along the Delaware River. After extensive preparations had been made, fewer than fifty of the approximate 240 members of the Separatist congregation in Leyden decided to migrate. Many feared the Atlantic. Others refused to risk their lives and the lives of their children in the wilderness known as a "slaughter-house." In the summer of 1620, those united in this exodus set sail for England on board the Speedwell. At Southampton, a larger vessel, the Mayflower awaited the Pilgrims. Disappointed because of the small number of immigrants who were participating in this migration, Thomas Weston insisted that the emigrants from Leyden take with them other colonists. With additional passengers, the Separatists began their long, hazardous journey. Twice they were forced to return to England because the Speedwell seemed unseaworthy. Finally, in the fall, the worst season to have begun such a journey, the Mayflower embarked alone from Plymouth, England. On board were 102 passengers, but of these only 35 were "saints" from Leyden. The others were called "strangers," who, according to one account, were sent by Weston to work, not to pray. Since the Church of England was the only legal religion in England at that time, undoubtedly most of the strangers were Anglicans, but these yeoman and peasants were not seriously interested in religion.

The Mayflower Compact

After sighting the New England coast, the colonists steered the Mayflower towards Virginia, but according to William Bradford, a Pilgrim historian and popular governor, the Mayflower was blown back to the bleak, sandy shores of Cape Cod. No further attempt was made to locate in the Old Dominion. Since the Pilgrims had not secured permission to locate in that section of America and feared that the strangers might not acknowledge the government which they intended to establish, before they landed, the religious leaders of the enterprise prepared a compact, patterned after their church covenants, which all eligible voters agreed to sign. The Mayflower Compact stipulated that the settlers would organize a government in the New World, directed by the will of the majority, which would prepare laws for the welfare of the society. By endorsing the compact, the settlers promised obedience and submission to the laws framed by the government. Although two-thirds of the passengers were strangers, only a small per cent were recognized as eligible voters, so from the beginning, the saints had a voting majority. By these maneuvers, that is by settling outside of the jurisdiction of Virginia and securing the signatures of the strangers of the Mayflower Compact, the Pilgrims from Leyden retained control of the enterprise and were in a position to plant in America their concept of the kingdom of God.

Establishment of a "Bible Commonwealth" in New England

The Pilgrims did not migrate to America to establish a haven for the persecuted sects of the world. Instead, they immigrated in hopes of obtaining a better refuge, where they could worship God according to their beliefs and where they would be relatively free of the danger of ecclesiastical error which might lead them to damnation. In their view the ideal church was to be strictly framed according to their interpretation of the Bible and was not to be weakened by great latitudes of belief; and they believed that the Calvinistic magistrates had the responsibility of advancing and preserving the Word of God. Conscientiously, they strove to prevent heretics from circulating views regarded as blasphemies in the eyes of God. Because of the emphasis on the autonomy of each congregation, if the church government had failed to gain the full support of the civil authorities, the Congregational system would have been hopelessly weakened and torn asunder by diversity. The believers in this system of church policy had not secured such support in England and the Netherlands, but upon arriving in America, they seized their opportunities. An alliance was formed between the church and the state. The Old Testament became a book of statutes, and the government dominated by the "elect" assumed the responsibility of preserving ecclesiastical solidarity. [^47]

The Great Puritan Migration

A few years after the Pilgrims planted Congregationalism in Plymouth Colony, a similar ecclesiastical system was created in Massachusetts Bay Colony. In 1630, more than one thousand immigrants settled in and near Boston in what proved to be the beginning of a great Puritan migration to the New World. During that decade, multitudes sailed from England and braved the perils of the sea in order to establish a zion in the New World. Many of these New England immigrants were a sifted element of the English society, converts of a reformation who were saturated with religious zeal. Religious insecurity was not the only motive that prompted them to settle in America. Inequalities of local taxes, increased unemployment, rising cost of living, and political injustices were also factors that influenced their decision. But the Puritan faith tended to steer many to New England. There on the bleak, rocky, and sandy coast, they established a haven where they could worship God according to the dictates of their conscience.

Orthodox Puritan Expansion

By employing the state as an active agent to promote their ideals, the Puritans of Massachusetts Bay acted in harmony with the popular beliefs of that age and welded a tight chain of religious uniformity around their society. As in Plymouth, only one religion was allowed to emerge in this colony. Then, by means of an expansion from Massachusetts into Connecticut by orthodox Puritans, the "Bible Commonwealth" was extended to include the settlements at and near New Haven and along the Connecticut River.

In the Puritan colonies, the state claimed no control over the private views of men but whenever individuals attempted to promulgate "heretical opinions" the state exercised effective control. Religious pluralism, a committee of Puritan ministers declared in 1635, would provoke God, destroy the peace of the church and would dissolve the state. This policy was also endorsed by the Puritan legislators, for in the mid-seventeenth century Puritan colonies, no churches were to be organized without approval of the General Court. In Plymouth, the law read that in addition to the sanction of the legislature, the ministers had to register their approval, and in Connecticut, the neighboring churches had to give their approbation before new churches were to be constituted. For many decades, the governments in the Puritan colonies granted only one body of Christians the right to organize. [^48]

Banishment of Organized Bodies of Dissent

The ecclesiastical establishments of New England did not arise without opposition. The first challenge to the religious program of Plymouth occurred in 1624. In that year an Anglican minister, John Lyford, and one of his friends, John Oldham, invited others to meet secretly in private homes. Shortly thereafter, these Englishmen organized a church in Plymouth, according to the constitution of the Church of England. After conducting their first public Sunday service, the two Anglican leaders were arrested. Governor William Bradford claimed that he believed in the principle of religious liberty, but he did not apply the principle to anyone who objected to the Separatist's theology and form of worship. The court sanctioned this policy by ordering the two recalcitrants to leave and not return. Others who were not in sympathy with the policies of the Pilgrims also emigrated, and the threat of schism was effectively checked. The strangers were not permitted to organize, hold meetings, nor preach in Plymouth. [^49]

Outspoken critics of the establishment in Massachusetts Bay were also promptly banished. Roger Williams, who had fled from England during the persecutions directed by Archbishop William Laud, became one of the first radical nonconformists in Massachusetts. The ardent rebel insisted that the land in America belonged to the Indians and should be purchased from them. He condemned the political leaders for failing to admit that by inaugurating Puritan reforms they had separated from the Church of England. He denounced their intolerance, recommending the separation of church and state and the establishment of religious liberty for all men, Christians and non-Christians. The unpopular critic was brought before the courts where he unsuccessfully defended his beliefs. The court ruled that since the views of Williams were dangerous and heretical, he was to be removed and was never to return. With a few followers, Roger Williams fled into the American wilderness where in Rhode Island he succeeded in planting his unorthodox convictions. [^50]

Another well-known dissenter who was banished from Massachusetts and settled in Rhode Island was Anne Hutchinson. Mistress Hutchinson provoked the authorities by inviting friends into her home, where she reviewed the ministers' sermons and popularized her peculiar form of Calvinism. Summoned before the court, she was rigorously examined. During the trial, Anne Hutchinson confessed that she had received direct communication from God. God revealed his will to me, she testified, "by the voice of his own spirit to my soul." Since the Puritans interpreted the Bible as stating that visions and revelations ceased with the death of the apostles, this acknowledgment of a form of revelation was, in their view, evidence that the woman had been seduced by Satan. The Puritan leaders would not tolerate such a heresy. You are a "woman not fit for our society," the court ruled. You shall remain in prison until transported from our jurisdiction. [^51]

Shortly after Anne Hutchinson and her followers were banished, certain individuals who proclaimed that only believers should be baptized were also ordered to leave Massachusetts. As the years passed, other Congregationalists who endorsed this dogma and expressed their convictions were cast out of the Puritan society. All other zealous nonconformists met the same fate. In the middle of the seventeenth century, the government officials of Massachusetts and Connecticut were not aware of any organized body of dissenters living in their domain.

The settlers of Massachusetts and Connecticut met Quaker invasion more vigorously than the Englishmen of Virginia or the Dutch residing in New Netherlands. "Quakers, Ranters, Adamites," and other "heretics" were not permitted to preach, hold services, nor be entertained in any town for longer than fourteen days. In New Haven, if a male Quaker returned after banishment, he was to be imprisoned, branded on one hand with the letter "H," and then expelled. For a second offense of returning after banishment, he was to be imprisoned, branded on his other hand, and expelled; and for the third conviction, he was to be imprisoned, his tongue was to be cut with hot irons, and then he was to be removed from the colony. Convicted female Quakers who returned after banishment were to be whipped severely, imprisoned, and banished. [^52] In Massachusetts Bay, the legislature ordered that if a Quaker returned after banishment, one ear of the recalcitrant was to be "cropped." For a second such offense, another ear was to be clipped; and for the third offense, the tongue of the "heretic" was to be "bored through" with a hot iron. [^53]

In 1656, the first Quaker missionaries arrived in Boston harbor. Before the two ladies had an opportunity to preach, they were seized from a ship and clamped in a jail with boarded windows. For five weeks, they were imprisoned, being denied pen and ink and the opportunity to speak to anyone, after which they were placed on a vessel sailing to Barbados. Other members of this society who landed in New England encountered more severe punishment. Some were imprisoned and were periodically whipped before being expelled; and one Quaker was beaten to death. When this harsh action failed to halt the Quaker missionary activities, the Massachusetts legislature ordered the death penalty for all Quakers who returned after banishment. In 1659, one year after the passage of this intolerant act, Quakers were arrested and informed that if they returned after being driven from the colony, they would be subject to capital punishment. Defying the law, a group of missionaries under such a ban returned. Three of these Quakers were apprehended and presented to the court. "Why did you return?" they were asked. "In obedience to the call of the Lord," they replied. [^54] Their defense was not adequate. The two male missionaries were hanged, but the woman, Mary Dyer, was released. When she again returned and refused to leave, Mary Dyer became a Quaker martyr. One other Quaker was hanged in Boston before the law providing capital punishment for banished Quakers was repealed.

About 1660, a petition was sent to the English monarch aptly summarizing Quaker persecution in Massachusetts in the late 1650's. The informers revealed that 30 Quakers had received about 23 lashes; 2 had been beaten with ropes; 64 had been imprisoned; 5 had been imprisoned 15 days without food; 25 had been banished on pain of being whipped or having their ears clipped or their hands branded if they returned; 3 had ears clipped; 1 had been branded after being beaten with 30 stripes; 1 inhabitant of Salem, after half his property was confiscated, had been banished on pain of death; 1 had been chained to a log of wood and exposed to the harsh winter elements for about 20 days; and fines amounting to a thousand pounds had been levied upon inhabitants for worshipping according to the Quaker belief. [^55]

Although the king did not endorse the Quaker faith and administered laws forbidding the Quakers to assemble in England, Charles II recognized that the punishment dealt to the members of this society was more severe in New England than in the mother country. Therefore, in 1661, the English monarch issued a mandamus to the governor of Massachusetts ordering the Quakers in prison to be transported to England for trial and forbidding capital punishment for these Christians. Governor John Endecott did not want these recalcitrants testifying in England against his administration so released the prisoners and allowed the laws against these Christians to be relaxed. Thereafter, Quakers were whipped and banished, but not executed. [^56]

Meanwhile, in 1663, a group of seven Baptists covenanted together to worship God at Rehoboth, in Plymouth Colony. The pastor of the Baptists was John Myles, an Oxford student who had served as minister in Wales prior to being ejected from his pulpit at the restoration of Charles II. Migrating to America, Myles established his new home in Plymouth where he resumed his religious teaching. For four years the Baptists worshipped unmolested, but when the civil authorities became aware of their activities, the Baptist leaders were arrested. On July 2, 1667, the Plymouth court fined John Myles and James Brown five pounds for "seting up of a publicke meeting without the knowledge and approbation of the Court, to the disturbance of the peace." The court further ordered that the meetings of the Baptists be discontinued. One year later, however, the Baptists gained a memorable victory. They were granted frontier land near the Rhode Island border. There in the Massachusetts wilderness in a settlement named Swansea they won the right to worship God in peace, becoming the first organized body of Baptist dissenters in Plymouth Colony. [^57]

The Gradual Rise of Dissent and of Toleration

Except for a few, small groups of dissenters living in isolated frontier communities, the Congregational political leaders in Massachusetts and Connecticut succeeded in preserving uniformity until the late 1680's. Then between 1685 and 1688 all the colonies north of the Delaware River were consolidated into one administrative region, called the Dominion of New England. The colonial charters were abolished and local governments were replaced with a governor and council. After the appointed governor, Edmund Andros, arrived in New England, he sternly requested that Anglicans be permitted to worship in peace, insisting that members of the Church of England be permitted to share Boston's Old South Meeting House with the Congregationalists. Reluctantly, the Congregationalists acquiesced. Shortly thereafter, the English Toleration Act and a new charter issued for Massachusetts in 1691 (combining Plymouth Colony and Massachusetts Bay Colony) extended limited toleration to Protestants. "Hereafter," the new charter of Massachusetts read, "there shall be a liberty of Conscience allowed in the Worship of God to all Christians (Except Papists) Inhabiting . . . our Province." [^58]

The extension of toleration did not lead to the rapid rise of dissent in the Puritan colonies nor did it prevent the legislatures from enacting oppressive laws and retaining intolerant policies. Although the Connecticut legislature admitted in 1708 that the English Toleration Act was in effect in their colony, they still refused to recognize rival creeds. In this first decade of the eighteenth century, the Baptists organized a congregation. When they refused to pay ecclesiastical taxes, claiming that it was contrary to their beliefs, they were fined, imprisoned, and flogged. Anglicans were also imprisoned, being charged with the crime of failing to attend services of the Congregational church. [^59] In 1721, the Connecticut legislature decreed that all settlers, without valid excuses, who failed to attend services allowed by law were to be fined. Those who attended unlawful meetings and failed to pay the prescribed fine were to be sent to the house of correction where they were to labor one month for every such offense. [^60] In 1723, the legislature defined an unlawful meeting as one held in a private home under the direction of an unordained minister. The law further forbade unordained ministers to administer the sacraments of the Lord's Supper or baptism. Unordained ministers who failed to comply with the law were to be whipped, not to exceed thirty stripes for every offense. [^61]

During the Great Awakening of the early 1740's when zealous revivalists proclaimed their views in Connecticut, the legislature passed a law against preaching by itinerants. No one, a statute of 1742 prescribed, was to preach in any parish without permission of the resident minister and if the parish be vacant, without permission of the people of the community. [^62] Elders of the Strict Congregational church, an offshoot of Congregationalism following the Great Awakening, were most seriously affected by the Act of 1742. Prior to 1750, at least six of their missionaries were imprisoned for preaching without special permission. But persecution was not limited to these Separates, for a Presbyterian minister, Rev. Samuel Finley, who later became president of Princeton, was imprisoned and banished for violating this act; and a few leading revivalists of the age, such as James Davenport, were also expelled from the colony. The enforcement of the act in some communities did not prevent others from flaunting the legislative decree, for nonconformist missionaries continued to preach in Connecticut, including towns where itinerants had been imprisoned. [^63]

Although popular hostilities against dissenters did not create in colonial Massachusetts and Connecticut a fertile field for the growth of nonconformists, nevertheless, pluralism increased slowly throughout the eighteenth century. Prior to the late 1740's, the Anglican church was the only denomination that had driven a significant wedge into the religious exclusiveness of Connecticut. In 1724, when there was only one Anglican minister in the colony, the first edifice of the Church of England was erected at Stratford. Ten years later, there were five parishes with church buildings and ministers; and by 1750, there were about twenty Anglican churches in Connecticut. [^64] In Massachusetts, there were only twenty-four dissenting ministers in 1748. Eleven of these pastors were Anglicans, three of whom resided in Boston. A French Huguenot and Presbyterian minister also lived in that port town. The Baptists were represented by eight elders, and three elders were members of the Strict Congregational church. Due primarily to the rapid growth of the Baptists in New England, religious solidarity crumbled more rapidly at the end of the colonial period. In 1776, there were 107 Baptist congregations in New England, outside of Rhode Island, which represents a growth of 90 societies in 20 years. [^65]

A study of the history of these Puritan colonies also reveals that limited toleration led to pluralism, and after the multiple religions united in opposition to the Congregational establishment, toleration increased. In the early eighteenth century, the Quakers, Anglicans, and Baptists constantly petitioned the king, exposing Puritan intolerance and appealing for English intervention to prevent further oppression.

In the 1720's, fearing reprisals from the mother country, the legislatures of Connecticut and Massachusetts excused members of the Church of England, Society of Friends, and Baptist denomination from paying ecclesiastical rates to the Congregational church. However, in Connecticut the law read that to secure ecclesiastical tax exemption, a dissenter had to live near a meeting house of his denomination and had to attend regularly the services of his church. To the disadvantage of the dissenters, the law was interpreted to read that those who lived more than two miles from a dissenting meeting house were not living near the house of worship. [^66] In Massachusetts, the law was fortified with a complicated system, requiring dissenters to prepare and file certificates before they were considered eligible for exemption. [^67] The exemption acts were flagrantly violated in some communities. Baptists who complied with the law were sometimes imprisoned. Others who thought they had acted according to the legislature's order did not meet the requirements imposed by local magistrates and were thereby required to pay ecclesiastical rates. When they refused, they were occasionally imprisoned. Moreover, the exemption acts only applied to three Protestant denominations. Throughout the colonial period, dissenters in the two Puritan colonies were fined, imprisoned, and whipped, and many were harassed and ostracised from Congregational communities. There are also examples of persecution following the Revolutionary War. Methodist preachers in Connecticut, for instance, were sometimes forbidden to preach in halls or public buildings; and when they attempted to circulate their religious views, they were fined and imprisoned. Ministers of that faith were also denied the opportunity to perform marriages in that state.

Although there is evidence of continued persecution in the Puritan colonies, one of the significant developments in the eighteenth century was the gradual increase of toleration in New England. Some harsh laws were not enforced. Others, such as the act requiring settlers in Connecticut to attend only lawful meetings, were repealed. In 1770, the Connecticut legislature answered the petitions of the dissenters by declaring that no one in the colony who professed the Christian Protestant religion and attended the worship services of their choice was to be punished for such action. [^68] Meanwhile, other denominations in this section of the New World, especially the Baptists, conscientiously struggled to establish religious liberty for all denominations. The seed of religious liberty was on the verge of germinating.

IV. The Birth of Religious Liberty in America

Nearly six centuries prior to the birth of Christ, Nephi, a prophet of God residing on the American continent, beheld in vision three major precursors of the Restoration: the discovery of America, the colonization of the new world, and the American Revolution. Then following the successful rebellion of the colonists, Nephi learned that God would initiate a "marvelous work and a wonder." Another prophet, named Joseph, would arise among the children of God and would bring forth a new witness for Christ. [^69]

As Nephi foresaw, the colonization of America did not immediately create conditions favorable for a restoration. In all the colonies planted in the new world prior to 1633, the political leaders of various nationalities, with the support of the people, succeeded in establishing religious exclusiveness. Intolerant laws and attitudes were slowly replaced in all these regions by an acknowledgment of the religious rights of men. An important development, however, occurred in the English mainland colonies planted after 1633. With the exception of Connecticut, the founders of all the post-1633 colonial enterprises planted toleration at the inception of their history. Instead of continuing the policy of religious exclusiveness, the proprietors encouraged settlers of various faiths to establish their homes in the areas granted to them by the English monarch.

Catholics Plant Toleration in the New World

Ironically, the Roman Catholics, who were known for their bigotry in Europe and Latin America, first planted toleration on the American continent. In order to establish a haven in America for persecuted English Catholics and as a source of profit, Cecil Calvert, the Catholic proprietor of Maryland, determined to plant a colony north of Virginia. After inheriting a land grant which the king had given his father, the second Lord Baltimore was gravely disappointed when only a few Catholics decided to migrate to Maryland. Since more settlers were needed for a successful colonizing program, Cecil encouraged Protestant laborers to emigrate with the Catholics. To attract such workers, the leader had to guarantee religious toleration. From the outset of Maryland's history, therefore, most of the inhabitants were non-Catholics, more settlers undoubtedly being members of the Church of England than were affiliated with any other denomination.

Toleration was not only planted in Maryland because of economic necessity but because of political necessity. Due to the anti-Catholic bias in the mother country, Cecil Calvert knew that if Anglicans were persecuted in his colony the king would be informed and his charter would probably be revoked. Moreover, this proprietor had been raised a member of a persecuted denomination, and many English Catholics believed that the establishment of toleration in that land would benefit the members of their church. Cecil Calvert had not been indoctrinated on the principle of religious solidarity, but had been taught the advantages of toleration. Before the first ships set sail for Maryland, Cecil instructed his brother, Leonard Calvert, the appointed governor of the enterprise, to establish and maintain toleration in the land which the family controlled.

After arriving in 1634, the settlers of various faiths spread into the Maryland wilderness where they concentrated on making a living in the pristine forests of America. Although they were governored by benevolent Catholic rulers, the Protestants of Maryland had carried with them from England an intense hatred of Catholicism and this cancerous enmity ignited the flames of persecution. Learning of the eruption of intolerant actions against Catholics in his colony and facing the threat of a revocation of his charter, Cecil Calvert directed the Maryland assembly to pass the first toleration act in American history. By the Act of 1649, toleration was to be continued for all Trinitarian Christians, and the state was authorized to protect the religious rights of such citizens. But anyone who denied "the Holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, . . . or the unity of the Godhead" was to be "punished with death and confiscation or forfeiture of all his or her lands and goods to the Lord Proprietary and his heirs." Although toleration was limited by the legislation, the limitations were almost nondiscernible for there were few non-Trinitarian Christians in Maryland at that time. Shortly after the passage of the act, a Jew obtained the franchise, indicating that the tolerant spirit of the act was upheld. [^70]

The Decline of Toleration in Maryland

Even though the policy of toleration was fortified with legislation, the political leaders in Maryland were unable to prevent the continued oppression of the Catholics. In 1654, Protestant assemblymen sought to repeal permanently the Toleration Act, which was one factor precipitating a civil war between Catholics and Protestants. This conflict was followed by periods of peace, interrupted by periodic oppression of Catholics.

In all the English mainland colonies, except Maryland, there was a growth of toleration in the first half of the eighteenth century; but after the Anglicans obtained permanent control of this colony, intolerant laws were enacted to prevent the growth and curtail the ecclesiastical activities of the Roman Catholics. By the act of 1707, Catholic priests were not permitted to proselyte nor conduct public services. The only legal religious function extended to priests was the right to administer the Mass in private homes to individual families. During this pre-Revolution penal age, Catholics were not granted the franchise nor the right to hold office; and for a period, Maryland Catholics were not permitted to send their children abroad for education. From 1702 to 1776, Catholics and all other taxable inhabitants of Maryland were also required to pay taxes for the support of the Church of England. [^71] Under these restrictions the Catholic church failed to prosper; and many Catholics left the colony to seek refuge elsewhere. When the Revolution erupted, the largest Catholic community in the Thirteen Colonies was in Philadelphia, one of the few cities in the English colonies where Catholics enjoyed the right to worship publicly.

The Birth of the Pure Principle of Religious Liberty

The pure principle of religious liberty, unblemished by economic and political motives nor limited by law to Trinitarian Christians, was first established in the new world by the irrepressible rebel of Massachusetts, Roger Williams. In 1636, after banishment from and after being warned not to settle within the boundaries of Massachusetts Bay or Plymouth, Williams founded Providence, Rhode Island, where he launched an experiment in religious liberty. Williams insisted that anarchy and loss of public morality would not result from the separation of church and state and the elimination of the public support of religion by taxation. He believed that all men, Christians, Jews, Moslems, and members of other religions, should be granted the right to worship according to the dictates of their conscience. Who is to judge which of the many religions is sanctioned by God? he asked his critics. Force should play no role where religion is concerned, he argued, for when men act with coercion they are required to assume the position of infallible interpreters of God's will; and there is no infallible guide to direct man's thinking. If men are coerced into joining a church, he concluded, the organization will be weakened by the unconverted element. [^72]

After founding a haven in which he ordered that "no man was to be molested for his conscience," Williams was baptized a member of the Baptist church. Possibly the rebaptism was by sprinkling or pouring, for the Baptists of that age did not emphasize immersion as the proper mode but insisted that only believers should be baptized. Williams remained a member of this denomination for only a few months, probably from March to June or July, 1639. Although he continued to believe in many fundamental tenets of Calvinism (such as predestination, depravity, and irresistibility of grace), he became a Seeker. [^73] During the remaining years of his life, he searched for the truth, but was unable to locate what he considered as God's restored church. The "apostasy" destroyed the primitive church, Williams declared, and deprived men of the authority to perform God's ordinances. There is no proof of a true apostolic succession, he alleged; and, therefore, Catholics and Protestants do not have authority to administer the sacraments. Williams believed that this authority would have to be restored by God, not by man, through some divine means. As one of his contemporaries, John Winthrop stated, Williams concluded that the Protestants were "not . . . able to derive the authority . . . from the apostles, . . . [but] conceived God would raise up some apostolic power." [^74] Another colonial historian, John Callender, whose work remained the only major history of Rhode Island for over a century, also aptly summarized the views of Williams regarding the need for a restoration: [^75]

After a while he renounced these opinions [the views of the Baptists], likewise, and turned seeker, i.e. to wait for new apostles to restore Christianity. He believed the Christian religion to have been so corrupted and disfigured in what he called the "apostacy, as that there was no ministry of an ordinary vocation left in the church, but prophecy," and that there was need of a special commission, to restore the modes of positive worship, according to the original institution.

Since the statements of Roger Williams on religious liberty and the need for a restoration were considered too extreme by most of his contemporaries, Williams exerted little influence on his generation. After his death, he was lost in the maze of historical characters, and many of his views were buried with him. Then during the years preceding the American Revolution, his arguments favoring religious liberty were resurrected and widely circulated by others. A century after his death, Roger Williams was finally acknowledged as the great American prophet of religious liberty. [^76]

Toleration Accompanies English Expansion following the English Civil War

Due to the Civil War and political strife in England, colonization was momentarily interrupted between 1642 and 1660, but following the Interregnum, there was a remarkable expansion of English occupied territory and a marked increase in immigration. During the reign of Charles II (1661-1685), six English colonies were founded—the Carolinas, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware—and in all these colonies, toleration was planted at their inception. While many aristocrats were seeking greater titles, honors, and riches, the king desired to support territorial expansion for economic and defensive reasons. At the same time, many Englishmen concluded that the sanguinary Civil War had reduced the population to the level at which England was no longer considered overpopulated. Since the English desired to expand without draining the population, they enlisted the support of non-English settlers. To attract foreign immigrants, the English proprietors knew that they would have to guarantee the colonists toleration. Moreover, as previously mentioned, when the English seized the Dutch colony in 1664, they realized that toleration was a necessity if this colony were to prosper. A few years later, a noted Quaker advocate of the principle of religious liberty, William Penn, launched his "Holy Experiment" in Pennsylvania, inviting to his colony amiable men of all faiths where they were granted freedom of worship. America gradually became an asylum for the oppressed of Europe. In large numbers, peasants, dissenters, and political refugees migrated to the English mainland colonies where they secured choice land and the right to organize various religious societies.

Pluralism and State Religions

Although toleration was planted in all the English mainland colonies founded after 1660, by the Acts of 1704 and 1706 the Church of England became the tax-supported state church in the Carolinas; and in 1758, the Anglican faith became the established religion of Georgia. In these and other southern colonies, nonconformists continually complained that they were at a disadvantage, for in addition to financing their own denomination, they were required to pay for the support of another church. In all of these southern colonies, except Virginia, the members of the state church were a minority of the population and in some of these colonies there were few Anglicans. Yet, the dissenters were unable to alter the situation, partially because of the colonial political structure. The united action of the assembly, council and governor was necessary to obtain a repeal of the laws which had created the establishments. Since the king or the proprietor had the right of disallowing colonial acts and appointed the governors who also had absolute veto power, the English administrators prevented the passage of undesirable colonial acts. Since the king and the Anglican governors favored a retention of the public support of Anglicanism, the will of the people was denied until after the Americans declared their independence.

The American Revolution Advances the Principle of Religious Liberty

After announcing that the united colonies were independent states, Americans, influenced by the humanitarian spirit of the enlightenment, framed in many states a bill of rights guaranteeing freedom of conscience to all citizens. Then they implemented the right by disestablishing the Church of England. In 1776, the Church of England was disestablished in Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina. By the constitutions of 1777 framed in New York and Georgia, all denominations were placed on equal footing, the people no longer being required to support ministers not of their faith; and in 1778, the Anglican church was also disestablished in South Carolina. The Virginians were not satisfied with an insertion in their Bill of Rights of liberty of conscience, but in 1785, continued the religious upheaval by adopting a bill, written by Thomas Jefferson, designed to extend complete religious freedom to all men. "No man," the law stated "shall be enforced, restrained, molested or burdened . . . on account of his religious opinions or belief; but . . . all men shall be free to profess . . . their opinions in matters of religion . . . and the same shall in nowise . . . affect their civil capacities." [^77]

The American Revolution also advanced toleration in New England. In Massachusetts, for instance, a semi-Congregational establishment was maintained in the young republic. The legislature granted the towns the right to tax settlers for the support of the community church of the taxpayer's choice. If no preference was registered, the money was to be given to the most popular church, which invariably was the Congregational church. Since some towns did not take advantage of the act, neglecting to tax some of the dissenters, the religious rights of many were not restricted. In Connecticut, all religious bodies were recognized as legal institutions in 1784 and were allowed to manage their temporal affairs. After the Revolution, all Christians who attended their church services and filed a certificate with the clerk of the Congregational church confirming such action were exempt from ecclesiastical taxes. Some individuals who did not live near a meeting house of their denomination were taxed for the support of the state religion, but others failed to comply with the certification law and were not assessed, indicating that in some towns the act was more liberal than it appeared on the statutes. [^78]

The changing attitude of the Americans in favor of increased toleration is also clearly expressed by the Constitution and Bill of Rights. There is only one reference to religion in the Constitution of 1787, a negative one prohibiting religious tests as a prerequisite for office holding. The silence on this subject reveals that the delegates were not in favor of creating a national religion supported by public taxation nor requiring the office holders in the national government to be affiliated with any particular denomination. With the adoption of the Bill of Rights in 1791, the First Amendment prohibited Congress from erecting a state church and from interfering with the free exercise of religion.

The Birth of a New Religious Era

In the early nineteenth century, the attitudes of many Congregationalists continued to change. The old concept that dissent was a heresy of which the community was responsible, that nonconformists profaned the word of God and prevented the growth of the kingdom of God, was replaced with the view that dissent should be permitted and that religion should be supported by voluntary contributions. Many dissenters became honorable citizens, and the Congregational establishments were gradually abolished. Vermont separated the church and state in 1807, followed by Connecticut in 1818, New Hampshire in 1819, and Maine in 1820. The last vestige of a state religion finally disappeared in the United States in 1833 when the representatives of the people in Massachusetts replaced the ecclesiastical establishment with a system of voluntary support of religion. The experiment in separation of church and state had not created in the new nation anarchy nor a decline in religion, but paralleled a birth of religious fervor. America set a worthy precedent for other nations to follow.

Many Americans of the early republic recognized that a new religious era had been inaugurated. In a tract published in 1805, one of the New England leaders in the struggle for religious liberty, Isaac Backus, wrote: [^79]

We have cause to remember with thankfulness, that God had established a civil government over us, which allows equal liberty to all; so that each one may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Such great, such unspeakable privileges demand proportional love and obedience.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Theological Climate in Early America Edwin Scott Gaustad, Historical Atlas of Religion in America (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), 3-4, 160-61.
[^2] [Robert Barclay], A Catechism and Confession of Faith, Approved (Philadelphia, 1726), 1, 6-7, Evans No. 2727; [Cotton Mather], Maschil, or, The Faithful Instructor (Boston, 1702), 5, 18, 137, Evans No. 1069; [Thomas Ken], An Exposition on the Church-Catechism (Boston, 1668), 13-15, 20, Evans No. 445; William Dyer, Christ's Famous Titles (Philadelphia, 1743), 49, 59, 94, Evans No. 5170.
[^3] [Cotton Mather], Maschil, 71-74; Thomas Pender, The Divinity of the Scriptures (New York, 1728), 7, 30-32, Evans No. 3083.
[^4] Thomas Paine, The Doctrine of Original Sin (Boston, 1724), 1-16, Evans No. 2574; [Cotton Mather], Renatus (Boston, 1725), 4-5, 7, 10, 11, Evans No. 2672; John Webb, Practical Discourses (Boston, 1726), 2-6, Evans No. 2823; John Cotton, A Treatise . . . (Boston, 1713), 6, Evans No. 1604.
[^5] Dyer, op. cit., 175-76; John Webb, The Believer's Redemption (Newport, 1728), 13-17, 29, Evans No. 3115; Increase Mather, A Plain Discourse (Boston, 1713), 85, 88, 100-107, Evans No. 1634 Thomas Prince, The Grave and Death (Boston, 1728), 8-9, Evans No. 3095.
[^6] Moses Dickinson, An Inquiry into the Consequences Both of Calvinistic and Arminian Principles Compared Together (Boston, 1750), 9, Evans No. 6483. See also pages 6-10, 12-16, 26-29.
[^7] Robert Russell, Seven Sermons (15th edition, Boston, 1772), 137, 154, 159-60, Evans No. 12548; John Webb, Practical Discourse, 25; George Keith, A Testimony [Philadelphia, 1692], 2, 7-8, Evans No. 607.
[^8] Mather Byles, A Discourse on the Present Vileness of the Body, and Its Future Glorious Change by Christ (2nd ed., Boston, 1771), 14.
[^9] Webb, Practical Discourse, 115-16.
[^10] Byles, op. cit., 15-17; Russell, op. cit., 139.
[^11] Russell, op. cit., 161; Webb, Practical Discourse, 121.
[^12] Russell, op. cit., 138-39; Byles, op. cit., 19; Webb, Practical Discourse, 293-94, 307.
[^13] George Keith, The Great Necessity and the Use of the Holy Sacraments (New York, 1704), 4, 6-7, 11, 22, Evans No. 1161; Edward Gibson, The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper Explained (Williamsburg, 1740), 28, Evans No. 4519; [Cotton Mather], Baptistes [Boston, 1705], 5-6, 10-11, 14, 27-30, Evans No. 1172.
[^14] Gibson, op. cit., 20, 28-32; Samuel Willard, Some Brief Sacramental Meditations (2nd ed., Boston, 1743), 16, Evans No. 5315.
[^15] One of the best short analyses of the enlightenment is found in Louis Leo Snyder, The Age of Reason (New York: Van Nostrand, [1955]). Other scholarly works enabling students to gain a better insight of this development are Carl Becker, The Heavenly City of the Eighteenth Century Philosophers (New York, 1932); Ernst Cassirer, The Philosophy of the Enlightenment, Fritz Keelln and J. P. Pettegrove, trans. (Boston: Beacon Press, [1960]); and Preserved Smith, The Enlightenment, 1687-1776 (New York: Collier Books, 1962).
[^16] Leslie Stephen and Sidney Lee, eds., The Dictionary of National Biography (22 vols., London, 1917), IX, 630; Hannah Adams, An Alphabetical Compendium of the Various Sects (Boston, 1784), xxiv.
[^17] Herbert M. Morais, Deism in Eighteenth Century America (New York: Russell and Russell, 1960), 16-17. For another view of deism in early America see G. Adolf Koch's Republican Religion: The American Revolution and the Cult of Reason (New York, 1933).
[^18] Thomas Jefferson to Rev. Samuel Miller, Jan. 23, 1808, quoted in Thomas Jefferson, The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Albert Ellery Bergh, ed. (20 vols., Washington, D.C., 1904-07), XI, 429.
[^19] Lester J. Cappon, ed., The Adams-Jefferson Letters (2 vols., Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1959), II, 361, 373, 494.
[^20] Paul F. Boller, Jr., George Washington and Religion (Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press, 1963), 90-91.
[^21] John Adams, The Works of John Adams, C. F. Adams, ed. (Boston, 1856), II, 397-400.
[^22] [William Cobbett], Christianity Contrasted with Deism (Philadelphia, 1796), 23-24, Evans No. 30192.
[^23] Thomas Jefferson to John Adams, Aug. 22, 1813, quoted in Thomas Jefferson, The Works of Thomas Jefferson, Paul L. Ford, ed., (12 vols., New York, 1904-05), XI, 328-30.
[^24] Cappon, op. cit., II, 373.
[^25] Thomas Jefferson to William Short, April 13, 1820, quoted in Jefferson, Writings, XV, 244-45; Thomas Jefferson to Benjamin Rush, April 21, 1803, quoted in Jefferson, Works, IX, 457-63.
[^26] James Madison Stifler, The Religion of Benjamin Franklin (New York, 1925), 61-62.
[^27] Ethan Allen, Reason the Only Oracle of Man (Bennington, 1784), 423-24, 439, 444-45, 452, Evans No. 18322.
[^28] [Cobbett], op. cit., 41.
[^29] Thomas Paine, The Age of Reason (New York: Thomas Paine Foundation, n.d.), 24-25, 81-82; G. A. Koch, "Elihu Palmer," Dictionary of American Biography, Dumas Malone, et al., eds. (22 vols., New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1934), XIV, 178.
[^30] Thomas Jefferson to S. Hales, 1818, quoted in Saul K. Padover, ed., Thomas Jefferson On Democracy (New York: New American Library, 1958), 166.
[^31] Thomas Jefferson to Benjamin Waterhouse, June 26, 1822, quoted in Jefferson, Works, XII, 241-43.
[^32] [Cobbett], op. cit., 23; Allen, op. cit., 273-74.
[^33] Stifler, op. cit., 55.
[^34] Allen, op. cit., 70-71; [Cobbett], op. cit., 23.
[^35] Alvan Lamson, "Unitarian Congregationalists," An Original History of the Religious Denominations at Present Existing in the United States, Daniel Rupp, ed. (Philadelphia, 1844), 714-17, hereafter cited as Rupp's Original History. Conrad Wright's The Beginnings of Unitarianism in America (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955) and Earl Morse Wilbur's A History of Unitarianism (2 vols., Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1947) are the best works describing the early history of American Unitarianism.
[^36] Lamson, op. cit., 704; William E. Channing, The Works of William E. Channing (Boston, 1886), 371. For a detailed analysis of many aspects of Channing's thought see Robert Leet Patterson, The Philosophy of William Ellery Channing (New York: Bookman Associates, 1952).
[^37] Channing, op. cit., 291-93.
[^38] Noah Worcester, Bible News, of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit (Concord, 1810), 6, 65-66, 80-81, 101-02; see also William W. Fenn, "The Revolt against the Standing Order," The Religious History of New England (Cambridge, 1917), 120-21.
[^39] Channing, op. cit., 1007-08.
[^40] Lamson, op. cit., 710.
[^41] Worcester, op. cit., 3; Joseph Priestley, Letters to the Philosophers and Politicians of France, on the Subject of Religion (Boston, 1793), 23, Evans No. 26035.
[^42] Channing, op. cit., 367-68.
[^43] Ibid., 368-69.
[^44] Henry Ware, Letters Addressed to Trinitarians and Calvinists, occasioned by Dr. Woods' Letters to Unitarians (2nd ed., Cambridge, 1820), 92-93, Channing, op. cit., 378.
[^45] Channing, op. cit., 378-79.
[^46] Fenn, op. cit., 123-24.
[^47] Channing, op. cit., 350-51; 360-66; Elizabeth P. Peabody, Reminiscences of Rev. Wm. Ellery Channing (Boston, 1880), 442.
[^48] Channing, op. cit., 440-41.
[^49] John E. Dirks, The Critical Theology of Theodore Parker (New York: Columbia University Press, 1948), 48-52, 73-75.
[^50] Thomas Whittemore, The Modern History of Universalism (Boston, 1830), 14-15, 39, 276.
[^51] Paul Siegvolck, The Everlasting Gospel (Germantown, 1753), 53-54, 72, Evans No. 7033.
[^52] James Relly, Union (reprint from London edition, Boston, 1779), 13-15, 46, Evans No. 16484.
[^53] Whittemore, op. cit., 392-430; A. B. Grosh, "Universalists," Rupp's Original History, 724-25, 728-29; John Coleman Adams, "The Universalists," The Religious History of New England, 306.
[^54] Elhanan Wincester, The Universal Restoration (Lexington, 1794), 122-24, Evans No. 28115.
[^55] Whittemore, op. cit., 431-32, 440.
[^56] John Murray, Universalism Vindicated (Charlestown, Mass., [1798]), 7, 66-67, Evans No. 34161; Wincester, op. cit., 187.
[^57] Hosea Ballou, A Treatise on Atonement (14th ed., Boston, 1902), 24-29, 98-100, 119, 123, 136-37.
[^58] Whittemore, op. cit., 432-41; Murray, op. cit., 51-54.
[^59] Wincester, op. cit., 71, 73, 75-76.
[^60] Ballou, op. cit., 190, 213-18.
[^61] John Murray, Some Hints Relative to the Forming of a Christian Church (Boston, 1791), 14-18, 22-24; Evans No. 23583.
[^62] H. Shelton Smith, Changing Conceptions of Original Sin (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1955), 52-54, 57.
[^63] Ibid., 92, 100, 109; Clifton E. Olmstead, History of Religion in the United States (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1960), 299-300.
[^64] Porter S. Burbank, "Freewill Baptists," Rupp's Original History, 59, 65-66. See also N. A. Baxter, History of the Freewill Baptists (Rochester: American Baptist Historical Society, 1957).
[^65] John Wesley, The Journal of the Rev. John Wesley (4 vols., London: J. M. Dent and Co., n.d.), I, 102.
[^66] Among the best works on the early history of Methodism in America are William Warren Sweet, Methodism in American History (New York: Abingdon Press, 1953); Wade Crawford Barclay, Early American Methodism, 1768-1844 (2 vols., New York: Board of Missions and Church Extension of the Methodist Church, 1949); and Emory Stevens Bucke, ed., The History of American Methodism (3 vols., New York: Abingdon Press, 1964).
[^67] Bostwick Hawley, Manual of Methodism (New York, 1868), 19-49.
[^68] William R. Cannon, "John Wesley's Doctrine of Sanctification and Perfection," The Mennonite Quarterly Review, XXXV, No. 2 (April, 1961), 94-95. See also Colin W. Williams, John Wesley's Theology Today (New York: Abingdon Press, 1960).
[^69] Edward Deming Andrews, The People Called Shakers (New York: Oxford University Press, 1953), 5-6, 13, 16, 50, 54, 290-91; Thomas Brown, "Shakers," Rupp's Original History, 656-58.
[^70] One of the most comprehensive summaries (although not the most accurate) of the communistic societies founded in America is William Alfred Hinds, American Communities (Chicago, 1902). See also Bertha M. H. Shambaugh, "Amana Society," Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, James Hastings, ed. (12 vols., New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1951), I; and A. E. Bestor, Jr., Backwoods Utopias: The Sectarian and Owenite Phases of Communitarian Socialism in America: 1663-1829 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1950).
[^71] E. S. Bates, "Jemima Wilkinson," Dictionary of American Biography, XX, 226-27; Hinds, op. cit., 21-25.
[^72] Hinds, op. cit., 355; Andrews, op. cit., 11-12, 97; Daryl Chase, The Early Shakers (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1936), 14, 143.
[^73] Andrews, op. cit., 64-65; Chase, op. cit., 144-48.
[^74] Shambaugh, op. cit., I, 362-63. See also the articles in the Dictionary of American Biography on George Rapp and Christian Metz.
[^75] Shaker theology is discussed in such works as Amos Taylor, A Narrative of the Strange Principles, Conduct and Character of the People Known by the Name of Shakers (Worcester, 1782), Evans No. 17735; [Joseph Meacham], A Concise Statement of the Principles of the Only True Church (Bennington, 1790), Evans No. 22664; and F. W. Evans, Compendium of the Origin, History, Principles, Rules and Regulations, Government, and Doctrines of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing (Albany, 1867).
[^76] Loren E. Lair, The Christian Churches and their Work (St. Louis, Mo.: Bethany Press, 1963), 43-44; W. E. Garrison and A. T. DeGroot, The Disciples of Christ (St. Louis, Mo.: Bethany Press, 1958), 89-92.
[^77] Garrison and DeGroot, op. cit., 106-11, 115-16.
[^78] Ibid., 133-39.
[^79] Ibid., 146-48.
