Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER FIVE

A Second Reformation

Although religious solidarity was a prominent characteristic throughout North and South America prior to 1633, the eighteenth century was marked by the growth of toleration and increased religious pluralism in the English mainland colonies so that gradually this land became known as a melting pot of the religions of Western Europe and as a land of religious liberty. Even though all the major faiths of Western Europe were transplanted to the New World, about 67 per cent of the churched settlers in the middle of the eighteenth century were members of three denominations and 90 per cent were affiliated with eight Protestant societies. In 1750, over 50 per cent of the active members of Christian churches were affiliated with organizations whose teachings stemmed from the Biblical interpretations of John Calvin. Most of the church-going New Englanders were Congregationalists; many of the settlers in the Middle Colonies were affiliated with the Presbyterian, the German Reformed or Dutch Reformed churches; and many of the southern frontiersmen were Scotch-Irish Presbyterians. About one-third or more of the active members of Christian churches in mid-eighteenth century America were affiliated with either the Church of England or the Society of Friends, the Anglicans being a dominant religion in the South, especially Virginia, Maryland, and South Carolina, while the Quakers were the most influential body in eastern Pennsylvania and southern New Jersey. Fewer than ten per cent of the church members were Baptists and Lutherans, there being only about 5,000 active in each of these denominations; and other than approximately fifty congregations of Moravians, and thirty congregations of Roman Catholics and Mennonites, there were no other bodies of significant numerical strength at that time. [^1]

Most of the colonial American denominations were creedal religions, the members of most churches endorsing creeds or articles of faith which gave articulate expression of their theology. The Calvinists accepted the doctrines described in the Westminster Confession of Faith or other similar Reformed creeds. The Anglicans endorsed the Thirty-nine Articles of Religion. Most Lutherans accepted the Augsburg Confession; and many Quakers endorsed the beliefs expressed by Robert Barclay as a form of declaration. Although the Baptists were divided on many issues, they also endorsed creeds which were similar in many respects to the Westminster Confession or Thirty-nine Articles.

The works published by the early American apologists reveal that the colonists did not depart appreciably from the theology expressed in the creeds prepared by the reformers of Protestant Europe, but held tenaciously to the doctrines popularized by the European Protestants of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The most prolific writers in defense of colonial Christianity were the orthodox Congregational clergy of New England, but the theological conservatism of the colonists is also evident by an examination of the most popular Anglican works circulated in the North and South. While most colonists shared identical convictions on basic doctrines, conflicting views regarding worship and church polity created major ecclesiastical divisions. Of the members of Christian bodies of significant numerical strength, only the Quakers disagreed sharply on the most popular doctrines held by the Christians of colonial America. Therefore, an examination of the popular creeds and ecclesiastical treatises circulated in colonial America clearly reveals the basic tenets held by a vast majority of the members of Christian churches in this land prior to 1750.

Concept of God

Without exception, the Nicene Trinitarian concept of God—a God consisting of three persons of one essence or substance was described in all the creeds adopted by members of the major religions of colonial America; and this concept was defended in almost every work describing God published by the colonists prior to the middle of the eighteenth century. A vast majority of the members of mid-eighteenth century American churches believed that God was also a most pure and holy spirit, immaterial and indivisible, without body, parts, and passions. They not only held that God was eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, just, merciful and glorious, but that he was omnipresent. They believed that God was the maker of heaven and earth, generally concluding that he made the heaven and earth and all things solely by his word "out of nothing" in the "space of six days." In addition to endorsing the concept that God was a "Trinity of Persons," Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they held that Christ was co-eternal and co-equal with the Father, and that in Christ, the two natures of God and of man were united and made one. Born of the Virgin Mary, they unitedly concurred, Jesus was conceived by the Holy Ghost, taking upon himself human nature. The majority of the colonists further believed that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father and the Son. [^2]

Attitude Toward the Bible

Except for the Quakers and Catholics, the members of the dominant religions of early America believed that the Bible was the sole norm of faith and that the scriptures were all-inclusive and infallible. Although many of the clergy un-doubtedly recognized that errors might have crept into the Bible as a result of transmission and translation, few acknowledged this problem. Most of the ministers merely emphasized that the Bible was the word of God, so that most parishioners believed that when they read this work they were reading the words of God as if God were speaking directly to them. Since most colonists believed that the infallible Bible was the sole norm of faith and visions and revelations ceased with the death of the apostles, they charged that the unorthodox Quaker view of God speaking to every man was an apostate belief and was evidence that these "heretics" were being deluded by Satan. [^3]

Concept of the Fall

A large majority of church members of early America further believed that after creating Adam and Eve holy and righteous, God placed them in the Garden of Eden. They maintained that since the first man disobeyed and rebelled against his Maker, he plunged into sinful and woeful circumstances. Because Adam was a representative of the human race, all his posterity suffer the consequences of his apostasy; and by his disobedience, all men are made sinners, are exposed to evil and suffer death. If Adam had not sinned, most Protestants believed, his posterity would have been righteous and would not have been subject to sin and death. But Adam fell and his sin was imputed to all men. Since after his first transgression Adam ceased to stand as a representative of mankind, his subsequent sins were not infused in man, nor are the sins of any other individual inherited by the human race. Moreover, it was commonly believed that because we inherit Adam's guilt, men are naturally depraved, possess an evil disposition, are in constant rebellion against God, and are deprived of all that is spiritually good. In this state, man does not have the power to do that which is good and acceptable in the eyes of God. [^4]

Belief in the Atonement

Most members of colonial churches also believed that Adam was not the only individual who stood as a representative for the human race, for Christ (sometimes referred to as the Second Adam) was our agent, being appointed to undertake the work of reconciliation between God and man. Christ, a perfect being, a lamb without blemish, shed his blood on the cross and thereby paid the necessary price for our redemption. Although most colonists held that his atonement was sufficient for all mankind, they concluded that only believers reaped the benefit of his sacrifice. Believers were considered justified or reconciled with God, because Christ's righteousness was infused in them. Believers were immediately redeemed by the blood of Christ from the slavery and misery arising from sin. Although most held that believers were not freed at all times from sin, Christians were regarded as redeemed from the dominion of sin. In addition to being freed from bondage of sin and Satan, most thought that Christ had appeased God's anger towards men, restoring God's favor toward some men. By his redemption, men also generally concluded, believers were given the power to serve God and perform righteous acts. [^5]

Arminianism vs. Calvinism

Although most early Americans who were "churched" believed that men were made aware of their justification by obtaining faith in Christ, the colonists were divided on the role which men played in the salvation experience. Many Congregationalists and Anglicans were outspoken believers in man's role in the salvation experience. Those who espoused Arminianism insisted that since God gave to all men the power and liberty to comply with or reject the gospel, man participated in the salvation experience. The Arminians also rejected the popular Calvinistic concept of perseverance of the saints, arguing that some true believers fall from the state of grace and perish in their sins. Most of the clergy, however, held to the strict Calvinistic view that men were totally unable to rescue themselves from their sins and reap the benefits of Christ's atonement and insisted that Saints would persevere to the end.

Most Arminians and Calvinists agreed on other popular concepts. In addition to endorsing original sin and depravity (with the exception of the extreme Calvinist emphasis on human impotency), they held that God knows the number who will be saved. Many of the Calvinists also adopted a definition of decree that, as far as they were concerned, did not deprive men of free will, as charged by Arminians. God's decree, according to one Calvinist, was God's "Purpose to act or suspend acting; when, and where, and how, he in his infinite Wisdom sees fit." [^6] Many Congregationalists and Presbyterians denied that there was a direct connection between God's foreknowledge and that which occurred, insisting that even though God created situations and knew men's actions, man had his free will to act.

Belief Regarding Life after Death

Most colonists (again the Quakers and Catholics being the principal exceptions) shared similar convictions regarding life after death. Although they believed that man has a beginning, they held that man shall never have an end. Death was considered as a separation of the body and the soul (or spirit), the souls of the believers entering immediately into a state of unspeakable joy and the souls of the unconverted being "kept in chains and darkness." During the period in which the soul and body are separated, the body rested in the dust of the earth. Only a few colonists concluded that the soul sleeps during the period between death and the resurrection, and only a small minority believed that men were immediately resurrected after death. Beginning with the second coming of Christ a great judgment would take place, ministers often declared, during which event all men would be resurrected. The saints would be resurrected first, followed by the unregenerated. Some concluded that the second resurrection would occur a thousand years after the first. [^7]

Although there was some disagreement on the time of the General Judgment, a large majority of the church-going colonists interpreted their creeds literally regarding the resurrection of the body. They believed that since God in his infinite knowledge and power created man out of nothing, the Creator knows what dust belongs to every body, where-ever it is scattered. At the blast of a trumpet, one colonist wrote, the "Dust shall be called together; the Bones shall harden and the Joints connect; a new, unknown, incorruptible Fluid" shall "suddenly fill the Vessels; . . . and the skin" shall be covered with "everlasting Beauty." [^8] "All the individualing Particles," another colonist wrote, "that are essential to each Body shall be gathered together at the last Day; and every Part and Member of the Body shall be made up of the same Particles that it was formerly Composed of . . . The Head, the Hands and the Feet shall each possess their proper compounding Particles; and no single Member of the Body; no, not so small a one as the Eye, shall want so much as the least Particle that was ever necessary to the Perfection of it." [^9] Frequently, the early American apologists compared the resurrected body with Christ's glorious body, concluding that the body will be immortal, can appear or disappear, rise or descend, and perform other such miraculous maneuvers. [^10]

While the bodies of the saints would be raised with a perfect, beautiful and glorious body, it was generally believed that the bodies of the wicked would be raised in a distorted countenance. Yet, the unregenerate would possess bodies of great strength in order for them to endure the horrible punishment with which they would be afflicted. [^11]

Almost all the Christians of colonial America further taught that after the resurrection men would be summoned before the judgment seat of Christ where they would give a detailed account of all their thoughts and actions. The believers would then be led into the kingdom of heaven where, in God's presence, they would forever be free of sin and sorrow and would experience eternal bliss and joy. "There shall be life without death," one theologian declared, "health without sickness, and pleasure without pain; as you shall be free from all evil, so you shall enjoy all the good that can be enjoyed." Meanwhile, after hearing a dreadful sentence, the unconverted would be "hauled by the devils . . . down into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone." This punishment was to be everlasting, meaning without diminishment nor end. As one clergyman elucidated, fires of hell "will be ten thousand times hotter than the Flames of Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, heated seven times hotter than usual: And 'twill penetrate into every Part of the Body. . . And the Anguish that will seize and distress any one part will be unspeakable." Some likened the fires of hell to a caldron of boiling oil, but even then such a comparison was considered a feeble human representation of the actual situation. As one colonist warned, the "Wrath of God will fall upon the Souls of the Wicked, and fill them with the most amazing and inconceivable Horrors," that man cannot begin to conceive of such punishment. [^12]

Concept of the Sacraments

In most colonial churches there were only two sacraments or dispensors of grace, baptism and the Lord's Supper. Baptism was generally considered a sign of the covenant of grace or a symbol reminding men that God would save the believers and remit their sins. Many Calvinist and Anglican clergy taught that God entered into a covenant with Abraham, informing him that he and his posterity would be blessed. In addition to giving Abraham choice land, God promised that many of Abraham's descendants would serve the Lord and as a result of their faith would be blessed. It was generally maintained that circumcision was instituted as a sign of this covenant; and since infants (boys) of the faithful were once subjects of circumcision, infants (boys and girls) of one or both believing parents should now be baptized as a sign that they also are under a special covenant. The recipients of this sacrament were promised that when they were capable of choosing and acting for themselves, they would "at least have some offer of the Gospel, with some Striving of the Spirit, inviting them to lay hold in the Covenant." Most colonists did not emphasize a precise mode of baptism, asserting that the ordinance was a sacred washing by water and that sprinkling or pouring were proper modes. Only a few early Americans insisted that baptism was essential to salvation; and although special authority was not deemed necessary to perform the ordinance, custom dictated that only the clergy should administer this rite. [^13]

By partaking of the Lord's Supper, individuals were granted an opportunity to renew their promise to serve God and refresh their memory of the atoning sacrifice of Christ. The ordinance also reminded most colonists that God would favor and pardon the faithful. Although the bread and wine were partaken in remembrance of Jesus Christ, most believed that the Savior was spiritually present during this ordinance, blessing the worthy who partook of the sacramental emblems. [^14]

Although the early Americans were noted for their religious conservatism, a Second Reformation occurred in this country during the Revolutionary generation. In many respects the theological changes of this reformation were more profound than the doctrinal reforms inaugurated by Luther and Calvin. The reformers of the sixteenth century primarily had eliminated abuses in the Catholic church, had stripped that religion of what was regarded as apostate innovations, and had popularized concepts which had been taught by prominent Roman Catholics. During this Second Reformation, major deviations from traditional Catholic and Protestant theology occurred. So many critics denounced the traditional Trinitarian concept of God and the orthodox Calvinistic concept of election that some historians have referred to this age as the era of the Arian and the Arminian Reformation.

II. The Appearance of Deism among the Revolutionary Generation

One of the most liberal philosophies to emerge among the Revolutionary generation was deism, the religion of the enlightenment. Between 1650 and 1800, an intellectual upheaval occurred in Europe. During this era there was a reaction against a popular Medieval pattern of thinking. Whereas the preceding centuries have often been designated as the Age of Faith, the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have often been referred to as the Age of Reason. Many intellectuals of these later centuries replaced authority and tradition as a basis for determining truth with reason. Equipped with an enlarged sense of man's ability to comprehend reality, some scholars determined that numerous popular elements of Calvinism were irrational principles. Man does not inherit the sin of Adam, intellectuals contended. Man is not elected by God to heaven nor condemned to hell for disbelief. Man is not morally evil. Instead, man is morally good by nature, but becomes evil by association with a corrupt environment. Since man is born good and made evil by society, some held that the proper procedure to reform man is to modify his environment. In order to accomplish this desirable goal, men realized that they must acquire increased understanding of the world in which they lived. Therefore, during this era there was an increased quest for education. Many new schools were erected; others were enlarged; and the curriculum in some of the schools was secularized. After Isaac Newton discovered one of the natural laws of God, extreme confidence was placed in the field of science, for as Alexander Pope wrote concerning the public's reaction to Newton's accomplishment, "Nature and Nature's Laws lay hid in Night. God said, 'Let Newton be!' and all was Light." Inspired by this pattern of thinking, many Europeans zealously strove to change existing institutions and to modify traditional standards of belief and behavior. [^15]

During the Age of the Enlightenment, many profound theological changes occurred in the beliefs of numerous European intellects; and some of the most liberal thinkers adopted the name "deist." Even though such liberals refused to subscribe to a creed, one of the eminent English writers of the early seventeenth century, Edward Herbert, Baron of Cherbury, aptly crystallized the most popular views of the deists into five articles: [^16]

I. That there is one supreme God.

II. That he is chiefly to be worshipped.

III. That piety and virtue are the principal parts of this worship

IV. That we must repent of our sins; and if we do so God will pardon us

V. That there are rewards for good men, and punishments for bad men, in a future state.

Transplanting Deism to America

Early in the eighteenth century, rationalistic works of Herbert and other religious liberals of England were transplanted to America, arriving in the New World at the same time the new science of Isaac Newton and the psychology of John Locke were being popularized. After studying the arguments advanced by the free thinkers in Europe, some colonists reevaluated American Christianity; and a few acknowledged conversion to deism. However, most of the adherents confined their opinions to personal statements, recorded in their letters or diaries or uttered to their friends during private conversation. [^17] There seem to be no successful attempts to circulate widely deistic views nor to organize a deistic society in colonial America. The movement, with few exceptions was limited to colonial aristocracy; and most Americans first became aware of this philosophy by reading critical articles published by the orthodox defenders of eighteenth century American Christianity.

During and after the American Revolution the deistic movement became aggressive. A few free-thought societies were organized, the circulation of European deistic works increased, and the first anti-Christian works were published in this land. In 1784, Ethan Allen, a military hero of the American Revolution, published Reason the only Oracle of Man, which was the first book printed in America denouncing the Holy Writ. Ten years later Thomas Paine published the first anti-Christian work to be widely circulated in the United States, The Age of Reason. This work was read by more Americans and precipitated far more counterattacks by orthodox churchmen than any other deistic book. The most zealous American champion of this philosophy was Elihu Palmer, a blind graduate from Dartmouth and former Baptist minister. In addition to editing several newspapers, Palmer advanced this religion by lecturing, organizing free thinking societies and publishing various books, one of which, The Principles of Nature (1801), became a textbook for his voluntary associations.

Two other famous Americans who were converted to the basic tenets of English deism were Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin, but their activities were very different from the actions of Allen, Paine, and Palmer. The two competent statesmen did not employ their talents to promulgate deism. They did not launch an attack on the Bible or advocate the destruction of American Christianity. Although Jefferson and Franklin determined that Christianity suffered from many corrupting changes, instead of concentrating on denouncing the Christian religion, these men of the enlightenment supported many humanitarian reforms designed to improve society. Jefferson's attempt to reform American institutions also took the form of reducing the power of the priests by separating the church and state and fostering the establishment of religious liberty in Virginia. "I do not believe it is for the interest of religion to invite the civil magistrate to direct its exercises, its discipline, or its doctrines," Jefferson maintained. [^18] While writing his epitaph, he summarized what he regarded as his most noble accomplishments:

Here was buried

Thomas Jefferson

Author of the

Declaration

of

American Independence

of the

Statute of Virginia

for

Religious Freedom

And Father of the

University of Virginia

Other well-known Americans of the Revolutionary generation who are sometimes classified as deists are John Adams, George Washington and James Madison, but these men never publically admitted their connection with deism, nor did they prepare deistic-type creeds describing their religious views. John Adams periodically revealed in his private letters his dissatisfaction with American Christianity of the eighteenth century and expressed his approval of the general religious views of Thomas Jefferson. "The Ten Commandments and The Sermon on the Mount contain my Religion," Adams wrote to Jefferson, but this astute politician did not expose himself to public furore as did Jefferson, by announcing his innermost convictions. [^19] George Washington also did not endorse any particular articles of faith and was conspicuously silent in his writings and talks regarding the divinity of Christ. Because the "Father of Our Country" often referred to God without reference to the Savior or Redeemer, and because he neglected to defend or define what he regarded as the fundamental principles of Christianity, many twentieth century historians identify Washington with the non-Christian liberals of his age. [^20] James Madison, "The Father of the Constitution," also disclaimed allegiance to orthodox Christianity; and although undoubtedly influenced by European deistic writings, Madison did not enunciate his religious opinions. These three competent Americans also rebelled against the religious bigotry of their age, being advocates of religious liberty. Although Washington and Madison employed their energies to separate the church and state, Adams was not a leader in this struggle, pessimistically maintaining that one might as well "turn the heavenly bodies out of their annual and diurnal courses," as to attempt an alteration of the religious statutes of Massachusetts. [^21]

Beliefs of the American Deists

Since the deists subscribed to no official creed and emphasized reason as the means of determining religious as well as secular truth, it is difficult to summarize precisely their conflicting views. Nevertheless, the American deists agreed on many religious issues. They were very critical of the traditional Christian concept of God. William Cobbett, an English journalist who lived in this country for ten years as a political refugee, explained, "A Christian worships three Gods in the person of one God, and in defiance to the science of numbers contends that, three times one is one, and that, once one is three. . . . They tell us that their God is his own son; that this son is his own father, and that he was born unbegotten, being four thousand years older than his mother." [^22] In a letter written to John Adams, Thomas Jefferson expressed his attitude toward the colonial concept of the Trinity: "Three are one and one is three; and yet the one is not three, and the three are not one. . . . This constitutes the craft, the power and profit of the priests. Sweep away their gossamer fabrics of factious religion, and they would catch no more flies." [^23] And John Adams confessed in a letter to Thomas Jefferson that had the two men been with Moses on Mount Sinai for forty days and while there been informed that "one was three and three, one," they might have had courage to deny it, but they "could not have believed . . . the doctrine." [^24]

In addition to rejecting the traditional view of the Trinity, the deists denied the virgin birth and divinity of Jesus. While president of the United States, Thomas Jefferson prepared for his personal use a life of Jesus of Nazareth extracted from the Four Gospels, which enabled him to better understand the historical setting of the moral teachings of the Nazarene. Since he did not believe Jesus was the Son of God or the long awaited Messiah, Jefferson omitted from this brief narrative all accounts of miraculous events, including his birth, healings and resurrection. Although this energetic Virginian concluded that the moral system of Jesus was "the most benevolent and sublime probably that has ever been taught," he did not accept all the teachings of Jesus. The Nazarene died, Jefferson reasoned, before he developed a complete system of morals. Consequently, "the doctrines which he really delivered were defective as a whole." Jefferson admitted in a letter to one of his friends that he was a "Materialist," while Jesus, he said, was a "Spiritualist." In the opinion of Jefferson, many sayings and discourses attributed to this philosopher were of fine imagination, of correct morality, and of lovely benevolence, but others were of "so much ignorance, so much absurdity, so much untruth . . . as to pronounce it impossible that such contradictions should have proceeded from the same being." Since he insisted that the discourses of Jesus had been delivered to his generation in "a mutilated, misstated, and often unintelligible" form, Jefferson separated the teachings of the Nazarene into that which he classified as the gold and the dross, restoring to Jesus the former and leaving the latter to what he called the "stupidity of some, and roguery of others of his disciples. Of this band of dupes and impostors," Jefferson contended, Paul the Apostle was the "great Coryphaeus, and first corruptor of the doctrines of Jesus." [^25]

Shortly before his death, the elderly Franklin was requested by Ezra Stiles, President of Yale College, to describe his religious views and Franklin replied that previously he had not been asked to articulate his religion. After reciting a creed almost identical with the basic articles of religion endorsed by the English deists, Franklin declared that he thought the system of morals and the religion of Jesus of Nazareth "as he left them to us, the best the world ever saw or is likely to see." But he concluded that the religious views of the Nazarene had received "various corrupting changes" and expressed his doubts as to the divinity of this individual. "Tho' it is a question I do not dogmatize upon," Franklin admitted, "having never studied it, and think it needless to busy myself with it now, when I expect soon an opportunity of knowing the truth with less trouble." [^26]

The American deists also rejected the popular view that the Bible was all-inclusive and infallible. They further denied that the authors of the Bible wrote under the direction of God, for as Ethan Allen argued, revelation does not occur because such a principle would require God to control or interfere with man's right of reasoning. According to Allen, the various books of the Bible have passed through "all the vicissitudes, and alterations of human learning, prejudices, superstitions, enthusiasms and diversities of interests and manners." We do not have, Allen insisted, "the premised infallible original manuscript copies." Languages have changed. The meaning of words have been altered. Therefore, Allen concluded, "Of one thing we may be certain, . . . that it is . . . utterly impossible, that there could have been a genuine and perfect compiling and translation thereof," and no one can determine the errors which have crept into that work. [^27]

Another deist, William Cobbett, declared that the Bible "is written in such figurative and ambiguous language . . . that it appears only calculated to puzzle creedmakers, miracle men, and soul-saviours." [^28] Thomas Paine and Elihu Palmer also failed to perceive the significance, the historical and literary value, and inspiring message of the Bible. Paine's summation of that work, as recorded in the Age of Reason, was that a greater part of the book was "a history of the grossest vices and a collection of the most paltry and contemptible tales." Palmer defended Paine's view by characterizing the Bible as "a book whose indecency and immorality shock all common sense and common honesty." Paine also denied that Moses was the author of the Pentateuch, refused to accept any of the miraculous events recorded in that book, and insisted that the work contained inconsistencies, mistranslations and a history that incorrectly reflected the actions of a loving, merciful God. [^29]

The deists also repudiated the Five Points of Calvinism, especially the concepts of total depravity and predestination. They agreed that Adam did not experience a fall in the Garden of Eden or that man suffers any consequence of what Christians called Adam's transgression. They not only abjured the popular view that man inherited an evil disposition from Adam but discarded any need for a Redeemer, therefore rejecting the atoning sacrifice of Christ. They renounced the concept that through the grace of God some men were saved and repudiated the popular view that unbelievers would suffer an eternal punishment in hell. "The truth is," Jefferson alleged, "Calvinism has introduced into the Christian religion more new absurdities than its leaders had purged it of old ones." [^30] On another occasion, when writing to one of his friends, Jefferson compared his religious creed with that of the Calvinists. After citing the basic views of the English deists, he summarized what he called the "demoralizing dogmas of Calvin." The Calvinists believe in three Gods, Jefferson argued. They deny that good works, including loving one's neighbor, is profitable in the eyes of God or that reason is useful in religion. They assert that in the beginning God elected certain individuals to be saved and others damned, and that no crimes of the former can damn them nor virtues of the latter save those assigned to eternal punishment. [^31]

Since most deists believed that God governed the world with unalterable, natural laws and never interfered with the affairs of men, they also denied that God answered prayers. "A deist is convinced by reason and experience," Cobbett explained, "that human petitions will never alter the will of providence." To believe that God answers prayers, Allen contended, is to assume that God does not govern but is governed by the prayers of men. To pray is the same as dictating to God. Prayer, Allen concluded, will not lead to change, nor alter the existence of things. [^32] Some deists compared God with a skilled watchmaker, who created a perfect watch which operated eternally without winding or adjusting. Those who conclude that the Creator tampers or interferes with the affairs of men, deists sometimes argued, must imagine that God organized an imperfect world and that he must periodically make adjustments or repairs in his creation. Although Benjamin Franklin was converted to most deistic principles, this talented American was a staunch advocate of prayer, setting forth as one of the fundamental axioms of his faith that God should be worshipped by adoration, prayer and thanksgiving. [^33]

The American deists also rejected the popular concept of the creation, that God had created the world out of nothing in the space of six days of twenty-four hours each. Ethan Allen insisted that the creation was a formation of the elements which were "co-equal with the eternity of God." He further denied that all men have descended from Adam and Eve and agreed with other American deists that God did not create a "troop of infernal deities, called devils or damned spirits," Just as the deists refused to acknowledge that God intervenes in the affairs of men, they also disclaimed any influence of a being called Satan in the activities of mankind. [^34]

Although the American deists were more united on what they denied than what they endorsed, there were a few theological issues on which most agreed. Deists believed in a supreme God without an equal. Without undue speculation on the nature of the celestial abode, they held that there was a life after death and a judgment according to man's works; and even though they rejected the divinity of Jesus, they recommended living the moral teachings of this eminent philosopher. As leading advocates of man's free will, they were industrious, competent leaders in the movement of separating the church and state and advancing religious liberty in the New Nation.

III. Unitarianism in Pre-Civil War America

The rationalism emanating from the spirit of the enlightenment stimulated some Americans to reevaluate orthodox Christian theology; and after reexamining their religious convictions, the majority of the liberals in New England concluded that the deists advanced many concepts worthy of acceptance but the philosophy was too extreme. Retaining a belief in the divinity of Christ, many New England liberals rejected the traditional Trinitarian concept that God was three persons of one substance and renounced orthodox interpretations of the Five Points of Calvinism. The growing popularity of such sentiments among the Revolutionary generation was a major factor in creating conditions in New England favorable for the introduction of another European religion, Unitarianism.

In 1785, after James Freeman persuaded the Anglican congregation of King's Chapel in Boston to amend the liturgy by eliminating all reference to the Trinity, Unitarianism was officially born in this country. The movement then advanced among the Congregationalists. In 1805, a Unitarian, Henry Ware, was appointed Hollis Professor of Theology at Harvard where he popularized a form of liberal Christianity. Subsequently, the graduates from Harvard carried Unitarianism into the Congregational parishes where they settled. Since the Congregationalists believed in local autonomy of each congregation, insisting that each local body had the authority to select a minister, many congregations hired Unitarian ministers inaugurating the transformation of their church into a Unitarian society. By 1810, the majority of the pre-Revolutionary Congregational churches of Boston had become Unitarian, making that town the headquarters of American Unitarianism.

While Unitarian societies were being organized in Boston and other sections of Massachusetts, Joseph Priestley fled from religious bigotry in England and settled in Pennsylvania. In the 1790's, Priestley helped establish two Unitarian societies in that state, one at Northumberland and the other in Philadelphia. This noted scientist and educator also advanced Unitarianism by preaching, writing, and publishing many apologies in which he expressed his innermost religious convictions.

In the early nineteenth century, Unitarianism spread into Connecticut and New Hampshire. Rev. John Sherman, who settled in Mansfield, Connecticut, as an orthodox Congregationalist began doubting the traditional concept of God, concluding that the Father and the Son were two separate and distinct beings. His Unitarian views were published in 1805 in a work entitled, One God in One Person Only: and Jesus Christ a Being Distinct From God, Dependent upon Him for His Existence, and His Various Powers, Explained and Defended. Another New England Congregational minister who was converted to the principle that Christ was God, but separate and distinct from the Father was Noah Worcester. This industrious minister of New Hampshire also published an anti-Trinitarian work which was widely circulated, precipitating the growth of Unitarianism in New Hampshire, entitled Bible News of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit (1810).

Unitarian sentiments were further circulated in the early Republic by the publication of newspapers, such as the Christian Register and the Christian Disciple, the latter being a monthly paper issued in Boston under the direction of Noah Worcester which was replaced in 1823 by the Christian Examiner. Then in 1825, the American Unitarian Association was founded in Boston. This organization was responsible for the publication and circulation of hundreds of tracts describing and defending Unitarian principles. Through these and other missionary tools, membership in this church slowly increased. By 1840, there were 214 Unitarian societies in the United States of which 150 were located in Massachusetts (primarily in the eastern part of that state) and only 36 societies existed outside of New England. [^35]

Even though the Unitarians of the early republic agreed in their opposition to the Trinity and many elements of orthodox Calvinism, they expressed conflicting views on many subjects. In 1819, William Ellery Channing, the "Father of American Unitarianism," delivered a discourse at the ordination of Jared Sparks, known as Channing's Baltimore sermon, in which he issued the first public statement of the major beliefs of the Unitarians. This sermon was published and republished. Its wide circulation and general acceptance gave the discourse a reputation of being the Unitarian creed; and although the Unitarians claimed the right of every individual to have his own particular articles of faith, Channing's discourse became the most popular statement of Unitarian belief in pre-Civil War America.

The Distinguishing Tenet of Unitarianism

The one, and strictly speaking the only distinguishing feature of Unitarianism was a belief in the absolute unity of God. God, Unitarians insisted, is of one mind, one person, one undivided being. There is only one Supreme God, they held, and in the highest sense, the Father alone is entitled to be called God and is the only proper object of supreme worship and love. The one Supreme God is the only being who possesses the attributes of infinite, underived divinity. "We object to the doctrine of the Trinity," Channing proclaimed in the Baltimore sermon, for "when we attempt to conceive of three Gods, we can do nothing more than represent to ourselves three agents," three separate persons. God, he believed, cannot be many persons any more than man can be. Consequently, he regarded the orthodox Trinitarian concept of God as a doctrine which created a plurity of gods, a concept contrary to the Unitarian belief of God's unity. [^36]

In analyzing man's likeness to God, Channing on one occasion declared that man does not resemble the Creator because he has arms and legs, but man's likeness to God is a spiritual similitude. Man has a kindred nature with God. In ourselves are the elements of God for we have a mind; we have intelligence. "We call God a mind. He has revealed himself as a Spirit," and he is a being with "human intelligence raised above all error and imperfection." [^37]

Beliefs Generally Accepted by the Pre-Civil War Unitarians

Although the doctrine of the unity of God was the sole discriminating article of faith of Unitarianism, most members of this church prior to the Civil War agreed on many other tenets, including the divinity of Christ. Only a few Unitarians of that age denied that Jesus lived prior to his birth or insisted upon the simple humanity of Jesus. Christ was the only begotten son in the most strict and proper sense, Noah Worcester wrote. Jesus was the son of God as truly as Isaac was the son of Abraham. The self-existent God, dignified his only Son, Worcester added, with his divine name, giving to him the title of God, and investing in Christ his fulness and authority. Before his birth, Christ lived with the Father and then became man by becoming the soul of a human body. Christ, Worcester concluded, should be worshipped as the only begotten son of God. [^38]

In considering why the Father conveyed to Christ his power and authority, William Ellery Channing reasoned that in a pre-mortal existence, Christ became victorious over sin and developed an unfailing reverence for goodness. Jesus was responsible for his perfection Channing added, and deserved the rank and title of "God," being the most exalted individual in the universe under the Supreme Father. [^39]

While the Unitarians accepted Christ as a person subordinate to the Father, they generally held that the Holy Ghost was not an individual entity, but a divine influence. God's influence has been poured out or given to the followers of Jesus in all ages, it was generally believed, to heal, comfort and strengthen his children. [^40]

The Unitarians of the early republic also believed that the scriptures should be regarded as the standard of faith in preference to human creeds, confessions or catechisms, but they denied that the Old and New Testament were all-inclusive or infallible. The books of the Bible, Joseph Priestley taught, were "written by pious, honest men, well acquainted with the facts which they relate," but they reflected upon the events "as it was natural that persons in their circumstances would do." Moses, Priestley argued, wrote an account of the creation based upon the traditions available to him. We should not expect that "with regard to composition and accuracy" the Bible should be without faults. In interpreting the books of the Bible, Priestley explained, we should "consider the manners, opinions, and prejudices of the times in which they were written, and make due allowance for them. A tincture of these is an argument of their genuineness." [^41]

A few years later, Channing in his Baltimore sermon elucidated the Unitarian attitude toward the Bible by announcing, "We do not . . . attach equal importance to all the books in this collection. Our religion . . . lies chiefly in the New Testament." In interpreting the Bible, Channing expounded, Unitarians insist on employing reason for the "Bible is a book written for men in the language of men, and . . . its meaning is to be sought in the same manner as that of other books." [^42] When God speaks to us through his prophets, Channing asserted, he uses their language. Human language is subject to various interpretations. At times God dispenses information to a particular people and this information is not to be regarded as a guide for all people of all ages. Occasionally, Biblical authors did not write under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, but recorded "the peculiarities of their minds," and "a knowledge of their feelings." "From a variety of possible interpretations," he averred, "we select that which accords with the nature of the subject and the state of the writer, with the connection of the passage, with the general strain of scripture, with the known character and will of God, and with the obvious and acknowledged laws of nature." [^43]

What was the influence of Christ's atonement on mankind? was a question which led to disagreement among the early Unitarians of America. Some believed that the act contributed to man's securing a pardon from his sins by leading to that repentance and virtue which is the great and only condition on which forgiveness is bestowed. [^44] Other Unitarians, including Channing, argued that the mediation of Christ has a special influence not in remitting sins but in removing punishment resulting from sin. Although divided on some aspects of this subject, Channing proclaimed in his Baltimore sermon that Unitarians generally agreed that Christ did not die to appease God's wrath nor to pay the debt of sinners. Christ's actions did not alter the mind of God towards man, for God has always been disposed to forgive. Christ's mission was "to effect a moral or spiritual deliverance of mankind," the Bostonian clergyman maintained, "that is, to rescue men from sin and its consequences, and to bring them to a state of everlasting purity and happiness." This sublime purpose was accomplished not by his shedding of blood but by his teachings; his exemplary life; by his promises of forgiveness to the penitent; by his sufferings; by his resurrection, in which he impressively taught men the reality of a future life; and by his continual intercession. In other words, most Unitarians of the early republic did not value the atonement as an act which mended a broken law or an act which secured for men a pardon of sins, but prized the crucifixion solely because in this act Christ died in defense of great principles, sealing an exemplary life with his blood. [^45]

In addition to repeatedly denouncing the Calvinist's concept of the fall and atonement, the Unitarians of the early republic vehemently attacked the popular concepts of predestination, irresistibility of grace, perseverance of the saints, and regeneration. They maintained that since man was born with God-like attributes, the idea of regeneration (that God planted in man divine elements) was superfluous. [^46]

They further abjured the Calvinistic concept that the non-elect would suffer everlasting punishment in hell. Many Unitarians of Channing's age believed that men would suffer punishment after death, for as the "Father of American Unitarianism" taught, "The miseries of disobedience to conscience and God are not exhausted in this life. Sin deserves, calls for, and will bring down future, greater misery." But Channing did not believe that such punishment would be endless, for he decided that there would be no rational purpose for such a penalty. Like most Unitarians of that era, he concluded that eventually all men would be saved in the kingdom of heaven. Moreover, Channing and many other Unitarians taught that death was the separation of the body and the spirit and denied that the body would be resurrected. [^47]

When the first Unitarian societies were organized in the United States, two rites baptism and the Lord's Supper, were retained, but the Unitarians did not believe that these ordinances were necessary or that in some miraculous manner they conveyed grace or God's special blessings to the recipients. Channing preached that the "two great rites" of the church were "powerful means of bringing great truths to the mind and of touching the heart." [^48] Since the importance of sacraments was reduced, it is not surprising that the Unitarians denied that special authority was needed to perform these ordinances or to engage in other similar activities in the church.

Because a majority of the Unitarians of the early republic believed that Christ was God, but subordinate to the Father, many historians today refer to these Christians as Arians, or Arian-Unitarians. A minority at that time, however, rejected the special title of the Nazarene, denied that Jesus lived prior to his birth or was the literal son of God, and maintained that Jesus was born on this earth as other men.

One of the most influential liberal Unitarians of the pre-Civil War period who helped set the tone of twentieth century Unitarian thinking was Theodore Parker. Early in his career, Parker rejected all miracles, including miracles described in the New Testament, and reconsidered his attitude toward Jesus. Some liberals in England at that time viewed Jesus as a non-historical figure, but Parker denied this concept in favor of the view that Jesus lived among the Jews and was an influential philosopher. Parker's rationalism also led him to the conclusion that the New Testament was a combination of legend, myth and history, and that all the miracle stories were unauthentic, including the virgin birth of Jesus. Jesus also had no foreknowledge of his death or resurrection, Parker decided, and all prophecies attributed to him were written by individuals after the death of the Man of Galilee. [^49]

Parker's views were so unacceptable to Channing, that Channing refused to classify this liberal preacher as a Unitarian, but following the Civil War most Unitarians adopted the basic premises popularized by Parker. The majority of the adherents of this religion in the twentieth century proclaim beliefs that are more in harmony with deistic philosophy than the Unitarianism of the early republic. In fact, Unitarians today generally classify Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, George Washington and John Adams as early Unitarians and list William Channing, Henry Ware, and Noah Worcester as Arians.

IV. The Birth of Universalism in the New Nation

While Unitarian societies were being organized in the new nation, another anti-Calvinist religion, Universalism, was transplanted from England to America. Whereas the distinguishing doctrine uniting the Unitarians was a belief in the unity of God, the tenet that precipitated the rise of Universalist societies was the belief in the final salvation of all men. Prior to and during the Reformation, a few individuals believed in universal salvation. Some of the Anabaptists of Germany, for instance, held that the torments of the devils and the damned would have an end. Such a view was condemned in the Augsburg Confession, indicating the endorsement of the doctrine among a few of Luther's contemporaries. During the Age of the Enlightenment, the idea increased in popularity, and individuals who were members of various Protestant religions rejected the orthodox concept of eternal damnation. [^50]

In 1753, a tract was published in Germantown, Pennsylvania, The Everlasting Gospel, in which the author, who employed the pseudo-name Paul Siegvolck, interpreted eternal damnation as "a future just Condemnation of the Wicked to those Punishments of the next World, which, according to the Dialect of the Holy Ghost, may be justly called eternal." This colonist determined that eventually the punishment of the wicked would cease and all men would live in the kingdom of God. The many mansions spoken of in the scriptures, he asserted, are the many prisons provided for the wicked after their death. Since punishment in the next world will be measured according to man's mortal iniquity, this unorthodox Christian concluded that all unrighteous unregenerates will be temporarily assigned to a jail or place, depending upon their degree of iniquity. [^51]

The individual who was primarily responsible for the organization of a church in this country based upon the distinguishing belief of the final salvation of all men was John Murray. Although born in England, Murray grew to maturity in Ireland where he was converted to Methodism and became a preacher in that society. Upon his return to England in 1760, Murray came under the influence of James Relly, who had organized a Universalist church in that country in the middle of the eighteenth century. Relly taught that after Eve had transgressed, Adam perceived an inevitable ruin and because of his love for his wife, voluntarily placed himself in her condition. Even though Adam was not deceived, as was Eve, Relly insisted that Adam stood as a representative of all mankind and by his offense all men became corrupt. But as by his single act, sin and death came upon all mankind, "in like manner, Christ's righteousness is upon all his seed. . . . For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive . . . (I Corinthians 15:22)." In other words, Relly explained, through the atonement and righteousness of Christ, the Redeemer brought us back into God's favor, making it possible for all men to ascend into heaven. Eventually, Christ will forgive all men for the sins which they commit and remember them no more (Hebrews 10:17). [^52]

Equipped with the religious philosophy of James Relly, John Murray migrated to America in 1770 and commenced preaching in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York, Massachusetts, and other states. After almost a decade of itinerant preaching, in 1770, the "Father of American Universalism" organized a society in Gloucester, Massachusetts, which was the first Universalist church constituted in the United States. Shortly thereafter, other societies were organized and the movement won the support of other influential leaders such as Elhanan Wincester, a former Calvinist Baptist who was converted in 1781.

At the beginning of the nineteenth century there were about thirty-five Universalist societies in America, the vast majority being located in the eastern sections of the New England states. Then in the first decades of the nineteenth century, the movement spread rapidly in New York so that in 1830 there were more Universalists residing in New York than in any other state. At that time there were about 400 Universalist societies in the United States of which approximately 230 were located in New England, about 150 in New York and fewer than 20 in all other states combined. Thirteen years later the number of societies had more than doubled, for in 1843 there were approximately 968 Universalist societies in the United States. [^53]

Distinguishing Beliefs and Doctrinal Divisions

For several decades, the Universalists refused to endorse any articles of faith, insisting that their only creed was the Bible and the one distinguishing tenet that led to their unification was a belief in the final salvation of all men. In 1803, lay and clerical representatives of a number of the Universalist societies in America assembled at Winchester, New Hampshire, and adopted the first explicit statement of Universalist beliefs. So many conflicting opinions were expressed at this meeting that the delegates condensed their basic doctrines into three brief articles of faith:

Article I. We believe that the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments contain a revelation of the character of God and of the duty, interest, and final destination of mankind.

Article II. We believe that there is one God, whose nature is Love, revealed in one Lord Jesus Christ, by one Holy Spirit of Grace, who will finally restore the whole family of mankind to holiness and happiness.

Article III. We believe that holiness and true happiness are inseparably connected, and that believers ought to be careful to maintain order and practice good works; for these things are good and profitable unto men.

Opponents of this religion argued that the belief in the final salvation of all men undermined the importance and necessity of living a righteous life; and therefore, Universalists would not be prone to abide by the concept expressed in the third article of the "Winchester Profession." Throughout the history of this religion, Universalists have replied to such critics by arguing that there is an intrinsic value in living all the moral teachings of Jesus, for sin produces unhappiness and righteousness produces happiness. There is no peace for the wicked, Elhanan Wincester declared. Eventually, everyone will be converted to the principle that happiness is the product of righteousness and will become holy, preparatory to their entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Consequently, he retorted, Universalism does not precipitate sin or licentiousness. [^54]

Although the basic beliefs of the Universalists had been expressed in the "Wincester Profession," theological conflicts among the Universalists flared in the early nineteenth century, precipitating various schisms in their ranks and resulting in a significant change of some of the doctrines generally held by the Universalists.

Prior to 1800, most Universalists, including the early leaders Murray and Wincester, believed in the traditional Protestant concept of the Trinity. However, as the Unitarians increased their circulation of anti-Trinitarian literature, more and more Universalists responded to the arguments advanced by these liberal Christians by abandoning their former belief. By 1820, the majority of the Universalists endorsed the generally accepted Unitarian view that the Father and the Son were separate and distinct beings and that Christ was divine, being the Son of God, receiving the title of God, and possessing derived power and authority. [^55]

The attitudes of the Universalists toward the Bible also gradually changed, so that prior to the Civil War many recognized that the book contained mistranslations and insisted, as did the Unitarians, that the work should be interpreted by employing the principle of reason.

The early converts to American Universalism also believed that as a consequence of the fall, men suffered sin, misery, pain and death and held that it was necessary for Christ to die to vanquish death and to redeem mankind from the other undesirable consequences of the fall. The early apologists taught that Christ bore the name of the Second Adam, being a representative of all men as the first Adam had been. Christ's atonement made it possible for all men to be saved in the kingdom of heaven; and by the power of God, the dispositions of all men, including the most vile sinners, will be changed. [^56]

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, Hosea Ballou, another influential Universalist, precipitated a significant change in the attitudes of the majority of the members of this religion regarding the mission of Christ. In a work entitled A Treatise on Atonement (1805), Ballou wrote that individuals should not interpret literally the account of the Fall as described in Genesis. Man does not inherit sin as a result of Adam's or any other man's actions, Ballou averred. God created man and produced in him a liberty of the will. Because of man's unwise choices, sin is produced. Sin, though, is finite and will terminate eventually for good in the moral system. The real consequence of Adam's fall, Ballou continued, was that Adam became unreconciled to God, but God was not unreconciled to Adam. God, therefore, did not need to atone. Christ's mission was not to be born on earth to suffer a death to satisfy justice, he added. Atonement and reconciliation are synonymous and mean a renewal of man's love of God. The power that causes men to hate sin and love holiness is the power of Christ. The atonement, according to Ballou, is the transferring of a man of sin to a man of righteousness by man's living the pure law of Christ, thereby bringing heaven to the soul and clothing the man in righteousness. [^57]

Although the Universalists did not alter their attitude toward predestination and election, vehemently rejecting these concepts as unjust, unreasonable and without purpose, they disagreed sharply in the early nineteenth century regarding the subject of punishment after death. Murray believed that there might be temporary punishment after death in consequence of blindness or unbelief. Since Christ suffered for the sin of all men, he reasoned, sinners are not punished for sin but for the failure to accept Christ as God. [^58] Meanwhile, Elhanan Wincester taught that the wicked suffer temporarily in a hell of fire and brimstone in consequence of the sins which they have committed here on earth. Christ, however, prepared the path for the entrance of all men into heaven. After his death, while his body lay in the tomb, Christ preached to the spirits in prison who had been disobedient during the days of Noah. The purpose of this missionary journey, according to Wincester, was in order that all men might be "judged according to men in the flesh" but "live according to God, in the spirit," meaning that one day all men would reside with God. In Wincester's opinion, it was also necessary for Christ to preach to the wicked so that he could convert them to the reality of his divinity, for eventually every tongue would confess that Jesus is the Lord. (Philippians 2:10-11) [^59]

In the early nineteenth century, Hosea Ballou popularized a view of the duration of punishment that created a storm of protest from some Universalists but was eventually endorsed by most members of this religion. Punishment for sin and disbelief is limited to this life, Ballou proclaimed. "I do not conceive that one part of human nature can be perfectly happy while the rest are in misery." Death is the termination of sin and misery, he added, so that by God's power all men, immediately after the separation of the body and the spirit, are restored to a state of holiness and righteousness. [^60]

Another issue that created a schism in this church centered on the subject of the sacraments. Universalists agreed that ordinances were not necessary for salvation, but many couldn't decide if any rites should be instituted in their societies. When Murray first constituted a society at Gloucester, he did not introduce any ordinances for he doubted their propriety. Shortly thereafter, Murray determined that there should be two rites in the church, baptism and the Lord's Supper, but the adoption of these ceremonies created dissension among the Universalists. Some members refused to acknowledge that baptisms should be performed and others disagreed on the mode of baptism. The question, should individuals be baptized by immersion, sprinkling or pouring? remained unresolved in the early republic while the ordinance was retained by the members of this denomination. Some Universalists also refused to participate in the Lord's Supper, but Murray acknowledged that in the 1790's most members agreed that the bread and wine should be partaken solely in remembrance of Christ and that only those who were worthy should partake. Murray insisted, the Bible taught that the unworthy who partook of the emblems of this rite ate and drank "Damnation or Condemnation, to themselves." [^61]

V. Liberal Congregationalism in the Late Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries

While many Congregationalists abandoned classical Calvinism in favor of the liberal tenets advanced by the Unitarians and Universalists, the vast majority of the members retained their allegiance in the church in which they had been baptized as infants. But many Congregationalists decided that some concessions had to be made, especially regarding the doctrines of original sin, depravity, and man's role in the salvation experience.

During the Revolutionary generation, an increasing number of Congregationalists concluded that Adam's sin was not imputed to man. According to one influential eighteenth century New England divine, Charles Chauncy, all men suffer two unavoidable evils as a result of the Fall, physical death and a more imperfect nature than Adam possessed before the Fall. This imperfect nature, Chauncy insisted, was not a totally depraved nature. [^62]

Controversies regarding the nature of the Fall and of man increased among the Congregationalists in the early nineteenth century. While most agreed that all men would certainly sin in consequence of Adam's fall, they disagreed on what made sin a certainty. In the 1820's, Nathaniel Taylor began teaching students at Yale that depravity was a "taste or bias or propensity or disposition to sin." That does not mean, Taylor declared, that man inherits Adam's sin or is born with a corrupt nature. Men sin, Taylor instructed others, solely as a result of their free, voluntary actions; and such sin continues until men are converted by the grace of God. Since man is a free agent, man has the ability to accept or reject the gospel and no irresistible force will convert men against their will. [^63]

The views popularized by Nathaniel Taylor were widely circulated by the graduates from Yale Divinity School, such as Horace Bushnell; and many parishioners of the Congregational church were converted to this New Haven concept of man's nature.

VI. Revival of Arminianism among the Baptists

During the early nineteenth century, there was also a significant increase in the number of Baptists who endorsed the concept that man plays a role in the salvation experience. Some of the first Baptist societies organized in colonial America endorsed the basic philosophy of James Arminius, but the Baptists who held to these convictions did not increase in numbers in the eighteenth century as rapidly as did the Calvinist Baptists. A revival of Arminianism among the Baptists was initiated in 1780 by Benjamin Randall, who organized the first Freewill Baptist society in New Durham, New Hampshire. Under Randall's leadership, the movement spread into other sections of New England; and following the death of Randall in 1808, John Colby began directing the movement, organizing congregations in Rhode Island, New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Indiana. The views of these Christians were not only proclaimed throughout the North by conscientious itinerant preachers but were promulgated in the books and magazines published by the members of this denomination, such as their principal organ in the early nineteenth century, the "Morning Star."

Retaining the basic teachings of the Calvinist Baptists on most doctrines (such as believing in the Trinity, the Bible the sole norm of faith, believer's baptism by immersion, resurrection of the righteous to a state of happiness and the wicked to endless misery, and the priesthood of believers), the Freewill Baptists departed from that which was once the largest wing of the Baptist fold primarily because of their beliefs pertaining to the Fall, atonement, and nature of salvation. Denying that Adam's sin was inherited by man, the Freewill Baptists believed that men are punished not for Adam's transgression, but because of their own unrighteous acts. Because of Adam's sin, they taught, all men will inevitably commit sin and will suffer death. Nevertheless, Christ's atonement, they explained, removed all the condemnation resulting from the Fall, placing man on a second state of trial.

All who repent after transgressing and accept Christ will receive a remission of sins; and "all who die short of the age of accountability are rendered sure of eternal life." Moreover, they taught that Christ offers salvation to everyone, and all men are agents capable of choosing or refusing this precious gift. They also endorsed the Arminian view that man can fall from grace by declaring that regenerates "are placed in a state of trial during life, their future obedience and final salvation are neither determined nor certain; it is however their duty and privilege to be steadfast in the truth, to grow in grace, persevere in holiness, and make their election sure." [^64]

VII. John Wesley and the Rise of Methodism

The individuals who were most responsible for the circulation of Arminianism among the backwoodsmen of the Early Republic were the industrious Methodist itinerant preachers. Methodism was another American religion which was transplanted from Europe to this country and first appeared among the Revolutionary generation. The well-known founder of this religion, John Wesley, was born in 1703 in England, only fourteen miles from Scrooby the home of several of the Pilgrim leaders. His grandfathers were nonconformists, but his father was an Anglican minister and John Wesley proceeded to walk in the footsteps of his orthodox parents. In 1725, one year after graduating from Oxford University, the young man, noted for his scholastic competence and passion for discipline, was ordained a deacon in the Church of England. A few years later, he was ordained a priest, after which he accepted a call to serve as a missionary in America for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. Although he intended to preach to the Indians of Georgia, after arriving in the English colony, Wesley became so concerned about the neglect of religion by the Europeans that he determined to awaken the colonists regarding the desirability of organized religion. His mission resulted in failure; and after a few unfruitful years, the discouraged young clergyman returned to the mother country.

Shortly after returning home, John Wesley had a profound experience that altered the course of his life and that of many others. On May 24, 1738, John attended an informal Sabbath evening meeting of a group of Anglicans in London in which they read and discussed the Bible and commentaries on the scriptures. While Martin Luther's preface to the Epistle on Romans was being read, John claimed that he was suddenly converted. "I felt my heart strangely warmed," he testified. "I felt I did trust in Christ, Christ alone, for salvation; and an assurance was given me, that he had taken away my sins, even mine, and saved me from the law of sin and death." [^65]

Endowed with an increased zeal to preach, Wesley began teaching others in church buildings, in private homes and in open fields. He traveled widely and spoke frequently before large crowds. Although the regulations of the Church of England provided that individuals were not to preach in a parish without approval of the resident minister, this Anglican clergyman defied such policies by proclaiming, "The world is my parish."

The Evolution from Societies to a Church

Success was preceded by opposition. Wesley's emotional messages and itinerant preaching were branded by some Anglicans as unconventional and undesirable. On occasions he suffered persecution from the actions of violent mobs, but the opposition encouraged him to organize those who approved the nature and substance of his preaching and desired to assemble for mutual edification. In 1739, Wesley commenced this organization in the smoky industrial towns of England and the evolution from the societies to a church continued in England until 1791. In the 1740's important stages in this evolutionary development occurred. In that decade Anglican priests refused some members of the Wesleyan societies the opportunity to partake of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, so Wesley and his assistants commenced administering this sacrament to the members of the societies. In 1741, lay preachers were assigned to preach to the members united under Wesley's direction; and in 1743, general rules were drafted for the government of the "United Societies," which were retained after a church was constituted. Shortly after the societies were organized, Wesley concluded that the right to ordain was not reserved to the bishops, but a presbyter or minister had such authority. After problems arose regarding leaders for the societies and men to administer the Lord's Supper, Wesley commenced ordaining others, who were regarded by the Methodists as properly ordained ministers. However, it wasn't until 1791, following the death of Wesley, that the Methodists in England officially organized a church independent from the Church of England.

The Appearance of Methodism in America

In the mid-eighteenth century, members of the English Methodist societies migrated to America; and in the decade prior to the Revolution organized their first societies in this land. The movement continued to increase in popularity as it did in England. For many years, the Methodist preachers in this country were primarily lay preachers who claimed no special authority to baptize or administer the Lord's Supper, the members primarily depending upon Protestant clergymen to administer these ordinances. Following the Revolution, because of the growth of the societies and the lack of Anglican priests to supply the needs of the Methodists, John Wesley and others agreed that a reorganization was necessary in the new nation. Therefore, in 1784, John Wesley appointed Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury to be superintendents of the Methodist societies in the United States; and in that year a conference was held in Baltimore. The delegates at this meeting approved Wesley's plan of organization and formed the Methodist Episcopal Church. By refusing to accept Wesley's supervision of the church, approving Coke and Asbury as their leaders, and changing their titles to bishop, the Americans created a new church in this land independent of the Methodist societies in England. [^66]

Methodist Theology

As in the Church of England, the Methodists have permitted a wide latitude of belief among members; and this church has a reputation of de-emphasizing theology. Since John Wesley insisted throughout his life that he was a member of the Church of England and did not protest against any particular doctrine of that faith, the basic beliefs of the Methodists are similar to the tenets held by many Anglicans. The most articulate expression of the beliefs of the Methodists as held by the members of this denomination in the early republic is the Twenty-five Articles of Religion, being Wesley's reduction of the Thirty-nine articles of the Church of England. In this early Methodist standard of faith, the basic beliefs of the Anglicans regarding God, the Bible, the Fall, the nature of man, the atonement, life after death, and the sacraments of the church are sanctioned, but the articles referring to predestination and election are eliminated, leaving no room for a Calvinistic interpretation. [^67]

One of the major themes emphasized by Wesley and the Methodists of early America was the Arminian view that God proffers grace to everyone. Although man does not have the strength of will to seek salvation, Wesley taught, man has the power to resist it. Therefore, the influential founder of this religion concluded that the decisive element in a person's salvation is his own freedom which accepts or rejects this gift. Man, consequently, decides his own fate. Such a concept, Wesley reasoned, does not rob God of his sovereignty. God instituted a plan that would take into account human freedom, and gave to man freedom of will. According to Wesley, regeneration is the cleansing of sin, and it empowers men with the strength to comply with God's will. It is the program by which God forgives men of their sins. Sanctification, Wesley further declared, has to do with man's inner dispositions and feelings and is a long process. This also is a gift of God, for God has the ability to forgive sin and make men saints, but although God calls all men to be saints, few allow themselves to be chosen. [^68]

Inspired by the Arminian views of John Wesley and his emphasis that all men should seek God and secure faith in Christ, the Methodist preachers traveled widely among the rural farmers of the new nation, encouraging them to study the Bible, to seek Christ, and to live a life patterned after the example set by the Savior of mankind.

VIII. Religious Communal Societies in the Early Republic

While Arian and Arminian views were being widely diffused among the American people, there was a noticeable increase in the number of individuals, who in their attempt to restore New Testament Christianity, commenced living in communal societies. One of the best known adventures in communal living by a religious group of the early republic was the Shaker experiment. The founder of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing or the Millennial Church was Ann Lee, the "spiritual mother" of a small sect in England. In 1774, Mother Ann Lee migrated to America; and after purchasing land in the American wilderness near Albany, New York, commenced gathering her followers. After her death in 1784, the mantle of leadership fell for a few years on the shoulders of the most gifted preacher of the society, James Whittaker; and under his direction, the gathering of Believers continued. After his death Lucy Wright and Joseph Meacham, the most competent organizer in the movement, became the acknowledged leaders. Father Joseph, as Meacham was called, united the Believers in communistic orders, the first communal societies being established near Albany at Watervliet and New Lebanon, New York, in 1787. The Believers were organized into family systems, private ownership of property was eliminated, and community homes, shops and farms were established. When Father Joseph died in the summer of 1796, eleven communal organizations existed, all of which were located in New York and New England. In the early decades of the nineteenth century, the movement spread into other sections of backwoods America. By 1828, eight additional Shaker communities had been established, four in Ohio, two in Kentucky, one in Indiana, and another in New York. All of these family systems were small units, there being no order which grew beyond six hundred members and most reached a maximum of three hundred. [^69]

New York was not only the birthplace for the first Shaker communities, but between 1780 and 1850 many other communistic orders were constituted by religious groups in that state. In 1786, Jemima Wilkinson, a former Quaker from Rhode Island, established a short-lived communal order, the Jerusalem Community, at Seneca Lake, New York. A half a century later, in 1842, Christian Metz, leader of a piestic group from Germany, initiated the first step for the establishment of a communistic order by purchasing a tract of land near Buffalo. In the 1850's when conditions became crowded in that community, the members of the True Inspiration Societies migrated to Iowa. After purchasing frontier land in that state, Christian Metz christened the land Amana, signifying "believe faithfully." Shortly thereafter, the community was incorporated as the Amana Society. This piestic group erected seven villages, establishing mills, factories, stores, orchards, and vineyards and conducting this country's most successfull experiment in communism. Six years after the Inspirationists purchased land in western New York, John Humphrey Noyes, a social reformer from New England, directed the organization of the Oneida community in the central section of the state, an order which attracted more visitors than any other communal experiment in America. [^70]

Meanwhile, other religious groups were establishing well-regulated societies in other parts of the United States. George Rapp emigrated from Germany and settled in Harmony, Pennsylvania, where after gathering his followers in 1805, he created a communistic theocracy. In 1814, the Harmonists or Rappites migrated to Indiana, founding another town named Harmony, but returned to Pennsylvania in 1825. In a fertile area, which they named Economy, they unitedly erected homes, shops, mills, factories, churches, and schools. Another group of German immigrants, the Separatists of Zoar settled in eastern Ohio wilderness in 1817, where a few years after their arrival, they agreed to set up a communistic system which continued throughout most of the nineteenth century.

General Characteristics of the Communal Societies

Although each sect which established a communal order in early America differed in theology and regulations governing the behavior of its members, there are some characteristics that reveal the general beliefs and programs of most of the largest and best known societies. Almost all the experiments in communal living were instituted under the direction of individuals who were zealous, influential leaders, often claiming to have received visions and revelations from God. When Jemima Wilkinson was about twenty, she became seriously ill with a fever, falling into a prolonged trance. Upon recovering, the "Public Universal Friend" announced that she had been dead, that her spirit had ascended to heaven and that her body was now inhabited by the spirit emanating from God. Moreover, she insisted that God had commissioned her as the Holy One, investing in her the power of Jesus Christ, which authority she was to retain until the Second Advent of the Savior. Meanwhile, she had been commissioned, Jemima informed others, to organize God's church on the earth. The members were promised that they would be blessed by participating in the first resurrection and would be with her when Christ made his dramatic appearance. [^71]

About the same time that Jemima Wilkinson claimed a vision, Mother Ann Lee emerged from a prison in England and announced to her followers that she had beheld the truths of God. While retained in that dungeon, she asserted, I saw Adam and Eve engage in the very transgression that led to the fall of all mankind. But in the midst of my anguish, she continued, Christ appeared to me, comforted my soul and commissioned me to preach the gospel of the stainless life. "I am Ann the Word," she testified. "I feel the blood of Christ running through my soul and body." From this pronouncement and other claims of communication with heaven, evolved the Shaker concept that "Christ" was infused in Mother Ann Lee, that she was his special instrument, and that when she spoke, it was the "Christ spirit" dwelling in her who was speaking. God is bi-sexual in nature, Shakers argued. God first appeared in the form of a male, that was Jesus, and later in the form of a female, that was Mother Ann Lee. [^72]

Visions were not limited to the founder of the Shakers, for during some of the unusual Shaker services and on other occasions, Believers claimed communication with heaven. In the last years of the life of Father Joseph Meacham, this leader often retired in seclusion where he prayed, meditated, and claimed communion with God. During some of these religious experiences, Meacham declared that he witnessed angels dancing around the throne of God. [^73]

Some of the German immigrant leaders also claimed revelation from God. George Rapp believed that God instructed him to lead his followers to a Land of Canaan and prophecied that one day he would live to present the Harmonites to the Lord. In the 1820's while in Germany, Christian Metz announced that the Lord informed him that under God's direction, he would lead the Inspirationists to a land of peace and religious liberty. After settling in the new world near Buffalo, members of this sect believed that the word of the Lord instructed these Christians to seek a home further west; and on many other occasions, the Inspirationists claimed that God directed their affairs.

The Inspirationists believed that although Christian Metz was usually the "Instrument" employed by God to reveal messages for the benefit of the church or individuals, sometimes several agents were selected by God to convey his words to the people. Such messages were recorded as though God was directly speaking to the people, the term "saith the Lord" being used to indicate the author of the messages. Moreover, the members of the Amana community believed that since God speaks to the people in their age as he directed his children in prior ages, the Lord directed the spiritual and temporal affairs of their community. Some of the remarks of Metz were recorded and members of the True Inspiration Societies read these messages in their meetings, holding such statements as the word of God in the same light as the Bible was regarded as the revealed will of the Lord. Such latter-day messages, they further taught, better enabled the members of the community to understand the scriptures and to interpret properly the Word of God. [^74]

In addition to believing in guidance by continuous revelation, most of these Christians believed in the manifestation of other gifts of the spirit, such as speaking in tongues and healing the sick. During the exuberant Shaker services, members of the society would begin shaking their heads violently and some would start singing strange songs, employing weird tunes and unusual words. Sometimes while others were running, jumping or walking around in the meeting hall, individuals would begin speaking in unknown tongues. The various demonstrations were regarded by the Believers as signs of their religious sincerity and enthusiasm and evidence that the spirit of God was in their midst as it had been in the Primitive Church.

Most of the members of the communal societies were also extremely millennial conscious, believing that their economic unification and separation from the world prepared the path for the second coming of Christ and the ushering in of a thousand years of peace. Most further held that the Second Advent was imminent. While the followers of Wilkinson and Rapp claimed that their leaders would present them to Christ; members of the Shaker and Oneida communities concluded Christ had already reappeared, and John Humphrey Noyes contended that the second coming occurred as early as 70 A.D.

Most of the members of the most popular communal societies believed in future rewards and punishments, but the Shakers and Harmonists denied that punishment would be everlasting. The Shakers also promulgated an unusual concept of the many mansions in heaven. After dividing the religious history of mankind into four "dispensations," the Shakers concluded that there was a heaven or hell for the people living in each of the four eras. The wicked antediluvians, they taught, proceeded to the first hell and the righteous of that age went to the first heaven. The wicked Jews who lived prior to the birth of Christ went to the second hell and the righteous went to the second heaven, a place which Shakers believed was called "Paradise." The third heaven and hell, they concluded, was reserved for those living from the advent of Christ to the modern era and those who live during the centuries immediately preceding the millennium enter the fourth heaven or hell. After Christ's crucifixion, Shakers said the Savior passed through "Paradise," the second heaven, and proceeded to the spirit prison, the first hell; and Paul was caught up into the third heaven, meaning the heaven where the righteous Christians were assigned. [^75]

Most members of the communal societies also maintained unusual marital views. Strict celibacy was the rule in many groups, such as the Shaker and Harmonist experiments. The Inspirationists tolerated marriage, but thought it best to remain single, and as each new child was born, parents suffered a reduction in spiritual rank. Members of the Oneida community practiced a complex marriage system. By predetermining each year the number of children that should be born in the community and selecting the parents of the anticipated children, these "perfectionists" attempted to produce superior offspring.

In some of these societies health codes were adopted. The Harmonists discontinued the use of tobacco in 1807; the Zoarites refused to eat pork; and the Shaker leaders in 1840 ordered the nonconsumption of strong drinks, tobacco, and swine's flesh.

Communal living was regarded by most of these Christians as an essential element of their religion. Since private ownership of property was shunned, all their possessions were placed in a common fund and a uniform style of dress and living accommodations were adopted.

Not all the meetings of these Christians were as exuberant as those of the Shakers. Many of their services were solemn, dignified and not accompanied with physical demonstrations. In these societies there were no salaried ministers and often no sermons were delivered during their religious services. The sermon was replaced by an emphasis on prayer, singing, and reading the Scriptures or the "inspired" or "divine" words of their leaders.

The religious communal societies were also generally known for their emphasis on public confession of sins, for their preaching against war, for their refusal to bear arms or take oaths, for their simplicity of living, and for their frugality, honesty, temperance, cleanliness and industry.

IX. Restorationist Theologians and the Rise of the Disciples of Christ

At the end of the eighteenth century and in the first decades of the nineteenth century, the spirit of reform was not only clearly visible by the growing popularity of the views promulgated by the Unitarians, Universalists, liberal Congregationalists, Freewill Baptists, Methodists and by the communal societies, but it was also evident by the increased acceptance of the views advanced by a group of restorationist theologians. Like many European reformers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, many Americans of the early republic earnestly sought a restoration of New Testament Christianity. These Americans determined that the leaders of the Reformation had failed to restore the fulness of the gospel and that all Christian religions had inherited from the Medieval church incorrect doctrines and practices. Such conclusions inspired the restorationists to seek the truth and to organize eventually new religions which in their opinion more closely resembled the Primitive Church.

James O'Kelly Leads a Reformation of Methodism

In 1794, James O'Kelly, a Methodist minister who had served in Virginia and North Carolina, protested against Francis Asbury's assumption of episcopal authority and organized a society called the "Christian Church." O'Kelly and his followers held that the Bible should be the only creed, that all individuals should have the liberty to interpret the scriptures, that each congregation should be autonomous, and that every body of Christians had the right of selecting its own pastor.

Abner Jones and Elias Smith Direct Movement of "Christians" in New England

A few years after O'Kelly organized a group of former Methodists into independent societies, a number of New Englanders separated from the Calvinist Baptists. Rejecting all creeds and renouncing the doctrine of predestination, these New England dissenters declared that the New Testament was their only norm of faith. In 1801, they organized an independent society in Vermont and called themselves "Christians." Under the leadership of Abner Jones and Elias Smith, the movement spread to other parts of New England and from there into New York, Canada, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Ohio. Insisting upon the independence of each congregation, these Protestants did not organize any central machinery to guide or direct the affairs of the local societies, and they refused to engage in cooperative activities. Although they endorsed the doctrine of believer's baptism by immersion and retained many other tenets subscribed to by the Baptists, they did not endorse an articles of faith and continued to emphasize the need for a restoration of New Testament Christianity. [^76]

Barton W. Stone Becomes Leader of the Western "Christians"

While groups calling themselves Christians were organizing in Virginia and New England, pioneers in Kentucky, under the direction of Barton W. Stone, separated from the Presbyterian church, established independent societies, and adopted the name Christians. These Protestants rebelled against the Calvinist concept of election and the practice of maintaining doctrinal uniformity within a church by requiring members to endorse a creed. Like others who called themselves Christians, these westerners adopted the Bible as their only guide for religious truth and agreed that each congregation should be autonomous. From Kentucky this movement spread into Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Tennessee, and Alabama. [^77]

Thomas and Alexander Campbell Seek a Restoration of New Testament Christianity

A fourth anti-Calvinist and anti-creedal movement of early America was initiated by Thomas and Alexander Campbell. Born in Ireland and educated in Scotland, these Presbyterians migrated to America in the first decade of the eighteenth century. Thomas preceded his son to the new world and obtained a position as pastor in a Presbyterian parish located in southwestern Pennsylvania. One year after his appointment, Thomas Campbell was admonished and suspended from the ministry. A synod ruled that Thomas Campbell had taught heretical doctrines and had engaged in practices not in harmony with the rules of the church. He had repudiated the right of the church to hold the Westminster Confession of Faith as a term of communion. He had denied that a sense of assurance was the essence of faith. Instead of teaching that faith was the result of a Spirit-given emotional experience, he had taught that faith could be the result of "an intelligent response of the mind to evidence." [^78]

After his dismissal from the Presbyterian ministry, Thomas Campbell continued to preach to the farmers of western Pennsylvania, especially in the vicinity of Washington, and in August, 1809, organized his followers into an independent society called the "Christian Association of Washington." The guiding principles of this association were clearly described by Thomas Campbell in his Declaration and Address (1809). We desire to support, Thomas Campbell recorded in this influential work, "a pure Gospel Ministry, that shall reduce to practice that whole form of doctrine, worship, discipline, and government, expressly revealed and enjoined in the word of God." This society is not a church, but an association established "for the sole purpose of promoting simple evangelical christianity" and seeking a reduction "to practice that simple original form of Christianity." [^79]

Shortly after Thomas Campbell had organized his followers, Alexander Campbell arrived in America, learned of his father's beliefs and actions, and assumed leadership of the movement. Then after being converted to the doctrine of believer's baptism by immersion, Alexander Campbell was immersed by a Baptist and in 1811, accepted the pastorate of the Brush Run church in what is today Bethany, West Virginia. The members of this Baptist society observed the Lord's Supper weekly; admitted into their society by baptism all who simply declared faith in Christ; and they joined the Redstone Baptist Association in 1813.

Although formal separation from the Baptists was not completed until about 1830, during the approximate seventeen years in which Alexander Campbell was affiliated with this denomination he remained a restorationist, teaching several doctrines not in harmony with the beliefs of his Baptist contemporaries. To popularize his views, Campbell traveled widely and spoke frequently. In 1823, he founded and began editing a magazine, the Christian Baptist, and in 1830, changed the name of this publication to the Millennial Harbinger, indicating his belief in the imminence of the second coming. Throughout the decade of the 1820's, Alexander Campbell continued to emphasize the need for a purification of the American religions. The iconoclast condemned all beliefs and practices that could not be validated by apostolic mandates. [^80] He proclaimed that missionary societies, tract societies, Bible societies, synods, associations, and theological seminaries were inconsistent with pure religion. He aroused many Americans by insisting that ministers were preaching for hire. And to provide others with scriptural evidence that the disciples of Christ recognized an inevitable need for a restoration of original Christianity, he captioned the title page of the Harbinger with a prophecy included in the book of Revelation, "I saw another messenger flying through the midst of heaven, having everlasting good news to proclaim to the inhabitants of the earth, even to every nation and tribe, and tongue, and people." (Revelation 14:6)

The Theology of Alexander Campbell

Although Campbell was extremely critical of all confessions of faith, most of his beliefs harmonized with the religious views held by members of the major religions of early America. For instance, he condemned the term "Trinity" because it was a word not located in the scriptures and insisted that the descriptions of God as contained in the popular creeds of Christendom were "un-intelligible jargons," but he failed to clarify the mystery of the Godhead. Revealing his acceptance of a triune God, Campbell taught that the Godhead was singular, but plural in its "personal manifestations." "Hence we have the Father, Son and Holy Spirit equally divine," Campbell declared, "though personally distinct from each other. We have, in fact, but one God, one Lord, one Holy Spirit; yet these are equally possessed of one and the same divine nature." Repudiating the concept of God as a material being, he agreed with most of his contemporaries that God was a pure spirit, invisible, supremely good and omnipotent. [^81]

Alexander Campbell also shared the convictions of most of his Protestant contemporaries when he stated that the Bible was all-inclusive and the only norm of faith. His interpretation of this popular concept led him to the conclusion that men should not formulate creeds or require members to subscribe to articles of faith. Since he regarded the Bible as a sufficient guide for religious truth, Campbell insisted that no new revelation or religious truths would be imparted by God to man. [^82]

In order to assist others to understand this important work, in 1826, Campbell published a new version of the New Testament. In this translation, Campbell attempted to use the language of his age, so that he employed the word "immersion" in place of "baptism" and "reform" instead of "repent." Although Campbell recognized that mistranslations had crept into the King James version, he did not doubt that the events described in the scriptures occurred, that the authors were infallible in their recording the will of the Master, or that the basic teachings found in the popular versions of the Bible had been perverted beyond their recognition. He concluded that only minor mistranslations had occurred as the words of God were passed down through the ages. [^83]

Like most Christians of the early republic, Campbell taught that Adam committed a grievous sin in the Garden of Eden, and as a result of the Fall, all men inherit a sinful nature. Man is prone to do evil, he said, but "is not under an invincible necessity to sin." Although man is not totally depraved, he is powerless to believe and live the gospel unless God dispenses grace to him. [^84]

Endorsing the concept of a limited atonement, Campbell reasoned that only those who have "faith in his blood . . . derive pardon and life through his death." In his opinion, the supreme end of Christ's sacrifice was "to unite mercy and justice in forgiving the sinner." [^85]

Even though Campbell condemned both the Calvinists and the Arminians, he recorded his acceptance of Arminian principles by arguing that man was a free agent who had the capacity to accept or reject God's gift of salvation. [^86] He concluded that men were saved as a result of the grace emanating from God, the aid extended by the Holy Spirit, and the actions of the individual.

In one of his most popular books, The Christian System (1835), Campbell emphasized five essential principles of salvation. Faith and repentance, he advocated, should precede baptism; remission of sins and the gift of the Holy Spirit are results of that ordinance. "Faith in Christ," Campbell declared, is based upon evidence and "is the effect of belief. Belief is the cause, and trust, confidence, or faith in Christ, the effect." A natural effect of faith is repentance, a sorrow for sins committed, and a resolution to forsake evil. True repentance also includes, Campbell taught, "ceasing to do evil and learning to do well." Repentance is consummated by a reformation of life. [^87]

Since Campbell regarded faith and repentance as necessary antecedents of baptism, he condemned infant baptism. This practice, he insisted, deprived individuals of the right of choice and obviates the personal responsibility of the individual. Campbell further taught that immersion was the only scriptural mode of baptism. Penitent believers, he argued, should proceed into the water and come out of the water. He further maintained that this ordinance, which was a symbolic profession of faith, was for the remission of sins, delivering recipients from both the guilt and pollution of sin. A "believer never has his sins formally washed away or remitted," he wrote, until he is baptized. While the blood of Christ "really cleanses" believers from sins, baptism "formally washes away our sins." [^88] Although Campbell inferred that baptism was essential for salvation, he refused to speculate on the fate of those who had not been correctly baptized.

Following immersion, Campbell stated, true Christians not only receive a remission of sins but receive a gift of the Holy Spirit. He agreed with others that no one could say that Jesus was the Christ but by the Holy Spirit, but he believed that the Spirit was "not promised to any persons out of Christ." The work of the Spirit, Campbell declared, is not only needed for conversion, but for sanctification, "to make our calling and election sure." Sanctification is a progressive work, and the Holy Spirit helps baptized believers develop a holy character. He also said that "Christians . . . are temples of the Holy Spirit; and they are . . . animated, encouraged and sanctified by the power and influence of the Spirit of God." Without this gift of "love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, (and) temperance," individuals could not ultimately triumph over opposition. [^89]

Like many of his contemporaries, Campbell believed in an intermediate state for the spirit following death; two judgments, a partial and general judgment; a resurrection of the body; salvation for the believers; and everlasting punishment for the wicked.

Organization of Independent Societies by the "Campbellites"

In the 1820's, Campbell's views regarding the need for a restoration of the Primitive Church were accepted by many settlers in western Pennsylvania, Virginia, Kentucky, and Ohio. Under the leadership of Walter Scott, Sidney Rigdon and many other disciples of Campbell, many converts were organized into independent societies, the majority of which were constituted in eastern Ohio. Most of these Protestants called themselves "Campbellites," "Reformed Baptists," "Reformers," or "Disciples."

Gradual Organization of the Disciples of Christ

In 1832, the formal union of independent societies which were committed to a program of the restoration of New Testament Christianity commenced under the leadership of Alexander Campbell. In that year, Campbell and many of his followers joined forces with many of the Christians who endorsed the views of Barton Stone. A few years earlier, Campbell and Stone had compared beliefs and recognized similarities. Both men accepted the New Testament as their only creed and only constitution upon which a church should be built. They favored the Arminian view that man played a role in the salvation experience. They held that immersion of penitent believers was the correct mode of baptism and that remission of sins was a consequence of that ordinance. They concluded that there should be liberty of belief on all matters of doctrine, which in their opinion, was not unmistakably revealed; and they insisted upon the autonomy of each congregation.

Doctrinal Divisions

There were major differences of opinion dividing the two restorationist theologians which nearly prevented a union and which persisted as thorny issues among the members of this new religion. Stone and Campbell disagreed on the frequency of administering the Lord's Supper; Campbell believed that the ordinance should be administered weekly while Stone concluded that a less frequent administration was more desirable. Another issue precipitating conflict centered on the subject of baptism. Was baptism by immersion essential for salvation and entrance into the church? Stone replied, "No." Campbell insisted that this ordinance was necessary for entrance into the church and was God's method of "formally" remitting sins. The proper name for the new church also served as a factor creating discord among these Protestants. Stone and most of his followers insisted that they retain the title of "Christians," while Campbell preferred the name, "Disciples." This conflict was never resolved for some congregations adopted the name Christian Church and others the Disciples of Christ. [^90]

In 1906, a major cleavage occurred in this religion. The conservatives who opposed the use of organs in churches and missionary societies, withdrew from the Disciples of Christ and adopted the name Church of Christ. Consequently, a movement designed to create Christian unity has been weakened by schisms caused by conflicting interpretations of the one book which serves as their sole norm of faith.

Alexander Campbell never acknowledged that he succeeded in restoring New Testament Christianity, but he and his followers concluded that the society which they supported was more in accord with the practices of the early Christian churches than any other denomination. Most of the members of the independent societies in New England who called themselves Christians did not share Campbell's convictions and refused to unite with him. However, the majority of the independents of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and Tennessee who were committed to a program of purifying God's churches, supported the movement, gradually joining the alliance of churches emerging from the activities of Campbell and Stone.

The members of the Disciples of Christ have not repudiated a basic teaching of the modern instigators of their faith by adopting a creed, but they have given token approval to a slogan which describes some of their most celebrated beliefs:

Where the scriptures speak, we speak; where the scriptures are silent we are silent.

In faith unity, in opinions liberty, in all things charity.

No creed but Christ, no book but the Bible, no law but love, no name but the divine.

* * * * *

Since the popular doctrines of the American colonists were very different from the views restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith, Latter-day Saint missionaries undoubtedly would not have reaped a bounteous harvest by proclaiming the news of the restoration among the orthodox Christians of that era. Many popular attitudes of the colonists regarding God, the Bible, revelation, the fall of man, the atonement, and the nature and fundamental principles of salvation were not in accord with the message unfolded by the Latter-day Prophet. During the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, however, there was a significant reorientation of Christian thinking. The traditional view that the Godhead consisted of three beings of one essence was challenged by the deists, Unitarians, and most Universalists. The concept that the Bible was infallible was also denied by these three religious groups. Declaring that revelation was continuous, most members of communal societies in the early nineteenth century insisted that the Bible was not all-inclusive. The deists, Unitarians, and Universalists furthermore rejected the traditional view that Adam's sin was imputed to man; and nearly every member of a denomination emerging among the Revolutionary generation emphasized that man played a vital role in the salvation experience. Meanwhile, the concept that unbelievers suffered eternally in hell declined in popularity, while the number of adherents to the doctrine of believer's baptism by immersion for the remission of sins and the imminence of the second coming increased.

The numbers who joined independent societies led by restorationist theologians and attacked apostate concepts described in the creeds of Christendom in the early nineteenth century is evidence that many settlers in this country and other parts of the world recognized the need for a restoration of New Testament Christianity. As the beliefs of numerous Protestants were brought into harmony with the teachings of Christ, conditions became more favorable for the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Congregational 700 10 5 715 65,000 The General Laws and Liberties of New Plymouth Colony (Cambridge, 1672), 7, Evans No. 171; The General Laws and Liberties of the Massachusetts Colony (Cambridge, 1672), 45, Evans No. 168; The Book of the General Laws for the People within the Jurisdiction of Connecticut (Cambridge, 1675), 22, Evans No. 173; Emil Oberholzer, Jr., Delinquent Saints (New York: Columbia University Press, 1956), 43-45.
[^2] Church of England 75 100 265 440 35,000 Kenneth Scott Latourette, A History of Christianity (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1953), 1229; Winthrop S. Hudson, American Protestantism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961), 96; William Warren Sweet, Revivalism in America (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1944), 18.
[^3] Baptist 140 90 200 430 22,000 George Bancroft, History of the United States of America (New York, 1883), I, 455.
[^4] Society of Friends 45 130 95 270 22,000 William Stevens Perry, ed., Historical Collections Relating to the American Colonial Church (5 vols., Hartford, Connecticut, 1870-78), I, 261-318.
[^5] Presbyterian 35 275 190 500 15,000 Ibid., IV, 190-231.
[^6] German Reformed 0 150 45 195 10,000 Spencer Erwin, "The Anglican Church in North Carolina," Historical Magazine, XXV, No. 2 (June, 1956), 151-52; The Colonial Records of North Carolina, William L. Saunders, ed. (10 vols., Raleigh, 1886-88), IV, 7, 605, 753; VI, 235, 734-35.
[^7] Dutch Reformed 0 120 0 120 9,000 Samuel Davies, The State of Religion (Boston, 1751), 33-34, Evans No. 6657.
[^8] Lutheran 1 185 35 221 7,000 Perry, op. cit., II, 433-34.
[^9] Roman Catholic 6 25 20 51 6,000 Ibid., I, 326-37.
[^10] Mennonite 0 50 4 54 3,000 Peter Force, ed., Historical Tracts (4 vols., New York: Peter Smith, 1947), III, No. 15, 4.
[^11] Other 6 55 20 81 6,000 George B. Scriven, "Religious Affiliation in Seventeenth Century Maryland," Historical Magazine, XXV, No. 3 (September, 1956), 227-29.
[^12] Erwin, op. cit., 147.
[^13] David Duncan Wallace, South Carolina (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1951), 61, 207-08.
[^14] George Gillman Smith, The Story of Georgia and the Georgia People (Atlanta, [1901]), 50-51, 492-501; Kenneth Coleman, The American Revolution in Georgia (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1958), 12-13.
[^15] Thomas Bradbury Chandler, An Appeal to the Public, in Behalf of the Church of England in America (New York, 1767), 4-5, 16, 18, 29, 32-37, Evans No. 10578.
[^16] Wallace, op. cit., 210, 216.
[^17] Samuel Davies, op. cit., 33-34.
[^18] Perry, op. cit., I, 326.
[^19] The estimates of the number of congregations of each denomination in the South during different periods of the eighteenth century are based primarily on an analysis of the data included in Frederick Lewis Weis, The Colonial Churches and the Colonial Clergy of the Middle and Southern Colonies, 1607-1776 (Lancaster, 1938). The population figures employed throughout this work are based on the estimates published in Historical Statistics of the United States (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of Census, 1960), 756.
[^20] Gaius G. Atkins and Frederick L. Fagley, History of American Congregationalism (Boston: Pilgrim Press, 1942), 99-100.
[^21] Eleazar Mather, A Serious Exhortation (Cambridge, 1671), 9, Evans No. 162.
[^22] Samuel Torrey, An Exhortation unto Reformation (Cambridge, 1674), iii-v, Evans No. 197.
[^23] Samuel Torrey, A Plea for the Life of Dying Religion (Boston, 1683), 12, Evans No. 353.
[^24] Thomas Jefferson Wertenbaker, The Puritan Oligarchy (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1947), 192, 207; Albert E. Dunning, Congregationalists in America (Boston, 1894), 189; Conrad Wright, "Edwards and the Arminians on the Freedom of the Will," Harvard Theological Review, XXXV, No. 4 (October, 1942), 242.
[^25] Solomon Stoddard, An Appeal to the Learned (Boston, 1709), 95-98, Evans No. 1433; Ola Elizabeth Winslow, Jonathan Edwards (New York: Macmillan Company, 1940), 104-05.
[^26] Edwin Scott Gaustad, Historical Atlas of Religion in America (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), 160-61, 167; George Punchard, History of Congregationalism (5 vols., Boston, 1880), I, 460; IV, 609; Frederick Lewis Weis, The Colonial Clergy and the Colonial Churches of New England (Lancaster, Mass., 1936); Williston Walker, A History of the Congregational Churches in the United States (New York, 1916), 428.
[^27] Ezra Stiles, A Discourse on the Christian Union (Boston, 1761), 129-39, Evans No. 9018. According to Punchard, op. cit., V, 488-89, in 1730 there were 23,000 communicants in the approximate 260 congregations or an average of 88 communicants per Congregational church. In 1820 there were about 100 members per church. The Minutes of the Warren Association, an alliance of Baptist churches in New England, reveal that in 1776, after a period of great growth, there was an average of 52 members per Baptist society. Based upon such figures, the author of this work estimates that in 1760 the average size Congregational church was about 90 and the average size dissenting society was from 40 to 50 members.
[^28] Perry, op. cit., II, 110, 115, 136, 145-46; Chandler, op. cit., 35.
[^29] Nelson R. Burr, "The Episcopal Church and the Dutch in Colonial New York and New Jersey—1664-1784," Historical Magazine, XIX, No. 2 (June, 1950), 91.
[^30] Gaius Jackson Slosser, ed., They Seek a Country (New York: Macmillan Co., 1955), 169; Abdel Ross Wentz, A Basic History of Lutheranism in America (Philadelphia: Muhlenberg Press, 1955), 46.
[^31] Cornelius Van Schrie to Leonard Beels, May 7, 1732, quoted in Ecclesiastical Records, State of New York (7 vols., Albany, 1901-18), IV, 2590.
[^32] Gottlieb Mittelberger, Journey to Pennsylvania, Oscar Handlin and John Clive, ed. and trans. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960), 21-22, 41. Quoted by permission.
[^33] Ibid., 21.
[^34] Frederick Lewis Weis, The Colonial Churches and the Colonial Clergy of the Middle and Southern Colonies; Alexander C. Flick, ed., History of the State of New York (10 vols., New York: Columbia University Press, 1934), III, 69; Wayland F. Dunaway, A History of Pennsylvania (New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1948), 278-95; Elizabeth Waterston, Churches in Delaware During the Revolution (Wilmington, 1925), 109; Samuel Smith, The History of the Colony of Nova-Caesaria or New Jersey (Burlington, 1765), 491-500. Evans No. 10166.
[^35] In 1776 there were about 300 Anglican parishes and missions in the Thirteen Colonies and about 250 clergy, more than half of the ministers residing in Virginia and Maryland. In 1785 there were only 155 Anglican ministers. Walter H. Stowe, "The Clergy of the Episcopal Church in 1785," Historical Magazine, XX, No. 3 (September, 1951), 253; James Thayer Addison, The Episcopal Church in the United States (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1951), 51, 52.
[^36] Addison, op. cit., 60-61, 65-74.
[^37] Ibid., 74.
[^38] Rufus M. Jones, The Later Period of Quakerism (2 vols., London, 1921), II, 715.
[^39] Hastings, op. cit., VI, 4302, 4317-19.
[^40] Herbert M. Morais, Deism in Eighteenth Century America (New York: Russell and Russell, 1960), 98, 120, 154-55.
[^41] Timothy Mather Cooley, Sketches of the Life and Character of the Rev. Lemuel Haynes (New York, 1839), 82-84.
[^42] Morais, op. cit., 156-57.
[^43] Gaustad, op. cit., 162.
[^44] Peter Cartwright, Autobiography of Peter Cartwright, W. P. Strickland, ed. (New York, 1857), 484-86.
[^45] John O. Gross, The Beginnings of American Methodism (New York: Abingdon Press, 1961), 66-69.
[^46] Wade Crawford Barclay, Early American Methodism (2 vols., New York: Board of Missions and Church Extension of the Methodist Church, 1949-50), II, 379-92.
[^47] Abel Stevens, A Compendious History of American Methodism (New York, n.d.), 607; William Warren Sweet, Methodism in American History (New York: Abingdon Press, 1953), 176-77; Gross, op. cit., 82; Historical Statistics of the United States, 229.
[^48] Milton V. Backman, Jr., "Isaac Backus: A Pioneer Champion of Religious Liberty," (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 1959), 173-77, 179, 189-90.
[^49] Charles G. Finney, Lectures on Revivals of Religion (New York, 1835), 238-40, 242-47; Charles G. Finney, Memoirs of Rev. Charles G. Finney (New York, 1876), 77-80, 144-47, 164-65, 288-89.
[^50] The Seventh Census of the United States: 1850 (Washington, 1853), lvii; J.D.S. De Bow, Statistical View of the United States (Washington, 1854), 138; Slosser, op. cit., 138; William Warren Sweet, The Story of Religion in America (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1950), 221; Theodore Maynard, The Story of American Catholicism (New York: Macmillan Co., 1954), 277.
[^51] Henry Otis Dwight, The Centennial History of the American Bible Society (New York, 1916), 8-9, 21-30; Margaret T. Hills, ed., The English Bible in America (New York: American Bible Society and New York Public Library, 1961), xv-xix.
[^52] The Development of the Sunday-School: The Official Report of the Eleventh International Sunday-School Convention (Boston, 1905), 1-4, 7-8, 17.
[^53] Cartwright, op. cit., 45.
[^54] A number of eyewitness accounts of the Cane Ridge Kentucky Camp meeting are published in Catherine C. Cleveland, The Great Revival in the West, 1797-1805 (Chicago, 1916), 75-81, 183-89.
[^55] William Warren Sweet, Religion in the Development of American Culture, 1765-1840 (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1952), 150.
[^56] Cartwright, op. cit., 45-46, 49-51; Autobiography of Rev. James B. Finley, W. P. Strickland, ed. (New York, n.d.), 166-67. One of the best surveys of revivalism in America is Bernard A. Weisberger, They Gathered at the River (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1958).
[^57] Jonathan Edwards, The Works of President Edwards (4 vols., New York, 1849), III, 234-35.
[^58] Quoted in Leonard Woolsy Bacon, A History of American Christianity (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1930), 237. Used by permission.
[^59] Quoted in Bacon, op. cit., 237-38. Used by permission.
[^60] Whitney R. Cross, The Burned-over District (Ithaca. New York: Cornell University Press, 1950). 9-13.
[^61] William Ellery Channing, Memoir of William Ellery Channing (3 vols., Boston, 1848), III, 244.
[^62] Benjamin Rush, An Inquiry into the Effects of Spiritous Liquors (2nd ed., Boston, 1790), 3-4, 12, Evans No. 22864.
[^63] Lyman Beecher, Six Sermons on the Nature, Occasions, Signs, Evils, and Remedy of Intemperance (Boston, 1827), 7, 81, 85-86, 107.
[^64] The standard work on the history of the Temperance Crusade in pre-Civil War America is John A. Krout, The Origins of Prohibition (New York, 1925).
[^65] Sylvester Graham, Lectures on the Science of Human Life (London, n.d.), i-iv.
[^66] Sylvester Graham, The Aesculapian Tablets of the Nineteenth Century (Providence, 1834), vii.
[^67] Ibid., 21-22.
[^68] Herman C. Weber, ed., Yearbook of American Churches, Edition for 1933 (New York: Round Table Press, 1933), 299; Charles C. Cole, Jr., The Social Ideas of the Northern Evangelists (New York: Columbia University Press, 1954), 13-14; Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, Henry Reeve, trans. (2 vols., Cambridge, 1864), I, 388; George L. Kieffer, "The Eleven Go Marching On," Christian Herald, LV, No. 6 (June, 1932), 18.
[^69] Edward Deming Andrews, The People Called Shakers (New York: Oxford University Press, 1953), 5-6, 13, 16, 50, 54, 290-91; Thomas Brown, "Shakers," Rupp's Original History, 656-58.
[^70] One of the most comprehensive summaries (although not the most accurate) of the communistic societies founded in America is William Alfred Hinds, American Communities (Chicago, 1902). See also Bertha M. H. Shambaugh, "Amana Society," Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, James Hastings, ed. (12 vols., New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1951), I; and A. E. Bestor, Jr., Backwoods Utopias: The Sectarian and Owenite Phases of Communitarian Socialism in America: 1663-1829 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1950).
[^71] E. S. Bates, "Jemima Wilkinson," Dictionary of American Biography, XX, 226-27; Hinds, op. cit., 21-25.
[^72] Hinds, op. cit., 355; Andrews, op. cit., 11-12, 97; Daryl Chase, The Early Shakers (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1936), 14, 143.
[^73] Andrews, op. cit., 64-65; Chase, op. cit., 144-48.
[^74] Shambaugh, op. cit., I, 362-63. See also the articles in the Dictionary of American Biography on George Rapp and Christian Metz.
[^75] Shaker theology is discussed in such works as Amos Taylor, A Narrative of the Strange Principles, Conduct and Character of the People Known by the Name of Shakers (Worcester, 1782), Evans No. 17735; [Joseph Meacham], A Concise Statement of the Principles of the Only True Church (Bennington, 1790), Evans No. 22664; and F. W. Evans, Compendium of the Origin, History, Principles, Rules and Regulations, Government, and Doctrines of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing (Albany, 1867).
[^76] Loren E. Lair, The Christian Churches and their Work (St. Louis, Mo.: Bethany Press, 1963), 43-44; W. E. Garrison and A. T. DeGroot, The Disciples of Christ (St. Louis, Mo.: Bethany Press, 1958), 89-92.
[^77] Garrison and DeGroot, op. cit., 106-11, 115-16.
[^78] Ibid., 133-39.
[^79] Ibid., 146-48.
[^80] 80. Ibid., 175-76.
[^81] 81. Royal Humbert, ed., A Compend of Alexander Campbell's Theology (St. Louis: Bethany Press, 1961), 78-79, 85, 208; Alexander Campbell, The Christian System, in Reference to the Union of Christians, and a Restoration of Primitive Christianity, as Plead in the Current Reformation (Cincinnati, 1835), 20.
[^82] 82. Humbert, op. cit., 90-91.
[^83] 83. Ibid., 41-43, 62.
[^84] 84. Ibid., 225.
[^85] 85. Robert Richardson, Memoirs of Alexander Campbell (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1868), II, 481; Humbert, op. cit., 104-05.
[^86] 86. Humbert, op. cit., 130 n.
[^87] 87. Campbell, op. cit., 52-54.
[^88] 88. Ibid., 55-58; Humbert, op. cit., 195-99.
[^89] 89. Millennial Harbinger, Vol. I, No. 8 (August 2, 1830), 355-58; Campbell, op. cit., 64-66.
[^90] 90. Garrison and DeGroot, op. cit., 207-11.
