Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER SIX

The Unchurched Americans' Quest for Truth

The story of religion in colonial America is one of striking contrasts. It is a history of faith and of religious negligence, of bigotry and toleration, of uniformity and pluralism, and of the public support of religion and the separation of church and state. Religious conditions varied in each colony; and in some of the colonies, conditions changed considerably during the long colonial period. Therefore, generalizations are sometimes misleading and incorrectly describe conditions which existed in vast areas of the mainland colonies, but, in order to summarize conditions of the past, some generalizations are necessary.

I. Religious Zeal in Early America

One important characteristic of life in the Thirteen Colonies was that members of Christian churches of that era were more sincerely interested in their faith and the scriptures than most Christians of the mid-twentieth century. Possibly they were not more virtuous in many respects than citizens of today, but they were more "God-fearing" and conscious of religion. More lived in fear of displeasing God or being assigned to a hell of everlasting fire. Religion pervaded the lives of many active Christians, and few members of churches of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries regarded religion as a mere Sunday observance or as a social, economic or political tool. Moreover, because of the lack of recreational facilities and government buildings, the meeting house served as the social, political and religious center of many communities.

Education in the colonies, as in the Old World, was closely associated with religion in the colonial era. Many teachers were clergymen, lay readers, or candidates for the ministry. In Virginia, many students were educated in the homes of Anglican clergymen; and in Massachusetts and Connecticut, public education was partially instituted to combat the evil influence of Satan. Although few subjects were taught in the colonial schools, there was an emphasis on the four R's (reading, 'riting, 'rithmetic, and religion). The Bible was a popular text; and in New England, while children learned to read, they memorized terse Biblical phrases. In the South, children were given the Anglican prayer book to study, while in the Middle Colonies, English Quakers, Anglicans and Calvinists established parochial schools where children became thoroughly acquainted with church doctrines and practices.

The literature of the colonial period was also permeated with religion. Although the first settlers brought few material goods to the New World, many carried the Bible to america; and the Holy Writ became the most popular book in the colonies. Believing that the sacred work was all-inclusive and infallible, many early Americans studied the scriptures with faithful regularity. Other religious books were also popular. In 1700, about two-thirds of all works published in this land were either apologies, sermons, or other works centering on religious themes. A half century later, one-third of all books published might also be classified as religious literature, the other two-thirds primarily being almanacs, government publications, newspapers and political treatises.

Throughout the colonial period, the highest per cent of church attendance and membership was in New England. Partially because the Puritans were a sifted element of English society, religion played a more important role in the founding of these colonies than those planted in other sections. Moreover, many areas of New England were colonized by groups, led or at least accompanied by a minister. Homes, shops and meeting houses were erected near a public green, and this agricultural village or community form of settlement provided advantages in defense, education and religion.

The legislatures in several New England colonies stimulated church attendance by enacting laws requiring all inhabitants to attend services on the Lord's day and on all special fast and thanksgiving days. In Plymouth Colony, a mid-seventeenth century law prescribed a fine of ten shillings for failure to attend church without a valid excuse, while in Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut the fine was five shillings. Prior to the American Revolution the penalty was increased in Massachusetts to ten shillings, but was not imposed unless an individual failed to attend church for an entire month. [^1]

The traditional view emphasizing religious zeal in early America does not portray correctly the religious life of the average colonist. A generalization that more accurately describes conditions in pre-nineteenth century America is that organized religion was neglected. Settlers were indifferent towards colonial Christianity, neglecting to observe the Sabbath and to study conscientiously the scriptures, failing to utter regularly individual or family prayers, and seldom attending worship services. [^2]

II. The De-Christianization of the Southern Population

The Dispersal of the Settlers

Many factors contributed to the creation of a spiritual vacuum (as far as organized religion was affected) in the South prior to 1800. When Jamestown was founded, North America was a vast frontier which lay open for settlement. The first permanent English settlers seized their opportunities, obtained land, and scattered into the Virginia frontier. This dispersal of population was greatly accelerated by the failure of industry, the successful production of tobacco, and the creation of a demand for this product in the mother country. After sailing up one of the rivers and locating a convenient shipping point, the first Virginians established their farms near the waterway. The land was prepared for sowing, and tobacco was planted for four or five years in succession on the same field. When the fertility of the soil was exhausted, new lands were cleared. The availability of the land and the advantages derived from owning and farming large areas precipitated the appearance of isolated farmsteads. Even the indentured servents, after complying with the provisions of their contracts, obtained property and began farming where few settlers resided. "There was hardly such a sight as a cluster of three dwellings" in Virginia in the late seventeenth century, wrote George Bancroft, a noted historian of the young republic. Even Jamestown, the capital, had but a state house, one church, and eighteen private homes. [^3]

In other parts of the South, similar developments occurred. Tobacco plantations emerged in Maryland; and in the deep South, great land holders developed an economy based on the production of rice and indigo. Consequently, in the eighteenth century, the Southern coastal plain was divided into large estates, and small isolated farmsteads dotted the uplands or piedmont region. In 1700, Charleston, South Carolina, was the largest town in the South, with an estimated population of only 2,000; and at the end of the colonial period, this town was the only community in all the South with a population of over 10,000.

The Large Parishes

As the settlers dispersed into the frontier, they lost contact with organized religion. Many families lived far from the home of a minister and a meeting house. Such individuals found it impossible, impractical, or inconvenient to attend services. Some parishes in Virginia were so extensive that parishioners lived fifty miles or more from the nearest church. Based upon reports submitted by ministers of twenty-nine parishes in 1724, the average size parish in the Old Dominion was about thirty-five miles by twenty miles. Although meeting houses were about ten to twelve miles apart along the coast, there were seldom more than two small chapels in some of the frontier parishes which were 100 to 120 miles in length. [^4] A few conscientious families traveled five or six miles to attend services, but many who lived more than three miles from church neglected to attend any meetings. Since the legislature decreed that ministers were to be paid an annual salary of 16,000 pounds of tobacco, the tobacco being collected by public taxation, the Virginians recognized that reductions in the size of the parishes resulted in increased taxation. If all parishes would have been reduced to a size which would have enabled most Virginians to live near a meeting house, parishioners would have been unable to pay adequately for the support of the church and the minister.

Large parishes not only prevailed in Virginia but in all other parts of the South. The reports from twenty-two parishes in Maryland in 1724 indicate that the average size parish was thirty-five miles by fourteen miles, but since a number of the frontier parishes were vacant and were therefore not included in the report, the majority of the parishes were undoubtedly larger than the accumulated accounts indicate. [^5] In North Carolina, one parish was about 150 miles in length and 150 in breadth; another was 50 miles by 100 miles; and a few other parishes were almost as large. [^6]

The problems resulting from the dispersed population in the large colonial parishes of the South were accurately described by many of the eighteenth century clergy. The revivalist Samuel Davies complained that the inhabitants of North Carolina were so scattered that only a few individuals could assemble conveniently in any one locality. [^7] An Anglican minister reported in 1768 that many inhabitants of North Carolina were "utterly destitute of any public religious worship." [^8] And a rector of Virginia in 1724, Rev. Forbes, testified that his parish was so large, being sixty miles by eleven miles, that he was unable to determine the number of families residing in the area in which he was the sole spiritual leader. "I have found by long experience," Forbes reported, that the extensive parishes prevent me from performing "my pastoral office as I ought, altho' I have spared neither cost nor labor on the attempts and endeavors thereof." Forbes further states that while services were conducted in the meeting house twice every three weeks, services were usually held but once a month in the remote areas of the parish. Sometimes, he would travel fifty miles to preach in one of the settler's homes, but because of inclement weather or other reasons, few would be in attendance. Discouraged, he would ride home without providing the rural farms with spiritual nourishment. [^9]

The Shortage of Ministers and Meeting Houses

Another reason for the neglect of organized religion in the South during the colonial period was that there existed a dire shortage of ministers to supply the needs of the inhabitants; and the settlers were not accustomed to organizing and conducting services without the direction of an ordained pastor. In 1661, about one-fifth of the approximate fifty parishes in Virginia were without a rector. [^10] In a few of these vacant parishes lay readers were appointed to read the services; but in many others, the people discontinued attending church, the habit persisting after a minister was finally settled. By the end of the colonial period, most parishes in Virginia were furnished ministers, but even then, because of the large size of some of the parishes and because the masses had become accustomed to worldly pursuits on the Sabbath, vast numbers failed to unite in worship on the Lord's Day.

Although in 1700 there were about forty-six meeting houses of various denominations in Maryland (including private homes employed for services), there were few religious leaders to serve the 25,000 inhabitants. It has been estimated that at least 15,000 settlers were not affiliated with any religion. Of those who possibly claimed membership in a Christian church, about half or 5,000 were Anglicans, about 2,000 were Quakers, approximately 2,000 were Roman Catholics and less than 600 were Presbyterians. Most of these Christians, however, were unable to attend services, for there were only eight rectors available to serve 5,000 Anglicans and merely seven priests to direct the spiritual affairs of 2,000 rural Catholic farmers. [^11]

In North Carolina, where the Anglican church was by law the tax-supported state religion during the first seven decades of the eighteenth century, there were no settled Anglican ministers nor organized body of Christians other than Quakers until after 1700; and prior to 1730, there were never more than two Anglican clergy in the colony at one time. From 1730 to 1746 there were probably no more than three Anglican ministers serving the people simultaneously. Although conditions improved in that colony in the years immediately prior to the Revolution, when the war erupted there were only eleven Anglican priests settled in North Carolina. In the years immediately preceding the War for Independence, Quakers, Presbyterians, and Baptists established churches in that colony, but these denominations also failed to prosper. [^12]

Conditions were also not favorable for the growth of organized religion in South Carolina in the colonial era. When the Church of England became the state religion in that colony in 1706 there were only two Anglican meeting houses, five Huguenot churches, one combination Presbyterian and Independent church, one Congregational, one Baptist, and one Quaker meeting house. Seventeen years later, the colony was divided into thirteen parishes, but four were not supplied with Anglican clergymen; and in 1776, there were just twenty ministers of the Church of England in South Carolina. Few living in the frontier attended the services of this church; and although some of the rural farmers united with the Presbyterians, Baptists, or Lutherans, most of the backwoodsmen of South Carolina were unchurched. [^13]

Partially because of the lack of spiritual leadership and religious facilities, organized religion was also in a feeble state in colonial Georgia. In 1758, twenty-five years after James Oglethorpe arrived with the first immigrants, there were only about six small meeting houses and six ministers in that colony. To advance religion among the settlers, in the mid-eighteenth century the legislature divided the colony into eight parishes and decreed that the Anglican church was to be the tax-supported state religion. But the legislation did not produce the desired results. For years, no successful attempts were made to erect new Anglican chapels in Georgia. In 1770, there was an Anglican meeting house and rector in only two towns, Savannah and Augusta. The other religions also failed to prosper, for at the end of the colonial period, there were only two Lutheran churches, four small Presbyterian meeting houses, and one Congregational church in the colony. In addition, a few Baptists and Quakers worshipped in the frontier and a few Jews sporadically worshipped in Savannah. [^14] Consequently, at the end of the colonial period, in a colony with a predominantly rural population of more than 35,000, there were less than a dozen small meeting houses, so that probably less than 1,000 or three per cent of the inhabitants attended church regularly.

Problems Resulting from the Failure to Establish an Anglican Episcopacy in America

Another factor which impeded the progress of the dominant religion of the South was the failure to send an Anglican bishop to America. Members of the Church of England believed that they possessed Christ's delegated authority by means of an uninterrupted succession of authority dating back to the age of the apostles. Since they also taught that the power to ordain was reserved to the bishops, and there were no Anglican bishops in the colonies, members could not secure ordination in this land. In order to become a priest, a colonist had to travel to England, a long, hazardous, and costly journey. One minister concluded that of fifty-two men who sailed to England for ordination from the northern colonies, ten died, discouraging some aspirants from attempting the journey. Since the salaries of many clergy were deficient and the work strenuous, there was not a sufficient number of ministerial candidates from the colonies to fill the many vacancies in Anglican parishes. The fact that there were no spiritual leaders comparable to bishops also meant the Anglican clergy in America were independent of each other. There was a noticeable need in that church for increased supervision of the clergy and for unified direction, advisement, and encouragement of the ministers. Although the general character of the vast majority of the Anglican clergy in this land was respectable, the fact that there was no bishop made it more difficult for the settlers to remove the few clergy whose lives were "notoriously infamous." [^15]

Because there was no bishop, members of the Church of England were also deprived of the blessing which they believed accompanied confirmation. After an individual reached maturity, the church taught that he should renew the vow made for him at baptism, ratifying and confirming the same in person and promising to do all that which his God-fathers and God-mothers undertook for him. Following this promise, the bishop placed his hands on the convert's head, prayed, and blessed him. Since this practice was deleted from the Anglican church in America, many members of that church failed to dedicate their lives to Christ or to consider seriously the covenants which had been made for them at baptism.

Secular Control of the Anglican Church

The secular control of the Anglican church also contributed to its weakness. The vestry, which consisted of the local aristocrats who created a closed corporation, regulated the affairs of the parish. They possessed the power to hire ministers and recommend dismissals. Since they collected the ecclesiastical tobacco tax to pay the minister's salary, they could pay the clergy with an inferior quality, thus reducing their income. Ministers were not prone to preach repentance to the men who maintained such extensive economic power over them.

The Character of the Colonists

The character of the colonists partially explains the reasons for the neglect of religion in the South. Because the elite of Europe, which included the best educated and wealthiest individuals, were generally satisfied with conditions in their communities and were unwilling to face the dangers and hardships accompanying colonization of the American wilderness, few members of this class migrated to the Thirteen Colonies. Most of the settlers came to America as indentured servants, redemptioneers or Negro slaves. Some were kidnapped from the streets of London; others were enlisted from the ranks of the perennially unemployed. America provided these people with unusual economic opportunities, for in Europe there was a shortage of land and an abundance of workers, but in the New World land was plentiful and laborers were in demand. In the new environment, countless peasants were lifted into the middle class. Since most of the immigrants were of the lower class, they were not granted educational opportunities in the Old World and failed to gain an appreciation of the values of education. After securing their own farms, most Americans became engrossed in materialistic objectives, refusing to support adequately public or private schools. Therefore, throughout the colonial period education was neglected in this country; and since many frontiersmen failed to learn to read or to derive pleasure from reading, Bible study was also neglected. At the same time, in many families, deep spiritual meditation and individual and family prayers seldom occurred. Man's spiritual needs were seldom nourished.

Instead of esteeming the colonists for their piety, European travelers to this land frequently referred to the early Americans as the uncultured and "inferior" of Europe who failed to develop an appreciation of religion or the finer aspects of life. Prior to the Revolution, the South Carolina backwoodsmen had a reputation of vulgarity of thought and speech, of irreligion and immorality, and of intoxication and lawlessness. [^16] Referring to the farmers of North Carolina, Samuel Davies declared that they were "generally such uncultivated Savages, that there was little Prospect of doing them much Service without continuing a long Time among them to teach them the first Rudiments of Christianity." [^17] And in a letter submitted to the leaders of the Church of England residing in the mother country, an eighteenth century clergyman of Virginia complained: [^18]

The inconvenience and prejudice of such large bounded Parishes are very great. For tho' the People are very ignorant and undisciplin'd, the Word of God can be preached but seldom among them; the use of the Sabbath day is converted by them into some diversion or worldly Business; they cannot be catechized so frequently as their need requires; their sick cannot be visited.

The State of Religion in the South

Throughout the colonial period, church membership was probably lower in the South than in the other sections of America. In 1700, in a southern population of approximately 105,000, the organized bodies of Christians numbered about 125. Over 70 per cent of the congregations were Anglican, a number whom were destitute of spiritual leadership and over 90 per cent of the southern churches at that time were located in Virginia and Maryland. Fifty years later, there were about 350 congregations in a southern population of over 500,000 two-fifths of which were Negroes. Of these bodies, approximately 170 were Anglican, almost 90 were Quaker, about 45 were Presbyterian, and 25 were Baptist, while the Lutherans, German Reformed and Roman Catholics were each represented by approximately 15 societies. Although it is impossible to determine accurately membership figures in the colonial period, an analysis of late eighteenth and early nineteenth century records reveal that the average congregations of most churches ranged from thirty to ninety members. Based upon such averages, throughout most of the eighteenth century only four or five per cent of the southern colonists were members and regularly attended Christian churches. [^19]

III. The Neglect of Organized Religion and the Decline of Piety in New England

Strict Requirements for Membership in the Congregational Churches

Although the early New England colonists gained a reputation of piety, virtue and faithful church activity, various factors were responsible for the de-Christianization of most of the immigrants who settled in New England. In the colonial period, individuals seeking membership were not admitted automatically into the dominant religion of that section. Candidates for membership were first rigorously examined by the elders, who attempted to determine if the individuals had been elected by God and were living a Christian life. Then they were presented to the main body of a local Congregational church. Although the normal procedure was for the candidates to relate their converting experience to the congregation, a few timid souls of the fairer sex were occasionally permitted to write a testimony which was then read to the "saints." Finally, the members voted to accept or reject such individuals into the church by the usual sign, the uplifted right arm. After approval by the congregation, the converts were invited to sign the church covenant or articles of faith, after which the individuals were numbered among the "covenant-people of God," securing the rights and privileges of membership. Although the practice was modified in some congregations in the eighteenth century, individuals today are accepted into Congregational churches by the friendly and spontaneous vote of the membership. In the colonial period, however, the procedure for membership prevented many from joining this church. For various reasons, some individuals refused to comply with the customary procedure. A few New Englanders attended church regularly, but were not numbered among the elect. Others did not receive a spiritual experience, preventing them from enjoying the advantages of membership; and children were not enumerated as church members in the Congregational church until they became communicant members.

The Frequent Excommunications

In addition to the strict requirements for membership, the exacting behavior required of all saints caused some individuals to become unchurched. When members succumbed to temptation or neglected to attend meetings, they were reproved and urged to repent, but when a change of life was not visible, the sinners were excommunicated, their names being stricken from the records of the church. The frequency of excommunications is evidence that many men and women fell into disrepute, especially because of the vice of alcoholism and sexual irregularities. Many Americans, reared in the rugged frontier environment, failed to conform to the pattern of living prescribed by the New England religious leaders and were content to remain outside the church. [^20]

Religious Uniformity and Bigotry

Another factor precipitating a neglect of organized religion in New England was the religious solidarity established in the early seventeenth century Puritan colonies and the religious bigotry which continued into the eighteenth century. Prior to 1760 there were few non-Congregational meeting houses in Massachusetts and Connecticut, so that when individuals rejected the Calvinism proclaimed from the pulpit, the recalcitrants had little or no opportunity to worship in another church. Many New Englanders, therefore, who sincerely believed in God and the Holy Writ were not included on the membership records of any denomination.

The Rural Population

The scattering of the population from agricultural villages to the American wilderness also created in New England conditions which deprived many of an opportunity to attend services. Desiring their own farms, many sons of the first settlers moved to the outskirts of the communities. There they settled, erected homes, and raised their families. As the years passed, the number of New England colonists who lived on isolated farmsteads increased. Since many found it inconvenient or impossible to travel to church, these pioneers, like the frontiersmen of the South, neglected organized religion, and their children were reared in an environment that was hostile to the advancement of religiosity.

Materialism Plagues the Churches

Coinciding with the movement from the villages to the farms was the transformation of many coastal villages into commercial towns. During this transformation, there was a noticeable change in the religious climate of such communities. By the end of the seventeenth century, wealth, accumulated by trade and fishing, replaced Congregationalism in importance in many communities; and a spirit of worldliness became more evident than the piety exemplified by the first generation of American Puritans. The clergy were especially sensitive to the changing environment. "When men have prosperity, outward riches, and know not what to do with them, besides making gods of them," Rev. Eleazar Mather warned, "this is a sign that the Lord's gracious presence is not among a people. . . . Outward prosperity is a worm at the root of godliness, so that Religion dies when the World thrives." [^21] Another Congregational minister, Samuel Torrey, predicted that the pursuit of worldly gain would lead to a decline of religion, arguing that such a decline had already commenced. "The first Design of New England was purely Religious," Torrey conjectured, but after the first settlers arrived, they encountered the "powerful and prevailing influence of a worldly degenerating Spirit" and "soon forgot their main and true interests." Although he admitted that some denied his observations, he testified that "it is a general concession amongst us, that we are in a declining Apostasizing state, and therefore that Reformation is necessary." [^22] In 1683, a few years after advocating a reformation, Torrey published another tract, A Plea for the Life of Dying Religion, which reveals that he was not convinced that the genuine repentance which he had urged had occurred. "Because of Worldliness, Profaneness, Sensuality," Torrey decreed, religion is dying in the churches. It is also dying in the families, he concluded, "through the neglect of the religious Service and Worship of God, and of the religious Education of Children and Youth." [^23]

The apparent decline of religionism continued in New England throughout the eighteenth century. The increased expansion of population into the wilderness and the growth of materialism in the commercial towns were accompanied by other decaying forces, such as the advancement of science and the growth of rationalism. Eighteenth century reformers continued to bemoan the fact that the values, objectives, and habits of the Puritans were degenerating. Rationalism, it was argued, was superseding faith in men's reasoning process. The clergy linked deism with atheism and remonstrated that the increased popularity of the Arminian concept of free will challenged classical Calvinism. Heresy, indifference, skepticism, profanity, immorality, and Sabbath breaking, some Congregationalists concluded, were destroying the zion of New England. [^24]

Theological Controversies Weakened the Congregational Church

Meanwhile, theological controversies raged within the dominant church, precipitating contention, defection, and schism. As religious enthusiasm declined and as the number of unconverted increased, liberal Congregationalists concluded that revisions of church policies were necessary, otherwise church membership might be reduced to an ineffectual minority. The first generation of Puritans had insisted that only covenant members and their children should be admitted into the church, but the question arose, how far did the covenant extend? Was membership to be limited to only the immediate children of the saints or did it extend to other generations? In other words, Puritans inquired, if a child of a saint fails to become converted, do his children automatically become eligible for membership? Some answered the query in the affirmative and others denied the covenant extended beyond one's immediate family. The controversy finally resulted in a compromise known as the "Half-Way Covenant." This plan, adopted by the Synod of 1662, and accepted by most congregations, permitted children to be baptized whose grandparents had been members but whose parents had not been able or willing to bear their testimony of God's merciful saving influence in their lives. Although such children could be baptized under the covenant, they became partial members, for they were denied the communion and had no authority to deliberate or vote in church affairs until after they became full members following their conversion. Not all the local churches endorsed the recommendation of the synod. Some congregations condemned the promise as a detrimental innovation, and one body of Congregationalists of New Haven Colony, fled the argumentative debates and settled in New Jersey in hopes of securing freedom from such "abominable" innovations.

As the years passed, the privilege of partaking the communion grew in importance. Many of the partial members, like their parents, could give no evidence of their election and were consequently denied the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. After the numbers eligible for this rite sank to a minority in some congregations, liberals recommended another alteration of Congregationalism. In 1700, Solomon Stoddard, an influential minister of Northampton, Massachusetts, proposed that the apparently righteous among the ungenerated be allowed to approach the Lord's table with the converted. The plan was another driving cataclysm into the core of the primitive purity of the church. "Mr. Stoddard's Way" was vigorously denounced by the conservatives. With diplomatic skill, Stoddard defended his position by insisting that the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was a means of conversion. The orthodox replied that the traditional practice of reserving the ceremony for the sanctified should not be repealed. For decades, Congregationalists of New England were involved in a bitter theological controversy, but Stoddard's innovation proved to be too popular to be denied. During the first half of the eighteenth century, to the dismay of many pious Puritans, most Congregational churches voted to adopt Stoddard's revision. [^25]

Other innovations occurred in the eighteenth century which precipitated discord. In some congregations, ministers permitted individuals to become members without insisting that they bear their testimony, and some congregations united under the supervision and direction of associations which created a semi-Presbyterian system in sections of New England.

Following the Great Awakening of the early 1740's, dissension reached a climax. Some Congregationalists desired to return to the pure religion of the original colonists, separated from the Congregational church in their community, and organized a new religion, the Strict Congregational or Separate church. Therefore, many voices of discontent were organized into one harmonious strain.

Summary of Religious Conditions in Colonial New England

Although it is impossible to determine precisely the membership or the numbers who attended regularly the worship services in New England, a fairly accurate estimate can be determined based upon statistics which are available. In 1650, there were about sixty-five congregations of Christians in New England, and with the exception of about two Baptist societies located in Rhode Island, all the churches were Congregational. At that time there was about one congregation for every three hundred inhabitants. In 1700, the ratio was about one congregation for every 550 settlers; and with the exception of a few Baptists and Quaker societies principally located in Rhode Island the vast majority of the churches were Congregational. [^26] During the next six decades there was no appreciable change in the religious complexion. In 1760, there were approximately 530 Congregational societies (including a few Presbyterian churches) in New England, about 50 Anglican, 40 Quaker and 40 Baptist societies, making a total of 660 organized bodies of Christians or one congregation for almost every 665 inhabitants. At the same time, there were about 560 ministers (including one representative for each Quaker society) in this population of 440,000 or one minister for every 785 citizens. Based on an average membership of each Congregational church of 90 and the other churches of 45, New England church membership in 1760 was approximately 12 per cent. [^27] Other than a remarkable growth in the membership of the Baptist faith, the ecclesiastical situation continued to remain the same in New England during the decade and a half preceding the American Revolution, but because of the population increase, this Baptist growth did not alter significantly the per cent of those who regularly attended church.

IV. The Religious Vacuum in the Middle Colonies

Religious Pluralism in a Rural Population

The greatest diversity of nationalities, cultures, and religious groups in the New World existed in the Middle Colonies (New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware). In fact, one of the world's greatest melting pots of races and religions was in this area stretching from English Maryland to Puritan New England. While the English were settling the Chesapeake region and New England, the Dutch, followed by the Scandinavians, moved into the fertile valleys adjacent to the Hudson and Delaware rivers. Following the Interregnum, when the English concentrated on colonizing this region, they attempted to promote settlement without draining the population of the mother country, so the English sponsored the Scotch-Irish and German migration. In the early eighteenth century, vast numbers of immigrants from northern Ireland and Germany, consisting primarily of individuals who were seeking to improve their economic positions, arrived in Philadelphia, Baltimore, New York and other near-by port towns and migrated inland in search of free or inexpensive land.

No one religion dominated this section as did the Congregationalists of New England or the Anglicans of the South. After 1664, freedom of conscience was a celebrated characteristic of this region so that members of various faiths were attracted to these colonies. The Dutch Reformed religion became the strongest denomination in the Hudson and Mohawk valleys, in the western end of Long Island, and in central and northeastern New Jersey, but was weak outside this area. Throughout the colonial period, the Quakers remained the dominant religious group in the three original eastern counties of Pennsylvania and in two southwestern counties of New Jersey and some sections of Delaware. They were also a respectable minority in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, but elsewhere the Friends were not a major denomination. German Protestants of various denominations (such as German Reformed, Mennonite and Amish) dominated central Pennsylvania and the Presbyterians became a major religion in western Pennsylvania. Although a few religions were dominant in some sections, in all parts of the Middle Colonies religious diversity prevailed.

Because of a combination of religious pluralism and a scattered population, the spiritual leaders of the Middle Colonies found it difficult, if not impossible, to serve their parishioners. In many areas, there were not sufficient numbers of any one faith to erect a meeting house or support adequately a preacher, resulting in the failure to organize any formal religion in the community. The problems which confronted Anglican ministers in the South were compounded in the Middle Colonies, for Anglicans lived further from one another in the colonies north of Maryland; and with the exception of the lower counties of New York, there were no provisions for the public support of that or any other religion. Since the Church of England was the public supported religion in the mother country, members of this denomination were not accustomed to contributing large sums voluntarily to the church. Consequently, few Anglican meeting houses were erected in this section so when Anglican immigrants arrived in the Middle Colonies most located their homes in areas where there was no church of their choice. The problems of the German and Scotch-Irish immigrants were similar to those of the English. On rural farms in the American wilderness, most of these immigrants found it difficult to organize, becoming another segment of the great de-Christianized population of colonial America.

Shortage of Spiritual Leaders

As in parts of the South, there was also a dire shortage of ministers in this section. Because of their scattered flock, the work was even more fatiguing for most of the pastors in the Middle Colonies than those living south of Delaware and the pay was less. Although the Anglican ministers in the North were subsidized by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, these clergymen continually complained about the high cost of living and about their frustrating efforts to collect subscriptions or parish pledges from the people. Most colonists were poor and had very little cash, and in some areas people gave no more than a pitiful donation to the clergy. Many northern Anglican ministers struggled to keep alive, some being forced to teach school or engage in other economic pursuits in order to support their families. Anglican ministers, therefore, were not attracted to this region and many left a few years after arriving. Throughout the colonial period, many parishes where there were Anglican meeting houses were void of rectors. In 1717, there were ten or eleven Anglican churches in Pennsylvania, but only three permanent ministers resided there. In 1725, there were only five ministers of that faith who instructed Anglicans in only seven of the fifteen congregations which had been organized; and in 1767, there were twenty-nine churches but only nine Anglican clergymen in the combined colonies of Pennsylvania and Delaware. The situation was similar in New Jersey, for in 1767, there were twenty-one Anglican churches and congregations, but eleven were destitute of ministers and only five pastors served the other ten congregations. Recognizing the problem, ministers complained frequently that when parishes were vacant, members drifted from the church; and although a few united with other denominations, others became "profane Sabbatarians." [^28]

Members of the Dutch and German Reformed churches also found it difficult to attract and retain ministers, for in 1664, there were thirteen Dutch Reformed churches and only six ministers; in 1740, sixty-five congregations and nineteen pastors; and in 1771, over one hundred churches but only thirty-four ministers. [^29] Meanwhile, the demand for German Reformed pastors in America far exceeded the supply and many members of this church drifted into other religions or became inactive because of the lack of spiritual direction.

Except for the Quakers who maintained no salaried nor ordained ministers, and the Baptists who ordained all members considered worthy to preach, the other major religious groups in the Middle Colonies failed to provide the people adequately with spiritual leadership. The Lutherans and Presbyterians insisted that since ministers had the responsibility of interpreting and explaining the "Word of God," they should be well educated in accredited institutions of higher learning; and there were few theological schools in America to train men for service in these churches. Moreover, not many Presbyterians nor Lutheran clergy migrated with the other immigrants; and since the members of these churches seldom acted independently to institute meetings, the vast majority of the Presbyterian and Lutheran immigrants became unchurched. In 1717, there were only seventeen Presbyterian ministers in the Thirteen Colonies. Eighty-two years later there were 177 clergy, but meanwhile, most of the Presbyterian settlers had lost contact with organized religion. One competent historian estimated that from 200,000 to 250,000 Presbyterians migrated to America during the colonial period and that in 1789, less than 15,000 were members of Presbyterian societies. In that same year, there were not more than forty Lutheran ministers in the United States and only a small fraction of the former members of this church had been gathered into congregations. [^30]

The State of Religion in the Middle Colonies

The church members of colonial America recognized the problems created by the shortage of ministers and meeting houses and continually complained that organized religion was being neglected in many sections of the New World. In 1732, one colonial observer wrote that many people in New York "were born, and grew up, in the woods and know little or anything else except what belongs to farming. Indeed," he insisted, "it can hardly be believed what trouble and toil a minister has, to introduce any civility into these places where there never has been a minister. . . . Many people here are like the wild horses of the woods which have never yet been broken." [^31] Another eighteenth century writer who left us his impressions of the spiritual vacuum in early America was a German school teacher who resided in Pennsylvania for four years. According to this German visitor: [^32]

Many people do not reveal their own particular beliefs to anyone. Furthermore there are many hundreds of adults who not only are unbaptized, but who do not even want baptism. . . . Some do not even believe in the existence of a true God or Devil, Heaven or Hell, Salvation or Damnation, the Resurrection of the Dead, the Last Judgment and Eternal Life, but think that everything visible is of merely natural origin. . . .

When young people not raised in the fundamentals of religion must go into service [indentured servitude] for many years with such free-thinkers and unbelievers and are not permitted by these people to attend any church or school, especially when they live far away from them, then such innocent souls do not reach a true knowledge of the Divine and are brought up like heathen or Indians. . . .

Many pray neither in the morning nor in the evening, nor before or after meals. In the homes of such people are not to be found any devotional books, much less a Bible.

The German visitor in America was also aware of the religious pluralism of the Middle Colonies, for he wrote that "In Pennsylvania there exist so many varieties of doctrines and sects that it is impossible to name them all." [^33] An enumeration of the most popular denominations of this region clearly reflects the nature of this religious melting pot. At the end of the colonial period, there were approximately 275 Presbyterian societies in the Middle Colonies, but the average congregation was very small, possibly totaling thirty members; and because of the shortage of Presbyterian ministers, services were not held every Sunday in all these societies. The Lutherans had established the second largest number of societies, about 185, but there was a greater shortage of Lutheran ministers to serve the people than prevailed in the Presbyterian church. Meanwhile, the Quakers had established about 130 societies, some of which were very large, followed by the German Reformed with 150, the Dutch Reformed with 120, the Anglicans with approximately 100, the Baptists with 90, the Mennonites with 50 and the Roman Catholics with only about 25 congregations. As in other sections, the membership of the different churches varied, averaging from 30 to 100 members and based upon such averages, about 63,000 settlers or about ten per cent of the inhabitants of the Middle Colonies were members and periodically attended church. [^34]

Religious Conditions in America in 1776

According to the author's estimates about eight per cent or 200,000 settlers in this land in 1776 were members and attended church regularly. Approximately 45 per cent of the population were children; and since most Protestants did not enumerate this large group in their membership figures, children are classified as unchurched in the pre-Civil War membership figures cited in this work. If, however, children were omitted from the population figures, 15 per cent of the adults in 1776 would be regarded as active church members. And if Negroes were excluded from the population (20 per cent of the population being Negroes), 19 per cent of the adult White population would be designated as active church members.

The relative size of the major denominations in America in 1776 is indicated by the following estimates:

ESTIMATED

APPROXIMATE NUMBER OF ACTIVE

DENOMINATION MEETING HOUSES MEMBERSHIP

New Eng. Mid. Col. South Total

__________________________________________________________

Totals 1008 1190 879 3077 200,000

Estimated Active

Membership in

Each Section 80,000 63,000 57,000

Estimated Population

(White and Negro)

in 1776 647,000 640,000 1,143,000 2,430,000

Per cent of

Membership Per

Section and in all

the Thirteen

Colonies in 12% 10% 5% 8%

V. Decline of Membership and Spiritual Zeal following the Revolution

The Critical Period in the History of the Anglican Church in America

During and immediately following the American Revolution, there was a decline in church attendance and religiosity in the new nation. The religion which suffered most as a result of the ravages of the war was the Church of England, and this religion was almost destroyed. Even though most of the members and clergy of this denomination supported the patriot cause, probably a larger per cent of the divines and members of this faith supported the British cause than could be found in any other prominent religious group; and consequently, this church was branded with a mark of opprobrium and called the Tory church. Angered patriots, inflamed by the holocaust of war, periodically unleased their passion by attacking Anglican ministers, members and meeting houses. As a result of this persecution and threats of attack, many Anglicans fled the country and many meeting houses were burned or demolished and were not rebuilt. Slightly more than half or 84 of the 159 pre-Revolutionary War Anglican clergy of Virginia and Maryland left these states or died during the conflict. At the same time, all the Anglican ministers of Georgia and New York emigrated and only one Anglican church remained open throughout the war in New Jersey. When the treaty of Paris was signed, bringing the war to a definite conclusion, there were only five Anglican ministers in Massachusetts, one in New Hampshire and none in Rhode Island. In viewing all the states after the war, approximately half of all the Anglican parishes were destitute of ministers. [^35]

During this most critical period in the history of the Church of England, this religion suffered a major financial crisis. Since all the Anglican establishments were abolished during the war, the members of this church were required to finance their religion without government assistance. Anglicans of the South were not accustomed to supporting their church solely by voluntary offerings. Then, in 1784, an economic disaster struck the Anglicans of the North, for in that year the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts discontinued its financial support of the northern ministers and missionaries. Consequently, at a time when there was a dire need of hiring new ministers and rebuilding meeting houses, the Anglican leaders in this country encountered the acute problems of the lack of funds and insufficient revenue.

Meanwhile, many Anglicans discontinued attending church. Some refused to participate in a service which included prayers for the individual labeled by the popular Thomas Paine as the "royal brute of Great Britain." Because of the fear of being classified as a Tory, others neglected their services. Some Anglicans joined other Christian churches but many drifted into an indifference towards organized religion.

A Re-organization—From the Church of England to the Protestant Episcopal Church

The problems of the Anglicans were partially solved by the re-organization of the church under the competent leadership of William White. At a general convention held in Philadelphia in 1784, the name of the church was changed to the Protestant Episcopal church, thereby eliminating one objectionable feature of the religion, the name England. Other conferences followed, the most important being the General Convention of 1789. In the same year that Americans framed a new national constitution, Episcopalians in this land adopted a constitution, a set of canons, and a Book of Common Prayer. A triennial General Convention, consisting of representatives of the churches, clergy and laymen, became the supreme governing body of the church. In 1808, the bishops became an upper house of the legislative convention while other clergy and laymen united to form a lower house, thereby establishing a government in harmony with the adopted American ideal of representative government. The Episcopalians also revised the English Prayer Book, eliminating all references to the king, and prepared an articles of religion which was almost identical with the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England, the primary difference being a modernization of the language. Therefore, the most significant alteration in the religion resulting from the reorganization was the change in church polity. The theological conservatism of the Episcopalians was expressed by their insertion in the preface to their Prayer Book a statement that they did not intend "to depart from the Church of England in any essential point of doctrine, discipline, or worship." [^36]

During the era of reorganization, William White traveled to England, secured ordination as a bishop and accepted the leadership of the church. But the problems resulting from the war continued to impede the growth of this religion. In 1800, there were only about 12,000 communicants in the Protestant Episcopal church. [^37]

Decline of Quakerism

Since Quakers were also branded by patriots as traitors and Tories, this religious society was also injured as a result of the Revolutionary War. Regarding war as a crime and remnant of barbarism, orthodox Quakers refused to engage in military action against the British. Some members repudiated this Quaker doctrine and enlisted in the American army. While more than four hundred were expelled from the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting for participating in military service, most Quakers held firm to their traditional faith. [^38] Some of these conscientious objectors were socially ostracised, others were beaten by mobs and some lost their property. In the early history of this religion, Quakers seemed to have thrived on persecution, but the persecution of the late eighteenth century was a contributing factor in the decline of Quakerism in some sections of America.

The Debilitating Impact of the War on the Dutch Reformed Church

Proportionately, the Dutch Reformed church was weakened as much during the Revolution as any other religion. Most members of this church lived in the Hudson River area, a region occupied by the British throughout much of the conflict. Refusing to accept the authority of the British, many members of this denomination fled from their homes, roaming like gypsies throughout the country. Many Dutch Reformed meeting houses were destroyed, and many congregations that were flourishing before the war emerged from the devastation with small memberships devoid of spiritual leadership. [^39]

Organized Christianity in America Weakened by the Spread of Deism

The growth of deism during and following the war also had a detrimental impact on American Christianity. Many French soldiers circulated liberal religious views among the patriots, and American veterans fanned the religion of the enlightenment throughout the new nation. After Thomas Paine's Age of Reason was published in 1794, many nominal Christians rebelled against orthodox Christianity, discontinuing attendance at Sabbath services. Since only a few deistic societies were organized, most post-war deists seldom if ever attended church. In the 1790's Methodist leaders recommended a day of prayer and fasting to stem the rising tide of deism; and Presbyterians declared at a General Assembly that there was a dire need to reconvert the opulent planters of the South to the fundamentals of Christianity. [^40] In this same decade, a Congregational minister of Vermont recorded in letters to his friends, "I never knew infidelity (to be) more prevalent." There is a noticeable "neglect of family religion" in Vermont. Corrupt doctrines are widely circulated; and while there are "few regular ministers among us," there are many deists. [^41]

The Western Expansion Retards Church Attendance

The decline in membership and church attendance in America following the Revolution was due not only to the impact of the war on several denominations and the spread of deism, but was partially the result of the continued expansion of the American population. After the war, many pioneers left their farms located along the Atlantic sea coast and migrated across the Appalachian mountain barrier, settling in Kentucky, Tennessee, western New York and Ohio. Few ministers accompanied these frontiersmen; and for many years, only a few meeting houses dotted the western horizons. Missionaries who labored in the West during the decade of the 1790's reported that in the Ohio Valley few people openly professed allegiance to organized religion. Sections of Kentucky had a reputation of being "destitute of the gospel." Farmers of Tennessee were classified as "cold and indifferent" to religion; and missionaries complained that throughout the West, many frontiersmen were apathetic towards that which was classified as spiritual. [^42]

Decline of Peity in the East

Meanwhile, the increase of religious indifference and decline of spiritual zeal in the more thickly populated sections of America added to the plight of the post-war churches. During this era, many ministers complained that attendance at weekly services dropped and that few new members joined the church. In many regions, Americans detected that gambling, swearing, drunkenness, immorality and violation of the Sabbath day were more noticeable. Anglicans were not the only Christians who referred to the late eighteenth century as a critical era.

Status of Organized Religion in 1800

Following the post-war decline of religion in the Early Republic, the ratio of churches to total population reached its lowest ebb in American history. In 1650, there was one church for every 430 people; in 1700, the ratio was one for every 630 settlers; in 1750, one for every 700 inhabitants; and in 1800, there was only one church for every 1,120 Americans. [^43] At the end of the eighteenth century, only about seven per cent of the inhabitants of the new nation were gathered into churches. In 1800, the percentage of church attendance and membership was as low or lower than at any other period in the history of our country; and there were fewer church members in proportion to the population in the United States than in any other Christian nation.

VI. The Growth and Expansion of Organized Religion in the Early Nineteenth Century

The Methodist Missionary Program—The Circuit Rider System

The increased skepticism and indifference of the late eighteenth century so alarmed the Protestants that many vigorous leaders launched missionary programs designed to plant the "orthodox" American religions in the homes of the unconventional and the unchurched. The most successful missionary system of pre-Civil War America was instituted by the energetic Methodists. Within twenty-five years after the organization of this church, Methodists had divided the settled sections of America into a network of circuits. At one time, some of these circuits were so vast that they covered an entire state, but as the years passed most of the circuits were divided so that the area could be served adequately by one itinerant. Preaching stations were located throughout the circuits, some in homes, some in schoolhouses, and others in public buildings. Traveling preachers maintained a fairly regular schedule, informing the settlers of backwoods communities of the place, day, and time of Methodist services.

One of the most famous circuit-riders of early America was Peter Cartwright. At the age of sixty-eight, this itinerant had a circuit almost 500 miles by 100 miles. Like many other dedicated Methodist preachers, Cartwright practically lived on a horse. In order to carry his gospel message to the pioneers of western America, he rode through blinding snow storms, steered his horse through treacherous floods, and followed dusty trails in the burning summer heat. He traveled from forts to camps and from tents to log cabins. He preached in towns, villages, and farm communities, and declared a message of salvation to farmers who sat in the fields under shade trees while they rested temporarily from their labors. The exhausting schedule which Peter Cartwright and other circuit riders maintained, enabled Methodist ministers to preach regularly to vast numbers of rural Americans. [^44]

While many religions of the early republic failed to increase in membership partially because of their inability to supply members of their faith with spiritual leadership, the Methodists were ordaining many itinerant and local preachers. Requirements for entering the Methodist ministry were not as rigid as those adopted by many other religious organizations of that age. Before their appointments, Methodists were asked to answer four questions in the affirmative: (1) Are you converted? (2) Do you know and are you willing to abide by the rules of society? (3) Can you preach adequately? (4) Have you a horse? In pre-Civil War America, a degree from an institution of higher learning was not a prerequisite for ordination in the Methodist church. In fact, few of the circuit riders secured more than a few years of elementary education, but they were better educated than the average frontiersman and they spoke the popular language of the people living in western America. [^45]

The unselfish Methodist itinerants were not only willing to serve under trying circumstances but they worked for small annual salaries. During the first sixteen years of the nineteenth century, traveling preachers were to be paid eighty dollars a year; and in 1816, the salary was increased to one hundred dollars, but the itinerants were not always paid the stipulated income. Many circuit riders were required to rely upon others for most necessities of life, and hospitable frontiersmen became accustomed to providing itinerants with food, shelter, and clothing.

As the Methodist membership increased at the various preaching stations, frugal ministers settled among the people. Many of these preachers served their parishioners for a small remuneration; and therefore it was necessary that these clergy be partially self-supporting, working as farmers, coopers, or engaging in other economic activities. By transplanting from England to America a missionary program and adopting and developing techniques popularized by John Wesley, the Methodists succeeded in providing many small rural groups with spiritual leadership.

Another reason the Methodists gleaned such a bounteous harvest in America was that they permitted a wider latitude of belief among their congregations than existed in most major religious bodies of that age. Such a characteristic was appealing to the independent-minded unchurched Americans. At the same time, the Methodists emphasized a few principles that harmonized with the most popular Protestant concepts of pre-Civil War America. They taught that since man was sinful there was a need for justification and sanctification. Christ died for all, most Methodists frequently declared, and God desires all men to accept the gift of salvation. Man has the ability to grasp this precious gift. Seek, study, and pray, they often exhorted. Secure faith in Christ and you will be saved. These views were promulgated by men who could mount a stump or stand on the bed of a wagon and preach without a note, quoting scriptures and expounding in such a way that many farmers of early America concluded that the message was applicable to their lives. [^46]

Witnessing vast conversions to their faith, most Methodists preachers believed that they were blessed immeasurably for their labors. During the half century preceding the Civil War, the Methodist church was the fastest growing religion in America. Whereas in 1820, the Baptists had become the largest denomination in this country, by the middle of the century, there were over a half million more Methodists than members of any other church. In 1786, the Methodists claimed a membership of only 20,600. Twenty years later, in 1806, the membership had increased to 130,600. Following the War of 1812, the increase in membership was even more remarkable than the earlier growth, for in 1816, there were 215,000 Methodists and by 1836, there were 650,000 members in this church. In one year, 1833, there was an increase in membership of 51,143, and in one ten year period, 1826 to 1836, the growth was nearly 300,000. By 1850 approximately one third of American Protestants were Methodists. [^47]

The Baptist Farm Preaching System

Shortly before the Methodist circuit riders were sent into the frontiers to convert the unchurched Americans, Baptist farm preachers settled in the fertile fields of the American wilderness and gathered into their societies many pioneers who were seeking formalized religion. Like the Methodists, the Baptists of the early republic did not insist that their ministers be college graduates and most Baptist elders received a meager formal education. Since these ministers were willing to work without relying upon parish contributions for their support, a Baptist elder could be appointed to serve in an area where only a few families supported that society.

One of the many Baptists of that age whose ministry was an avocation rather than a profession was Reverand Isaac Backus. Backus devoted many days to laboring in the fields. With a crude wooden plow, he tilled the rocky, sandy soil of New England and with a hoe cleared the ground for planting. He sowed the seeds and harvested large crops of corn and rye. He nurtured his apple orchard and cared for his cows, horses, sheep, and oxen. He gathered the winter supply of wood, and chopped pine, oak, and cedar from which he obtained lumber used in making furniture and other household items, such as chopping-boards and mixing bowls. Self sufficiency was the rule of that day and Isaac Backus and many other Baptist farm preachers performed the same labors as other American yeomen.

Primarily through barter and exchange, Backus secured the goods and services which he desired. He gave to Boston printers agricultural products, iron ware, cash and other items of value for publishing his sermons, apologies, and histories. He traded agricultural products, iron ware and implements, books, tracts, cloth, pasture rights, and cash for other books and cloth, and for shoes, watches, linen, pepper, rum, tea, lamps, feathers, and silverware. He gave the medical doctor of his community butter, cheese, indigo, blue yarn, oats, laths, and cash for medicine and services. He gave the local schoolteacher a hymn book, almanac, theological tracts, rye, corn, indigo, veal, pepper, and 6s. for schooling his children one year. Such transactions continued throughout the ministerial career of the Reverend Isaac Backus. [^48]

Backus and other Baptist farm preachers' responsibilities as fathers, husbands, farmers, and citizens were considered secondary to their ministerial duties. These sedulous elders visited parishioners, comforted the sick, and served as spiritual and temporal advisors. Nearly every Sunday, they preached two and sometimes three sermons. They spoke at weddings and funerals, delivered sacramental lectures about every other month, and proclaimed periodically mid-week gospel messages in the homes of their friends.

The farm and parish activities of the Baptist preachers of early America did not quench their ardent thirst to spread outside the boundaries of their parish the convictions that burned in their souls. Employing their farms as a base of operation, Baptist elders frequently rode to communities outside the boundaries of their parish, preaching in meadows, barns, homes, schools, and public buildings. Periodically, these traveling elders labored among the rural Americans for several weeks and months. After converting a few families, they assisted the new members in organizing a congregation, and sometimes one of the new converts was ordained as another farm preacher.

Although the Baptist denomination was the fastest growing religion in America during the last half of the eighteenth century and was the second largest denomination in 1850, the missionary program which they sponsored was not as effective as the Methodist circuit rider system. Except for occasional assignments by Baptist association, there was no central agency directing the activities of the farm preachers and these traveling preachers did not confine their efforts to a well-defined circuit. Most of these itinerants also did not maintain a regular schedule of traveling as preachers. After planting a seed of faith in the hearts of many rural Americans, some Baptist preachers failed to return promptly to families seeking organized religion and ministers of other faiths enlisted their support. Nevertheless, the Baptist religion was the first major convert religion in this country. Since the remarkable growth of this denomination beginning about 1760 was primarily the result of conversions rather than immigration, the Baptist society was the first major American religion to increase rapidly by converting the unchurched Americans.

Presbyterian Missionary Programs

Although the Presbyterians lagged behind the Methodists and Baptists in developing programs designed to convert the American pioneers, these Protestants were the third most successful missionaries of pre-Civil War America. Recognizing that there was an acute shortage of ministers in the colonies, in the middle of the eighteenth century American Presbyterians established a number of theological schools designed to train students for the ministry. But this program wasn't sufficient. Because most Presbyterian immigrants scattered into the American wilderness and were struggling in the frontier to make a living, most groups of former Presbyterians were not in a position to hire and maintain a regular preacher. At the end of the eighteenth century, the synods attempted to solve this problem by sending traveling preachers into the frontiers where the itinerants labored for one or more months. Pastors of some of the large parishes of New York and Pennsylvania also were assigned to work in frontier districts as summer circuit rider preachers.

Techniques Popularized by Charles G. Finney

A few unconventional Presbyterian ministers, such as Charles G. Finney, were extremely successful missionaries. For many years, Finney was antagonistic toward religion. While practicing law in Oneida County, New York, he criticized many dogmas taught by the Presbyterian ministers of that age. The turning point in his life was that which he regarded as his sudden conversion. "The Holy Spirit went through me," he claimed, and suddenly Finney possessed a burning desire to convey this feeling to others. Without securing the customary training in a theological school, Finney formulated his own religious views based upon his interpretations of the Bible and received ordination by his Presbyterian minister. In 1824, the tall, handsome, self-trained evangelist launched a crusade in western New York. In that era, the revival spirit was sweeping western New York and Finney became the most successful and influential promoter of revivalism in this section of the New Nation.

Instead of emphasizing theology, Finney popularized sensational techniques designed to convert the American pioneers. He held protracted meetings, services which continued for several days without lengthy interruption. He held daily prayer meetings. New converts were organized into "holy bands" and these missionaries went from house to house preaching to the unchurched Americans. During meetings which Finney conducted, the revivalist invited those who desired salvation to sit in the "anxious seat" so that all in attendance could pray for the unsaved soul, petitioning God to implant the spirit of faith in the individual's heart. The controversial minister also invited women to pray and speak in public and encouraged physical demonstrations. As a result of his powerful messages, emotional listeners burst into tears, some fell into trances and jerks, and others shrieked and fainted. Although some of Finney's missionary techniques and unorthodox teachings were condemned by members of his church, Finney's actions had a permanent effect. The most successful evangelist of that age encouraged many rural farmers to make a religious decision; and after accepting Jesus as the Christ, many rural Americans followed Finney's advice and joined the Presbyterian church. [^49]

Programs Sponsored by the Congregationalists to Convert the Rural Americans

The Congregationalists also supported missionary programs designed to solve the problems created by an expansion of the population into the American wilderness. In addition to sending traveling preachers into rural communities, members of this faith living in the settled regions of the East subsidized western churches by contributing to building funds and by helping the farmers pay the ministers' salaries.

The Congregationalists also decided to unite rather than compete with the Presbyterians in gathering the unchurched Americans. By the Plan of Union of 1801, ministers of both denominations agreed to cooperate in serving members of these religions. After congregations were gathered in some western localities, members of the new societies were granted an opportunity to vote for a minister, selecting a spiritual leader from either religion. In the first three decades of the nineteenth century, a large per cent of the people voted to hire a Presbyterian preacher; and many pioneers changed their religious affiliation. Therefore, the Plan of Union curtailed the expansion of Congregationalism. This once dominant American religion was virtually confined to the woodlands of New England.

Church Membership in 1850

Since other major religions of the early republic failed to develop effective missionary programs, membership in these societies increased slowly. Meanwhile, membership of the religions which developed the best solutions to the problems created by the American frontier soared. In 1850, the Methodist society was the number one Protestant religion, numerically speaking, in this country with an estimated membership of 1,300,000, followed by the Baptists with 850,000 members and the Presbyterians with 485,000 members. At that time, the Congregational society, who had almost double the membership of any other religion in 1776 was comprised of merely 200,000 members. The fifth major religion in this country in the middle of the nineteenth century was the Lutheran faith, with 165,000 members, the Disciples were sixth with 118,000 members, and the Episcopalians were seventh with about 100,000 members.

Primarily because of a great influx of immigrants from Ireland and Germany, during the three decades preceding the Civil War, the Roman Catholic population in this country increased at a remarkable rate. Since Roman Catholics include children in their estimates of church membership and most Protestants enumerate as members persons who have attained full membership, usually at age thirteen, it is difficult to compare membership of Protestant bodies with the Roman Catholics. Nevertheless, the census of 1850 reported that there were in America 1,173,700 Roman Catholics, a few less than were members of the Methodist society; and some Catholic historians estimate that there were 1,750,000 members of their church in the middle of the nineteenth century. According to the census of 1850 there were 13,000 Methodist meeting houses and only 1,221 Catholic buildings of worship, the Catholic figure representing an increase of 1,097 in thirty years. The census further revealed that there were approximately the same number of Lutheran and Roman Catholic meeting houses, and the Lutheran religion was ranked as the fifth largest Protestant religion. Undoubtedly the average number who worshipped in a cathedral was much larger than the average Lutheran congregation, but it is inconceivable to believe that as many Catholics were regularly attending church as Methodists, Baptists, or Presbyterians. Probably in 1850 about 350,000 adult Roman Catholics had been gathered into churches and attended church regularly. [^50]

Interdenominational Agencies Advance Organized Religion

In an attempt to plant Protestantism in the homes of the rural farmers, the leaders of the major American religions not only developed denominational missionary programs, but they also united, organizing interdenominational societies. Following the American Revolution, Americans became keenly concerned over the scarcity of Bibles in the new nation. This scarcity had not suddenly developed, for throughout the colonial period in many homes of the frontiersmen there were no Bibles. Since the crown restricted the printing of the scriptures to the king's publishers residing in England and Scotland, colonial printers did not issue an English version of the New Testament until about 1750. With the outbreak of the war, the importation of Bibles from England discontinued, and following the Revolution, many Americans determined that there was a need to increase the publication and circulation of the word of God.

In 1808, Americans organized to correct the apparent shortage of Bibles in this land, forming in Philadelphia America's first Bible society. The following year, similar societies were organized in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, and New Jersey. Within six years, more than one hundred Bible societies had been formed. Then in 1816, representatives from the Dutch Reformed, Presbyterian, Congregational, Methodist, Baptist, Episcopal, and Quaker societies gathered in New York and organized a national Bible society. After conducting a Bible census in many communities, members of these societies established as their goal the planting of a Bible in every home. The result of their efforts was the printing and circulating of the scriptures in unprecedented numbers. [^51]

In the same year that the first Bible society was organized in this country, citizens of Connecticut organized America's first tract society. This movement also spread rapidly in the North; and in 1825, the American Tract Society was constituted. By 1827, this interdenominational agency was publishing more than fifty-three million tracts annually. In addition to circulating millions of tracts, this society distributed innumerable hand-bills, leaflets, and illustrated cards. Works were written for all classes of people, as is evident by the titles of some of their publications: "To Children and Youth, on the Importance of Prayer," "Letter from an Aged Mother to her Only Son," "Affectionate Advice to a Married Couple," "Advice to the Keeper of a Turnpike Gate," "Hints for Visitors and Travelers," "Advice from a Master to his Apprentice," "To Christian Females on Simplicity of Dress," "Duties to Relatives," "Address to Parents, from persons who support Sabbath Schools," "A Warning to Sabbath Breakers," "On Temperance in the use of Food and Strong Drink," "More than Fifty Reasons for Attending Public Worship," "Conversion of an Aged Deist," and "Confessions of a Fashionable Gambler."

The Establishment of Sunday Schools

The Americans of the early republic not only imitated the English in establishing Bible and tract societies, but they also transplanted from England the Sunday School organization. The father of the modern day Sunday School movement was an English philanthropist, Robert Raikes. As Raikes watched the poor children of Gloucester play noisy games while others were attending church, he gained an interest in the welfare of these less fortunate youth. One Sabbath day in 1780, Raikes gathered the poor children in his community and hired a woman to teach them rudimentary knowledge such as spelling and reading. Three years later, Raikes was convinced that there were major advantages to such a program and with the help of others publicized the need for educating children on the Lord's Day. Within a few years, Sabbath schools were established in many English towns and the movement spread rapidly in the British Isles. The program instituted by Raikes was modified during its expansion. In most communities, the paying of Sunday School teachers discontinued, religious themes were emphasized, children memorized scriptures and catechisms, and the youth of all social classes were invited to the Sabbath schools.

Two of the foremost leaders in establishing Sunday Schools in the United States were Francis Asbury and William White, the most influential members of the Methodist and Episcopal churches. Early in 1786, Bishop Asbury organized a Sunday School in Hanover County, Virginia; and in 1791, Bishop White became president of a society founded to promote the establishment of "First Day" schools. As in Europe, the movement spread rapidly in the new nation. When the American Sunday-School Union was organized in 1825, there were almost 180,000 Sunday School pupils in the United States. While members of Bible and tract societies were attempting to place the scriptures and other religious literature in every home, the Sunday School unions strove to establish a Sunday school in every community. The efforts of the religious leaders of America in promoting the establishment of this institution proved most successful, for during the nineteenth century there was a substantial increase in the numbers and per cent of young Americans who actively supported the Sunday School organizations. On the seventy-fifth anniversary of the American Sunday School Union, the society reported a membership of more than four million pupils. [^52]

Interdenominational Missionary Societies

The churches of the new nation also increased their missionary labors among the Indians and sent ministers to various parts of the world to convert the inhabitants of India, China, and other non-Christian lands. In 1796, the New York Missionary Society was constituted, consisting of representatives from the Presbyterian, Dutch Reformed, and Baptist societies. The primary purpose of this society was to carry Christianity to the Indians of the southern states. Other interdenominational missionary societies sent representatives to the Old Northwest to convert the natives; and as the unfortunate Indians were pushed further and further west, missionaries followed.

The Camp Meetings

Another evangelical institution to evolve in this era was the camp meeting. In 1796, James McGready, a Presbyterian minister, settled in Kentucky and promptly gained a reputation as being a zealous, persuasive preacher. Crowds gathered to hear McGready's sermons, and the small meeting house of Logan County would not accommodate the congregation. Consequently, McGready decided to conduct meetings in the clearing of a woodland. Hundreds gathered and the idea evolved that similar meetings should be conducted in other backwoods communities.

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, ministers from many denominations, particularly those of the Methodist, Baptist, and Presbyterian societies, traveled among the farmers of America inviting them to gather at a designated spot on a specified date to participate in a camp meeting. Many farmers heeded the call, packed supplies, and transported their families to the site where the service was to be held. According to Peter Cartwright, some farmers traveled forty or fifty miles to attend these meetings. Tents were pitched, sheds were erected, and platforms for the preachers were built. Then Cartwright observed that "ten, twenty, and sometimes thirty ministers, of different denominations would . . . preach night and day, four or five days together; and indeed, I have known these camp-meetings to last three or four weeks." [^53] Occasionally, in order that all might hear a revivalist, the crowd would be divided into small groups, and many ministers would preach simultaneously.

Perhaps the most famous frontier revival was held in August, 1801, at Cane Ridge, Kentucky. The plans for this camp meeting had been carefully prepared by Barton W. Stone. A large stage was erected in a clearing near a meeting house and space was provided for the pitching of small tents nearby. Far more people gathered to be cleansed of their sins than Stone and other sponsors had anticipated. In fact, preachers of Kentucky had never seen such a congregation, and when men attempted to estimate the numbers who gathered from Kentucky, Tennessee and other regions their figures ranged from about ten to twenty-five thousand. The highest estimates, however, are fantastic when one considers that only a quarter of a million people lived in the state at that time. Services began on Friday and continued without intermission for six days. During the meeting, the crowd was divided into many groups and the people listened, prayed, sang, and sometimes shouted. One witness reported that at times the noise of the vast audience reminded him of the roar of Niagara. Occasionally, when ministers were delivering fiery sermons, individuals would shriek and fall to the ground. Five hundred, one man claimed, were struck suddenly as if they had been hit by a battery of guns. Another eyewitness recorded that hundreds suddenly bcame weak in their knees, and then began gasping for air, seeking to gain their breath as though they were in the agony of death. Then they would fall to the ground and lay insensible for a few minutes or for six, eight, and sometimes ten hours. When individuals failed to rise promptly, members of the congregation pulled the limp bodies to clearings, gathered about the bodies and sang and prayed. Upon recovering, usually the first words which the afflicted uttered were, "Lord, have mercy." Then those who had been unconscious would exhort others to believe in Christ. [^54]

The number of camp meetings held in this land continued to increase for several decades. In 1811, Bishop Francis Asbury anticipated that four hundred camp meetings would be held that year; and by 1820, approximately one thousand such meetings were conducted, some being held in the eastern states, but the majority taking place in the West. [^55]

The camp meetings often erupted into great spectacles. Sometimes thousands would gather carrying lighted candles and the throng would brighten dark valleys with flickering lights. Then, they would sing and chant melodiously and listen to the stirring message of an energetic revivalist. During many of these meetings, extremes of excitement and emotionalism often erupted. "I have seen more than a hundred sinners fall like dead men under one powerful sermon," Cartwright declared, "and I have seen and heard more than five hundred Christians all shouting aloud the high praises of God at once." In describing the drama of the camp meetings, other witnesses noted that people were struck as if hit by lightning, falling to the ground. Hundreds remained prostrate on the ground, and others jumped up only to be struck again. Meanwhile, other participants rolled over and over on the ground and some were seized with a convulsive jerking. The first few jerks would force caps, bonnets, and combs to fly in the air. After the head would begin jerking, other parts of the body would move back and forth rapidly, until the entire body would be jerking as if irritated by some strange power. Some reacted to the emotional sermons by squatting on the ground like dogs, and in this position they would commence barking. After crawling to the base of trees located on the site where the camp meeting was being held, some westerners looked up with angry expressions and growled and barked, believing that such action would "tree the Devil." [^56]

While some Americans defended the physical demonstrations as evidence of the power of God, others condemned the emotionalism as unhealthy hysteria and noted that while one group was supposedly being saved others were being intoxicated with either alcohol or evil spirits. No one, however, doubted that the camp meeting had a profound impact on many participants. Ater returning to their homes, many farmers desired to keep the flames of the revival burning brightly in their souls and determined that when an opportunity occurred, they would join one of the Protestant churches that sponsored such breathtaking meetings.

Great Revivals in Pre-Civil War America: The Great Awakening

The missionary programs developed by the various denominations in America were major factors in stimulating increased religious zeal and church activity in the new nation. Prior to this area of spiritual awakening, colonists had sponsored revivals as a means of arresting the religious indifference and worldliness so prevalent in this land. The first widespread revival had erupted in 1740, and its intensity continued for about two years. One of the leading instigators of the Great Awakening was Jonathan Edwards. In 1734, the celebrated Congregational theologian initiated a powerful revival in Northampton, Massachusetts. After Edwards had bombarded his parishioners with incessant, persuasive sermons, a young girl of questionable morality asked the question, "What must I do to be saved?" Her manifest desire was succeeded by a sudden conversion. Throughout most of the following year conversions multiplied. The Congregationalists at Northampton witnessed the inauguration of the most remarkable quickening of religious enthusiasm that had ever occurred in America. Religion became the universal topic of discussion in this small New England town. Settlers swung from their frivolity and tavern socials to active participation in a variety of religious programs. Many in Northampton became communicants, and the vitality engendered by this movement swept into other parishes. [^57]

Jonathan Edwards merely ignited the spark that eventually flamed into the Great Awakening. That Americans were primed for such an emotional reaction is evident by the fact that general awakenings occurred almost simultaneously in Massachusetts, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. Under the leadership of a Dutch minister, Theodorus Frelinghuysen, and a Presbyterian preacher, Gilbert Tennent, many settlers in the Middle Colonies had become converted to the view that revivals should be sponsored to arrest the decline of organized religion in this land. These revivals of the 1730's prepared Americans for the stentorian sermons of George Whitefield, an English evangelist. Beginning with an introduction in Philadelphia in 1739, Whitefield's powerful exhortations immediately won the approval of many colonists. As he led the campaign against the forces of liberalism and indifference from Maine to Georgia, the revivalist excited throngs in crowded meeting houses and in open fields; and his presence in many communities was followed by widespread revivals. Numerous Christians were encouraged by his success, and they copied Whitefield's celebrated techniques in their itinerate crusades.

The Second Great Awakening

Although there were sporadic revivals in some sections of the new world following the Great Awakening, it was not until the end of the eighteenth century that another revival swept America. Between 1800 and 1805, incessant revivals occurred in many towns and villages. These revivals reached their greatest intensity in the West, where emotional out-bursts and physical demonstrations attracted many seeking relief from the drudgery of their labors.

One traveler, Dr. George A. Baxter, who analyzed the consequences of the second Great Awakening declared that when he first visited Kentucky "infidelity was triumphant and religion was on the point of expiring." However, according to Baxter, after the revivals of the early nineteenth century erupted "a religious awe seemed to pervade the country. Upon the whole, I think the revival in Kentucky the most extraordinary that has ever visited the church of Christ." The revival has "confounded infidelity and brought numbers beyond calculation under serious impressions." [^58]

During this spiritual awakening, another Protestant, Reverend David Rice, recorded his impressions of the impact of this movement on the lives of many Americans: [^59]

Drunkards, profane swearers, liars, quarrelsome persons, etc., are remarkably reformed. . . . A number of families who had lived apparently without the fear of God, in folly and in vice, without any religious instruction or any proper government, are now reduced to order and are daily joining in the worship of God, reading his word, singing his praises, and offering up their supplications to a throne of grace.

A Burned-over District—Revivalism in Western New York

The second Great Awakening marked the beginning of an era of intense religious zeal in America. While there had been a decline in the number and frequency of revivals following the first Great Awakening, successful revivals were conducted periodically in many sections of America during the six decades preceding the Civil War. One of the regions of almost habitual revivalism was western New York. Prior to the ratification of the Constitution, few settlers had located their homes in this fertile section of the young republic; but beginning in the 1790's, vast numbers poured into this area from eastern New York, New England, and northern Pennsylvania. The early emigrants of western New York scattered into the woodlands and for several years neglected organized religion. As the population increased, ministers recognized that conditions were favorable for the establishment of churches in this area. In an attempt to gather the rural Americans into the Protestant fold, hundreds of preachers of various denominations began laboring in the backwoods communities. Revivals were held, and the immediate success of these meetings sparked preachers to increase their efforts. The first Great Revival erupted in the winter of 1799-1800, and another peak in revivalism took place in 1807-1808. Following the War of 1812, fresh immigration from New England hastened the erosion of frontier conditions, creating a more fertile field for the establishment of formalized religion. The postwar revivals surpassed all earlier awakenings. Large numbers were added to the Protestant churches of western New York in 1815, 1819, and 1821. Another flurry of excitement erupted in the "burned-over district" in 1825 and continued periodically until 1837. [^60]

VII. Humanitarian and Moral Reforms in Pre-Civil War America

The intense religious impulse emanating from the great revivals of the early nineteenth century was a dominant factor in increasing northern interest in humanitarian and moral reform programs. This revivalistic spirit was coupled with the reforms perpetuated by the Quakers, deists, and Unitarians and the inspiration received by the examples set by the English, resulting in the organization of many societies designed to help the less fortunate and to improve the morals of the American people. Beginning about 1830, there was a significant increase in the numbers and influence of abolition and temperance societies. Movements were also advanced to reform the prisons and insane asylums. Societies were organized to teach Americans correct dietary habits, the proper method of keeping the Sabbath day holy, and the value of being morally clean. William Ellery Channing aptly expressed the increased Christian zeal of his age when he proclaimed that a nation, such as the United States, which is blessed with free institutions has the responsibility of eradicating "all oppressive establishments." "I think," Channing reasoned, "that the time is aproaching in which Christian philanthropy is to act a new part on the theatre of human affairs. . . . Every age teaches its own lesson," he observed. "The lesson of this age is that of sympathy with the suffering, and of devotion to the progress of the whole human race." [^61]

The Temperance Crusade

During this era of revivalism, many Americans perceived that intemperance created serious problems in families and communities and hindered the growth of Christianity. Intoxication was a problem afflicting men and women, rich and poor, and farmers and factory workers. Throughout the South and West, whiskey was a favorite drink; and in New England, vast quantities of whiskey, rum, and beer were consumed. In nearly every community there was a distillery; and the price of whiskey, twenty-five cents per gallon, made it possible for the masses to purchase this inexpensive beverage. Americans were notorious for drinking excessive quantities of liquor while celebrating births, weddings, and funerals; and the story is told of the drunken pallbearers who lost their way to the grave. Europeans who visited this country were appalled at the vast amounts of hard liquors which Americans consumed, some concluding that the sin of intemperance was more prevalent in this country than in any other nation which they had visited.

Recognizing the problems resulting from intemperance, a few reformers of the Revolutionary generation urged Americans to reduce their consumption of hard liquors. One well-known physician, Dr. Benjamin Rush, published a tract in 1784, Inquiry Into the Effects of Spiritous Liquors, instructing others that alcohol had detrimental effects on the body and on men's character. According to Rush, intemperance produced diseases, such as gout, jaundice, and dropsy. It produced vices such as idleness, fighting, obscenity, suicide, and murder; and it led to debt, poverty, and imprisonment. [^62] Although this prominent reformer supported a movement to curtail the consumption of liquor, few Americans of his generation were willing to heed his advice; and the temperance movement of the Revolutionary era failed.

Following the War of 1812, the first successful effort to check intemperance by organized activity commenced. In the mid-eighteen twenties, when a general ferment created conditions favorable for the launching of a temperance crusade, Lyman Beecher delivered a series of sermons on the evils and remedies of intemperance. "Intemperance is the sin of our land," the Congregational pastor soberly declared. "It is coming upon us like a flood. . . . It is the river of fire, which is rolling through the land, destroying the vital air, and extending around an atmosphere of death." Intemperance is a sin which excludes men from heaven and turns multitudes into hell, he proclaimed. The public needs to be enlightened, aroused, and organized. "Let the temperate part of the nation awake, and reform," Beecher pleaded, "and concentrate their influence in a course of systematic action, and success is not merely probable, but absolutely certain." Exclude ardent spirits from your homes and assist others in excluding it from your communities, Beecher advised. "Become in your neighbourhood, and throughout the whole extent of your intercourse and influence, a humble, affectionate, determined reformer." Organize associations, petition for legislative action, and warn your neighbors of the consequences of this evil. [^63]

The sermons of Lyman Beecher and other temperance reformers of the 1820's were not delivered to apathetic congregations. In 1826, a national society, The American Temperance Union, was organized to coordinate activities of local groups. By 1830, more than 2,000 temperance societies had been organized in this country. Seven hundred had been constituted in New York State and many others had been constituted in New England and states settled by New England emigrants. The movement gained momentum in 1840 when six reformed drunkards of Baltimore organized the Washington Temperance Society. To advance the principle of total abstention from alcoholic beverages, the Washingtonians sponsored mass meetings and spectacular parades which included blaring bands and colorful floats. Within a few years, thousands in this country had pledged never to drink liquor.

The techniques of the temperance workers were similar to the activities of those who supported the various inter-denominational societies of the young republic. Many of the temperance leaders were ministers. Temperance meetings were held in church buildings. Revivalists preached on the nature of salvation on Sunday and during the week spoke on the evils of Demon Rum. Aroused Americans fanned their views regarding the sin of intemperance by publishing numerous novels, plays, tracts, pamphlets and hand-bills, and by petitioning their legislators.

Many politicians succumbed to the public demands for legislative action. By the mid-eighteen fifties, every northern state, except New Jersey, had enacted some form of prohibition law. But as the Civil War approached, public interest in this vice declined and northerners concentrated on solving the problem of the disruption of American democracy. In the sixties, most prohibition laws were repealed, and the most successful reform movement of pre-Civil War America halted abruptly. [^64]

The Physiological Reform Movement

Another product of the religious fervor of the early nineteenth century was the Physiological Reform Movement. After serving as a general agent for the Pennsylvania Temperance Society, the leader of this movement, Sylvester Graham, decided to enlarge his crusade from intemperance to other evils afflicting Americans. In 1830, Graham was requested to deliver a series of lectures on human physiology and diet at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia. Accepting the invitation, Graham declared to those who gathered that there were five major poisons injuring the health of many Americans. These poisons, he stated, are liquor, tobacco, tea, coffee, and opium. After discussing in some detail the effects of these stimulants on the human body, Graham itemized what foods should and should not be consumed. His lectures were an immediate success. Before completing the series in Philadelphia, Graham was invited to lecture in New York; and thereafter he received pressing invitations to speak from many groups. In the decade of the 1830's and 1840's he traveled widely and spoke frequently. After 1849 his health began to decline and Sylvester Graham died on September 6, 1851, at the age of fifty-eight. [^65]

From his "observations, reflections, inquiries, investigations and research" Graham formulated a code of living that became known as the Graham System. In addition to recommending the total abstinence of "distilled spirits, wine, beer, cider, tobacco, opium, coffee, tea, pepper, mustard, and every other kind of artificial stimulants and narcotics," Graham recommended as a general rule for most adults total abstinence of all animal food, including butter, cheese, and milk, and all carnivorous birds and fish. He warned others not to drink any hot drinks, to eat excessively or to eat between meals. He advised others, that as a general rule after a certain period in early life, men should subsist entirely on fruits, vegetables and pure water. "The solid forms of food," he taught, "should be taken in the natural and simple state, and plainly prepared, or cooked with no other seasoning than a very little salt, and eaten in moderate quantities, at regular periods—not too frequently—well masticated or chewed, and swallowed slowly." To keep the bowels regular, he suggested eating fruit regularly and eating bread made from "unbolted" or unsifted flour, carefully instructing others on the proper method of preparing such bread. This reformer also advised others to sleep with the windows open at night, to air the bedding frequently, to bathe often and to exercise the skin periodically with a flesh brush. [^66]

By 1834, Sylvester Graham had received so many letters informing him of the benefits derived from living his system that he decided to publish the testimonials in hopes that others would be converted to his dietary reforms. One such letter was written by a citizen of New York in 1832, who declared, [^67]

You will probably recollect that in June, 1831, I applied to you for advice concerning my health; and that I then informed you that I had long been laboring under great infirmities and disorder of body. . . . After hearing your Lectures, and receiving your advice, I abandoned the use of tea, coffee, and all other kinds of stimulating and heating substances; and was careful to observe your rules in other respects. . . . My health soon began to improve; and I continued to become more and more strict in my regimen, till I got on to a diet of Graham bread and rain water exclusively. . . . I . . . recovered and enjoyed the most entire and perfect health; feeling strong, active, and cheerful. My sleep is as sweet as a babe's, and when I rise in the morning, I always feel fresh, and clean, and vigorous, and sprightly, as ever I did in my boyhood.

Converts to the Graham system multiplied rapidly. The program was adopted for a number of years in several orphan asylums and converts to this dietetic system organized Graham boarding houses where they lived with others who desired to conform to this health code. Following the Civil War, Graham's popularity declined, and although Sylvester Graham's name has been relegated to a few items located on pantry shelves (such as Graham crackers), this former Presbyterian minister was one of America's most influential pre-Civil War latter-day health saints.

* * * * *

For vast numbers of unchurched Americans, the early nineteenth century was a time of decision. In many sections of the early republic, large numbers asked the question. "Which church should I join?" Records of church membership clearly reveal that the early nineteenth century was an "Age of Joining." In these decades, the decline of organized religion in this country was arrested. When the tragic Civil War began, the percentage of church membership had reached a point much higher than any previous age in the history of this country. Although the religions of America faced major problems resulting from the explosive expansion of population beyond the Appalachians, in 1835, about 13 per cent of the settlers were members of Christian churches. At that time, a French traveler to America, Alexis de Tocqueville, concluded that "there is no country in the world where the Christian religion retains a greater influence over the souls of men than in America." Twenty-five years later, about 23 per cent of the inhabitants were enrolled on the records of the churches—four times the number when the second Great Awakening erupted. [^68]

* * * * *

In the early nineteenth century, two Campbellite preachers, Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt were searching for a restoration of New Testament Christianity. At the same time, two Methodists, one a lay preacher and the other a member, John Taylor and Brigham Young, decided that their religion was deficient in doctrine. Meanwhile, many other Americans, such as Wilford Woodruff, W. W. Phelps, and Willard Richards, refused to affiliate with the American denominations organized prior to 1820. These men concluded that the popular religious societies of early America were not teaching the precepts of Christ. And in the midst of the intense revivalism of western New York, a fourteen-year-old farm boy, Joseph Smith, launched a quest for religious truth.

Historically speaking, conditions were ripe in the early nineteenth century for a restoration of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Religious liberty was becoming a reality. The beliefs of many coincided with the doctrines taught by the apostles of Christ, and many Americans were engaged in a quest for religious truth. The "field was white already to harvest."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, "Latter Day Saints," Rupp's Original History, 404-05; Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, B. H. Roberts, ed. (2nd ed. rev., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1959-60) I, 3-6, hereafter cited as D.H.C.
[^2] D.H.C., I, 11-13; Smith, "Latter Day Saints," Rupp's Original History, 405-06.
[^3] Journal of Reuben Miller, October 21 and November, 1848, located in the Church Historian's Office, 47 East South Temple Street, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^4] The Latter-day Saints Millennial Star, XXI, No. 34 (August, 1859), 545, hereafter cited as Millennial Star.
[^5] William Homer, "The Passing of Martin Harris," The Improvement Era, XXIX, No. 5 (March, 1926), 470.
[^6] David Whitmer, Address to All Believers (Richmond, Mo., 1887), 8-9.
[^7] Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith to John Taylor and the Council of the Twelve, September 17, 1878, published in Millennial Star, XL, No. 49 (December, 1878), 769-774.
[^8] Deseret News, April 13, 1859; Whitmer, op. cit., 8; Homer, op. cit., 470; Richmond Democrat, February 2, 1888, quoted in Preston Nibley, The Witnesses of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1958), 101-04.
[^9] D.H.C., I, 39-41; Oliver Cowdery to Phineas Young, March 23, 1846, a copy of which is located in Church Historian's Office; Oliver Cowdery to Samuel W. Richards, January 13, 1849, quoted in Deseret News, March 26, 1884; Messenger and Advocate (October, 1834).
[^10] D.H.C., II, 477; VI, 478-79.
[^11] Ibid., I, 64-70. See also The Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1952), Section 20, hereafter cited as D&C.
[^12] D.H.C., I, 120-25; Parley P. Pratt, The Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, Jr., ed. (Chicago, 1888), 49-50.
[^13] George Q. Cannon, The Life of Joseph Smith, the Prophet (Salt Lake City, 1888), 113.
[^14] D.H.C., II, 229-30; 254-55.
[^15] D.&C. 101:6.
[^16] D.H.C., I, 316-17.
[^17] Ibid., 374-76. See also Richard L. Bushman, "Mormon Persecutions in Missouri, 1833," Brigham Young University Studies, III (Autumn, 1960), 11-20.
[^18] D.H.C., II, 448-52.
[^19] Governor Daniel Dunklin to Col. James Thornton, June 6, 1834, quoted in E. D. Howe, History of Mormonism (Plainesville, 1840), 172-76.
[^20] D.H.C., III, 175.
[^21] The Saints' petition to Congress and affidavits prepared by members of the Church describing Mormon oppression in Missouri are published in D.H.C., IV, 24-74.
[^22] Wilford Woodruff's Journal, II, July 22, 1839, located in Church Historian's Office; Wilford, Woodruff, Leaves from My Journal (Salt Lake City, 1881), 62.
[^23] Parley P. Pratt, op. cit., 324-25; Woodruff, Leaves from My Journal, 63; J. B. Noble, "Early Scenes in Church History," Juvenile Instructor, XV, No. 10 (May 15, 1880), 112; Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, 1945), 263.
[^24] Noble, op. cit., 112.
[^25] D.H.C., VII, 394.
[^26] Ibid., VII, 264, 287-88. See also B. H. Roberts, Succession in the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City, 1894).
[^27] D.H.C., VII, 440-43, 448, 450-53.
[^28] The most voluminous treatise on the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is Brigham H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church (6 vols., Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930). The best one volume summaries of L.D.S. Church history are William E. Berrett, The Restored Church (12th ed., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1964); and Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History (17th ed., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961). For a short history of Mormon activities in Utah and a bibliography on this subject see Gustive O. Larson, Outline History of Utah and the Mormons (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1958).
[^29] The environmental interpretation of the origin of Mormonism has been expounded in Fawn M. Brodie, No Man Knows My History (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1957); Whitney R. Cross, The Burned-over District (New York: Cornell University Press, 1950); Thomas O'Dea, The Mormons (Illinois: University of Chicago Press, 1957); and Clifton E. Olmstead, History of Religion in the United States (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1960).
[^30] D.H.C., V, 517.
[^31] D.H.C., I, 65-66; D.&C. 20:17-24; 84:102; 88:41.
[^32] D.H.C., II, 12-13.
[^33] Ibid., V, 426.
[^34] Ibid., VI, 473-74.
[^35] Times and Seasons, August 15, 1844.
[^36] D.H.C., V, 325.
[^37] Messenger and Advocate, May, 1835.
[^38] D.H.C., I, 303-04.
[^39] Ibid., V, 391-92.
[^40] Parley P. Pratt, op. cit., 329-30.
[^41] D.H.C., III, 387; VI, 310.
[^42] The Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1952), Moses 1:24-39; Abraham 3:22-23.
[^43] The Book of Mormon, Ether 3:16. According to Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, Inc., 1960), 476-79, 700, the Holy Ghost is in the form of man.
[^44] The Pearl of Great Price, Moses 4:1-4; D.H.C., V, 388.
[^45] D.H.C., VI, 57.
[^46] Ibid., I, 282.
[^47] Ibid., I, 245; VI, 57.
[^48] Ibid., V, 341.
[^49] Ibid., II, 18; III, 28-30.
[^50] Ibid., IV, 207; Times and Seasons, August 15, 1844.
[^51] Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 2:13, 15, 22-25.
[^52] D.H.C., II, 213, 364-65; III, 385-88; IV, 207.
[^53] Ibid., III, 385-88.
[^54] Lowell L. Bennion, The Religion of the Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: L.D.S. Department of Education, 1947), 103-04.
[^55] The Pearl of Great Price, 59; Smith, "Latter Day Saints," Rupp's Original History, 410; Times and Seasons, August 15, 1844.
[^56] D.H.C., V, 259.
[^57] Ibid., II, 381.
[^58] Times and Seasons, August 15, 1844; D.H.C., V, 425-26.
[^59] Times and Seasons, August 15, 1844; Book of Mormon, Alma 40.
[^60] See F. W. Evans, Compendium of the Origin, History, Principles, Rules and Regulations, Government, and Doctrine of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing (New Lebanon, 1867), 98-103.
[^61] D.&C. 76:50-112; 131:1-4.
[^62] J. B. Turner, Mormonism in All Ages (New York, 1842), 242.
[^63] Elhanan Wincester, The Universal Restoration (Lexington, 1794), 71-73, Evans No. 29910.
[^64] Anna White and Leila S. Taylor, Shakerism: Its Meaning and Message (Columbus, Ohio, 1904), 260.
[^65] Julius F. Sachse, The German Sectarians of Pennsylvania (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1899), I, 365-66.
[^66] D.H.C., II, 380.
[^67] Ibid., IV, 231, 425.
[^68] Ibid., IV, 369, 426, 603; V, 1-3.
