Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER SEVEN

Joseph Smith and the Restoration of the Everlasting Gospel

In the spring of 1820, a fourteen-year-old farm boy, Joseph Smith, who had been reared in America's backwoods communities of Vermont, New Hampshire, and western New York, determined to ask God in vocal prayer which church he should join. For many years, his parents, his five brothers, and his two sisters (another sister was born in 1821) had refused to join any denomination. The family studied the Bible and accepted the divinity of Christ, but were not satisfied with the doctrines described in the popular creeds of that age. However, in the midst of the intense revivals of western New York, part of the family joined the Presbyterian church and others united with the Methodists. Although Joseph Smith was impressed with many features of the Methodist denomination he was not satisfied that this or other religious societies were the unadulterated Church of Christ. All religions can not be profiles of God's will, Joseph reasoned. God is not the author of confusion. Our Creator would not sponsor doctrines which are diametrically opposed. Therefore, adhering to the admonition of James, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God," Joseph sought an answer to his quest through vocal prayer. In the serenity of a beautiful grove, the boy knelt in prayer. "I was enrapt in a heavenly vision," Joseph stated, "and saw two glorious personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness." One of the personages called him by name and said, "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" Then, Christ informed Joseph that "all the religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as his church and kingdom." He was promised that if he remained worthy "the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto [him.]" [^1]

Three years later, on September 21, 1823, Joseph was again enwrapped in a heavenly vision. On this occasion, an angel, whose name was Moroni, informed him that deposited in a hill near his home was an invaluable record enscribed on metallic plates. These plates contained the religious history of aboriginal inhabitants of America, including an account of the visitation of the resurrected Christ to his "other sheep" living on the American continent. On September 22, 1827, the heavenly messenger delivered the golden plates to Joseph Smith; and according to the Prophet, he translated the work through the medium of Interpreters, called a Urim and Thummim, and by the gift and power of God. [^2]

I. Witnesses Verify the Testimony of Joseph Smith

Declarations of the Three Witnesses

Prior to the publication of the religious history which was called the Book of Mormon, the plates from which the book was translated were shown to eleven individuals. Three men, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and David Whitmer, testified that they were present with Joseph when an angel showed them the plates and while examining the record, heard a voice from heaven substantiating the correct translation of the history. Within one year after the Three Witnesses beheld the plates, their testimony was published in the first edition of the Book of Mormon.

Although the Three Witnesses were among the first to join the church organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, they became critical of teachings and policies advocated by the Prophet and neglected to live the gospel. Consequently, they were excommunicated. After severing their relations with the Restored Church, these men did not retaliate by denying their testimony regarding the reality of the golden plates, an action which would have been natural had they engaged in a plot to deceive others. During their estrangement, each of these men continued to assert that his testimony recorded in the Book of Mormon was true.

Prior to returning to the Church, Oliver Cowdery attended and spoke at a Church conference held in Iowa in 1848. On that occasion, Oliver described an earlier experience by declaring:

I beheld with my eyes. And handled with my hands the gold plates from which it (the Book of Mormon) was translated. I also beheld the Interpreters. That book is true. Sidney Rigdon did not write it. Mr. Spaulding did not write it. I wrote it myself as it fell from the lips of the prophet. [^3]

Before Martin Harris returned to the Church, he said to a young man who was traveling east to serve in the British mission, "As many of the plates Joseph Smith translated I handled with my hands, plate after plate." [^4] A few years later, in 1869, when Martin Harris was asked by a missionary who was returning from England if he still believed the Book of Mormon was true, Harris positively declared:

Young man, Do I believe it! Do you see the sun shining! Just as surely as the sun is shining on us and gives us light . . . so surely do I know that . . . I saw the plates; I saw the Angel; I heard the voice of God. . . . I might as well doubt my own existence as to doubt the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. [^5]

Although Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris returned to the Church and reaffirmed their acceptance of the divine calling of Joseph Smith, David Whitmer refused to reunite with the Church organized by the Prophet. Nevertheless, he also affirmed his testimony regarding the plates by publishing a tract, Address to All Believers (1887), in which he refuted the rumor that he and other witnesses had denied their testimony. [^6]

Nine years prior to the publication of the Address to All Believers, David Whitmer was interviewed by Orson Pratt, a prominent Mormon leader, and was asked if he had seen the angel when he examined the plates. David Whitmer replied, "Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is strictly and absolutely true, just as it is there written." David Whitmer further certified, "It was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light." I also "heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard any thing in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God." [^7]

Shortly before these men died, individuals stood near the beds of the Three Witnesses and recorded their dying statements. In all three instances, the men reaffirmed for the last time in mortality their testimony that the Book of Mormon was the word of God. [^8]

The Testimony of the Eight Witnesses

In addition to the testimony of the Three Witnesses, eight other men declared that they saw and handled the plates; and their attestation also appeared in the first edition of the Book of Mormon. Three of these witnesses were excommunicated, but not one of the men who severed his relations with the Church nor any of the other five men denied his testimony that he examined carefully a set of golden plates on which were inscribed peculiar writings.

II. Significant Preliminaries to the Organization of the Church of Jesus Christ

Restoration of God's Authority

In addition to the publication of the Book of Mormon, other significant events occurred prior to the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon declared that believer's baptism by immersion for the remission of sins was a prerequisite for salvation and that those who performed this ordinance must possess God's delegated authority. While translating the record, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery decided to ask God for further light regarding the subject of baptism. On May 15, 1829, as these young men knelt in prayer, the heavens were again opened. John the Baptist appeared and bestowed upon these men the Aaronic Priesthood, conveying to them the keys, the power, and the right to perform the ordinance of baptism. A short time later, Peter, James, and John appeared to these men and conferred upon them a higher priesthood, the Melchizedek Priesthood, conveying to them the right to bestow upon others who were worthy the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^9]

Joseph Smith taught that the priesthood which he received is the power and authority to act in God's name and is the channel of communication from God to man. "It is the order of heavenly things," the Prophet further explained, "that God should always send a new dispensation into the world when men have apostatized from the truth and lost the priesthood." When men attempt to restore the truth by building upon the foundations laid by other mortals, they act without authority from God. The Prophet insisted that such authority had to be delegated by God to man before an individual could properly reestablish God's Church upon the earth. [^10]

Important Revelations

Joseph Smith also declared that prior to the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ, he was informed by revelation that many popular Christian dogmas were true, such as the reality of the Fall and the atonement. By means of the atonement, the Prophet learned, those who believe and are baptized and endure to the end shall be saved. He further learned that justification and sanctification through the grace of Christ were just and true principles and perceived that the Arminians were correct when they stated that there was a possibility that man might fall from grace.

The Prophet received instructions from God regarding not only doctrines of the Church but also many aspects of church government and practices which are not described in the New Testament. He was informed of the duties of officers in Christ's Church, such as the responsibilities of elders, priests, teachers, and deacons, and learned the prayers that should be offered during the administration of baptism and the Lord's Supper. [^11]

III. The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

On April 6, 1830, after securing God's delegated authority, learning the fundamental principles of the gospel, and receiving revelations on the nature of church government, Joseph Smith at the command of the Lord, organized The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Although the official name of the Church was not established by revelation until 1838, the early converts to this religion called themselves Latter-day Saints. Most Americans, however, referred to these Christians as Mormons; and eventually, this nickname gained popular usage among the members of the Restored Church.

Early Church Growth

Immediately following the organization of the Church, membership increased slowly. A few families living in and near Manchester, Palmyra, Fayette, and Colesville, New York, joined the new religious movement, but most settlers in this section of the American wilderness refused to investigate the unusual claims of the Mormon Prophet. When the second conference was convened at Fayette on September 26, 1830, almost six months after the Church was constituted, there were only sixty-two members.

After these initial months of relatively little success, Mormon missionaries commenced a fruitful harvest. During and immediately following the second conference, four men were called to preach the gospel to Indians living on the edge of the American frontier. One of these missionaries, Parley P. Pratt, had been converted while serving as a traveling preacher of the Campbellite faith and believed that other Disciples or Reformed Baptists living in eastern Ohio would embrace Mormonism. Therefore, Parley P. Pratt convinced his companions that they should preach to his friends in the Western Reserve before proceeding to Missouri. Upon arriving in Mentor, Ohio, the missionaries stopped at the home of Reverend Sidney Rigdon, an influential Reformed Baptist minister who had previously converted Pratt to the religious views popularized by Alexander Campbell. After giving Rigdon a copy of the Book of Mormon and informing him of the origin of that work, the elders secured permission to preach to the members of Rigdon's congregation. When the parishioners gathered, the Mormon elders proclaimed that New Testament Christianity had been restored. God's authority had been delegated to man through heavenly messengers. By latter-day revelation, God was directing the Restored Church. This message stirred the hearts of a people who were seeking a restoration. During the month of November, many former Campbellites, including Sidney Rigdon, were converted; and after the missionaries left to resume proselytizing activities in western Missouri, other settlers residing in eastern Ohio requested baptism from those who had received God's delegated authority. [^12]

The Saints Gather in Ohio

After learning that many people residing in the Western Reserve had embraced Mormonism, Joseph Smith migrated to Kirtland, where he established temporary headquarters of the Church, and informed the Saints in New York that they should sell their property and move to Ohio. In the spring of 1831, a majority of the Mormons in New York complied with the counsel of the Prophet and settled in Kirtland and neighboring communities. When a conference was held in Kirtland in June, 1831, about two thousand people gathered, which probably constituted a large per cent of the membership of the Church after the New York Saints had united to worship with the converts of Ohio. [^13]

Unfolding the Zion Concept

In the summer of 1831, a second gathering place for the Saints was designated by the Mormon Prophet. Joseph Smith informed the membership of the Church that a city of God would be built by a righteous people in Independence, Missouri, and a magnificent temple would be constructed there. The willing and obedient who participated in this great work, he told the Saints, would receive innumerable blessings. During the millennium, this city of Zion would be one of the two capital cities of the world, the other capital being Jerusalem, and eventually Christ would rule the earth from these two important administrative centers. [^14]

Although the Prophet encouraged many Saints to settle in Independence, he warned members not to gather in haste, and attempted to supervise the migration west by a well-regulated program. The Prophet also instructed many members to remain in Kirtland and neighboring towns. From the summer of 1831 to the spring of 1838, there were two gathering places for the Saints, one in Missouri and another in Ohio.

IV. The Story of a Persecuted People

Mormon Tribulation in Jackson County

Enthused about the possibility of building a city of God in the center of Zion, many Mormons neglected to comply with the regulated program of migration, and without proper preparation migrated to Independence. Many failed to bring seeds or cattle to this region or to carry with them sufficient money, hoping that other members would provide them with economic necessities; but such help was not available for every new settler. The lack of preparation and the failure of many Mormons to comply with the instructions of their leaders, resulted in adverse economic plight for many immigrants. After residing in comfortable homes in the East, many Mormons became uncomfortable squatters in the American frontier.

While in a state of economic irritation, some Mormon immigrants to Missouri neglected to live the principles of the gospel. "There were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires" among these people. [^15] Aware of the failings of the Saints in Missouri, in January, 1833, the Prophet sent a letter to one of the leaders of the Church in the state instructing the people that Zion would only be built upon the principles of righteousness. Joseph Smith warned the settlers that if they did not purify their lives that "the Lord's anger" would be "kindled to fierceness." "Repent, repent, is the voice of God to Zion," the Prophet declared. "Our hearts are greatly grieved at the spirit" which prevails there, which spirit is "wasting the strength of Zion like a pestilence." Then, the Prophet reminded the people, "Remember God sees the secret springs of human action, and knows the hearts of all living." [^16]

In the summer of 1833, shortly after Joseph Smith had encouraged members

residing in Missouri to repent, perplexed Latter-day Saints

heard many grievances and obstinate threats from other settlers of Jackson

County. Mormons were unjustly accused of tampering with their slaves. The

cultural cleavage which existed was expressed when non-Mormons referred to the Saints as "easterners." Some of the old settlers resented the economic competition which emerged when Saints established and patronized a country store. Political leaders perceived that if Mormon immigration into Jackson County continued, Latter-day Saints could gain political control of that region and possibly replace other men as influential administrators. A vicious rumor was also circulated that Mormons planned to seize and monopolize all the land. Since Zion was to be built by the Saints, Missourians contended that Mormons schemed to drive from Independence all citizens who were not classified as "pure in heart." Moreover, some of the settlers condemned L.D.S. theology, insisting that men who claimed visions, revelations, and miraculous healings were inspired by Satan. After asserting that the religious "fanatics" should be driven from their community, one group of Jackson County pioneers issued a pernicious order of expulsion. [^17]

In the latter part of October, 1833, non-Mormons inaugurated a reign of terror designed to expel all Latter-day Saints from Jackson County. The lawlessness which erupted was a directed mob activity supervised by prominent political, business, and religious leaders of that county. When Mormons seized their arms to defend their rights, property, and lives, a militia intervened to prevent civil war. But instead of functioning to preserve law and order, the militia seized the arms of the Mormons and then withdrew, leaving the defenseless Saints at the mercy of irate mobs. Gangs of Missourians drove women and children from their homes, whipped Mormon men, and burned more than two hundred homes. Early in November, in the midst of biting winter storms, approximately one thousand Saints fled from the tragic scene, crossed the Missouri River, and established temporary residence in Clay County.

Latter-day Saints attempted to secure redress for crimes committed in Jackson County, but they were unable to obtain an impartial hearing in the courts of Missouri; and the national government refused to intervene in the religious affairs of this state.

Mormon Expulsion from Ohio and Missouri

After remaining in Clay County for several years, Mormons migrated a few miles north into a sparsely settled section of the state. New headquarters were established at Far West, in Caldwell County. In this primitive wilderness, the Mormons again cleared the ground, erected homes, and planted the seeds of a civilization.

Meanwhile, persecution erupted in Ohio. In 1838, in the midst of apostate mobocracy, Joseph Smith and other Mormon leaders fled from Kirtland. In the spring of that year, hundreds of faithful Latter-day Saints who had been living in eastern Ohio, migrated to northwestern Missouri, gathering in Caldwell and neighboring counties.

But members of this Church were not permitted to live in peace in Missouri. Although the principle of religious liberty was heralded as a prominent characteristic of the new nation, the practice of intolerance continued. False rumors and malicious lies regarding the aims and ideals of the L.D.S. people were widely circulated. A clash of cultures occurred in the American frontier where actions of mobs were sometimes stronger than the arm of the state. Latter-day Saints became "objects of the deepest hatred and detestation." The old settlers jealously objected to the attempt of the Saints to establish Missouri as a "general rendezvous." Mormons were accused of being abolitionists, Yankees, friends of the Indians, and tools of the Devil. Moreover, many Missourians concluded that the religious views of the Saints prevented peaceful coexistence of Mormons and non-Mormons. "The religious tenets of this people," the settlers of Clay County agreed at a mass meeting, "are so different from the present churches of the age, that they always have, and always will, excite deep prejudices against them in any populous country where they may locate." [^18] Daniel Dunklin, governor of Missouri at the time of the Mormon expulsion from Jackson County, also contended that religious prejudice was a primary cause of Latter-day Saint oppression, for he wrote, "I am fully persuaded that the eccentricity of the religious opinions and practices of the Mormons, is at the bottom of the outrages committed against them." [^19]

In August, 1838, conflict between the Mormons and non-Mormons erupted when the Saints attempted to exercise their right to vote. As the weeks passed, clashes intensified. When Latter-day Saints sought to protect themselves from the attacks of irate mobs, they were denounced as aggressors. Unsubstantiated reports of Mormon atrocities in northern Missouri were submitted to Governor Lilburn Boggs. Mormons were accused of burning homes, destroying towns, attacking the Missouri militia, and planning the destruction of Richmond. Without investigating these charges, Governor Lilburn Boggs issued one of the most unprecedented and intolerant decrees uttered by an American executive. "The Mormons must be treated as enemies," Boggs ordered the officer commanding the Missouri militia, "and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if necessary for the public good. Their outrages are beyond all description." [^20]

The executive order of expulsion was effectively enforced. Joseph Smith and other Mormon leaders were apprehended, imprisoned, and denied a fair trial. Property amounting to approximately two million dollars was seized from these oppressed people; and during the winter of 1838-1839, from twelve to fifteen thousand Mormons emigrated from Missouri. To describe accurately the hardships, pain, and anguish suffered by these pioneers is impossible. Some historians have estimated that possibly fifty Saints died during the exodus, but no accurate figures are available of the number who laid down their lives as a direct and indirect result of mob activity occurring during the tragic expulsion of the Mormons from Missouri. [^21]

Not knowing where their new homes would be located, the Mormon exiles crossed the Missouri border and entered Illinois and Iowa. There they were greeted with sympathetic kindness, were given relief, and provided employment.

After escaping from the Missourians, Joseph Smith reorganized the Saints, purchased (by issuing long term notes) hundreds of acres of farm land located about fifty miles north of Quincy, Illinois, and then directed the Saints to emigrate to this new gathering place.

A Day of God's Power

In the spring of 1839, hundreds of destitute Saints settled in the swamps adjacent to a great horseshoe bend in the Mississippi River. For weeks, many settlers lived in tents or wagons and some slept on the damp ground. Unaccustomed to such an environment, many Mormons fell prey to various diseases. On the morning of July 22, Joseph Smith called upon the Lord in prayer and then walked among the afflicted Saints, commanding them in the name of Jesus Christ to arise. According to Wilford Woodruff, Joseph Smith "healed all in his house and dooryard." Then accompanied by Sidney Rigdon and several apostles, Joseph walked among the sick lying near the bank of the Mississippi, healing the afflicted. "When he had healed all that were sick on the east side of the river," Wilford Woodruff continued, the Prophet crossed the Mississippi. At Montrose, Iowa, Joseph Smith entered the home where Brigham Young lay ill and by the power of God restored to health this prominent Church leader. [^22] During the historic day, a group followed the Prophet into the home of Elijah Fordham. Elijah Fordham lay prostrate, nearly speechless, in what was considered the last stage of a deadly fever. "His eyes were sunk in their sockets," Parley P. Pratt observed. "His flesh was gone; the paleness of death was upon him; and he was hardly to be distinguished from a corpse." Joseph Smith grasped the dying man by the hand and said, "Brother Fordham, in the name of Jesus Christ, arise and walk." Elijah Fordham arose from his bed, put on his clothes, ate, and then followed the Prophet to witness other remarkable healings. [^23]

When the group proceeded to the home adjacent to the Fordham residence, the Mormon Prophet approached Joseph Bates Noble, another Latter-day Saint who had fallen prey to disease. Bishop Noble vividly recorded the miraculous incident which ensued: [^24]

As soon as I saw him the tears of joy burst from my eyes. In a moment he was at my bedside, and took me by the hand. Without waiting for the other brethren to get to my bed, he commanded me, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and walk. I arose, and while putting on my clothes I fainted. When I regained consciousness I was on the bed, and Joseph was standing close to me.

As soon as my eyes met his he said, "Wherefore didst thou doubt?" and again commanded me to arise.

While he was speaking I felt the healing virtue flowing through every part of my system. I immediately arose and walked, rejoicing and praising the Lord with all my heart, for his blessing resting upon me, by which I was made whole.

After Joseph and other witnesses of the remarkable healings returned to their homes, Heber C. Kimball and Wilford Woodruff testified that they praised the Lord and vowed that this day in which the power of God was abundantly manifest would never be forgotten by the Latter-day Saints.

The Rapid Growth of Nauvoo

Inspired by the direction of a Prophet of God, the Saints worked industriously, drained the swamps, erected comfortable brick and wooden homes, and adorned their property with beautiful gardens. Political and recreational centers and meeting houses were constructed in the heart of the Mormon community, and an imposing temple was built overlooking the majestic Mississippi. A few years after the Mormons settled in Illinois, the Mormon community, named Nauvoo, had become the largest city in the state with a population of approximately fifteen thousand people.

Members of the Restored Church acknowledged that the guiding influence in the rise of Nauvoo was Joseph Smith. By providing the people with a plan for the laying out of this city, the Mormon Prophet demonstrated unusual foresight and skill. In the second half of the nineteenth century, this city became a model for the building of many towns by the Latter-day Saints in the Rocky Mountain region. While residing in Nauvoo, the Prophet was the inspiration behind the establishment of a school of higher education. He organized the women of the Church into a Female Relief Society, designed to foster the principles of knowledge and virtue among the "sisters" and to provide for the temporal needs of the less fortunate Saints. Moreover, he served as mayor of the city and was the commanding officer of the Nauvoo Legion, a large militia. Since Joseph Smith's leadership was visible in so many projects, members of the Church unanimously agreed at a conference held in April, 1845, that the Mormon community should be called "The City of Joseph." [^25]

The Mormon Exodus to Greatness

Peace and prosperity did not continue in Nauvoo. While Latter-day Saints resided in "The City of Joseph," the Prophet continued to teach doctrines which were regarded by members of other denominations as peculiar Mormon beliefs. Saints also learned that God had conveyed to their leader a new order of marriage, and a few members began practicing polygamy. When non-Mormons became aware of this practice, they accused the Saints of immoral actions. Meanwhile, jealous settlers craved Mormon wealth. Politicians who lost campaigns denounced Mormons for failure to support them and determined that if they were to succeed politically in Illinois, Latter-day Saints would have to be expelled. For a variety of reasons, American citizens again organized to eradicate a "peculiar" religious group from their society.

In 1844, anti-Mormon agitation increased and mobs formed. In June of that year, a mob killed the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum. Although the Mormon people were stunned and stricken with grief by the news of the assassinations, the death of Joseph Smith did not destroy the Church as some settlers anticipated. Complying with the instructions of Joseph Smith, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, led by Brigham Young, began directing the affairs of the Church; and in December, 1847, Brigham Young was accepted by most of the leaders and members of the Church as the new prophet, seer, and revelator. [^26]

After the martyrdom, Nauvoo continued to increase in population and prosperity, but mob activity also increased. In the fall of 1845, settlers of Illinois met in mass meetings and demanded that the Mormons leave. Ruffians demonstrated their determination to enforce such decrees by burning about a hundred Mormon homes located in the southern part of Hancock County. Threatened by renewed plots to destroy their way of life, in the fall of 1845, the Mormons announced that after preparing for an exodus "west of the Rocky Mountains," they would leave Illinois. [^27]

The massive western migration of the Mormon pioneers commenced in February, 1846. Migrating in groups, the saints crossed the Mississippi and slowly traversed the rolling hills of Iowa. After spending the winter at resting stations located along the lonely trail leading west, an advanced company of pioneers left an encampment located near the Missouri River in April, 1847, and in July entered the Great Salt Lake Valley. Others followed, and after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley many pioneers were requested to establish their homes in other sections of the Rocky Mountain Region. Under the direction of Brigham Young, one of the most competent and successful colonizers in the history of mankind, the Latter-day Saints transformed the western deserts into productive farms and towns. When President Young died in 1877, the Mormons had established more than three hundred settlements in western America. [^28]

V. Theological Contributions of Joseph Smith

While the early history of Mormonism is partially a story of oppression and expulsion, it is also a story of a people who courageously maintained their conviction that the gospel of Jesus Christ had been restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Mormon pioneers stand as imposing symbols of faith, devotion, and loyalty to a religion which was considered eccentric and peculiar by many Americans. Although the reasons for Mormon persecution in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois were many, a primary cause of Mormon oppression was the unique theology restored by the Latter-day Prophet.

Similarities in the Teachings of the Prophet and Doctrines Advocated by his Contemporaries

During the past few decades, many non-Mormon historians have neglected to emphasize the distinct theological concepts unfolded by Joseph Smith, but have concentrated on describing the parallels in the teachings of the Prophet with tenets espoused by his contemporaries. The comparison of resemblances is made in an attempt to substantiate a popular non-Mormon theory that Mormonism is solely a product of the times—that Joseph Smith formulated a religion based upon the religious convictions of American religious leaders of the early nineteenth century. [^29]

There are many explanations for similarities in the teachings of the Prophet and the doctrines advocated by others. The Latter-day Prophet averred that the Restoration was a "restitution of all things spoken of by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." Doctrines which he unfolded were ancient beliefs and practices, some of which had been retained in the theology of various Christian denominations. Since the Roman Catholics and Protestants based their teachings solely or partially on the principles taught in the scriptures, these groups proclaimed many truths. If Mormonism could not have been defended on the basis of Biblical tenets and if all its doctrine had been unique, the Mormon ambassadors of the Lord would have enlisted few converts. Mormons do not have a monopoly on truth. Truth is the common right of all mankind. "Have the Presbyterians any truth?" asked Joseph Smith. "Yes," he affirmed. Then referring to the many Protestant denominations he added, "They all have a little truth mixed with error. We should gather all the good and true principles in the world and treasure them up, or we shall not come out true 'Mormons'." [^30]

Although the doctrines of the Church are clearly expressed in the various writings and revelations recorded by the Latter-day Prophet, Joseph Smith did not produce a comprehensive description of the tenets of Mormonism, nor did he write an elaborate apology of Mormon theology. The thirteen statements of belief published by the Prophet, known as the Articles of Faith, were written at the request of a non-Mormon and primarily indicate the Latter-day Saint position on controversial theological issues of the early nineteenth century. They emphasize the similarities of Mormonism and beliefs endorsed by other Christians. Except for brief expressions on the Book of Mormon, and some features of the Zion concept, authority, and the organization of the Church, the Articles do not describe unique doctrines. Nevertheless, the contemporaries and successors of Joseph Smith crystallized his teachings into descriptive beliefs by writing competent apologies such as James E. Talmage's Articles of Faith. Friends and enemies of the Prophet were well aware that many of these tenets were distinct theological views and that no American contemporary of Joseph Smith was teaching the doctrine precisely as enunciated by him.

Concept of the Godhead

One of the most significant contributions of Joseph Smith was to restore to mankind a correct understanding of the Godhead. From visions and revelations, Joseph Smith learned that Christians and non-Christians professed many truths regarding Deity. "There is a God in heaven," the Prophet affirmed, "who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them." [^31] He held that the Father and Son are full of transcendent knowledge, power, mercy, love, and justice. Since Adam fell, the Prophet added, God sent to earth his Only Begotten Son. After living a perfect life, Jesus Christ "was crucified, died, and rose again the third day; and ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father." [^32]

While the Prophet's teachings regarding the character and personality of the Godhead and the mission of the Savior differed appreciably from the popular Unitarian concept of the early nineteenth century, Joseph Smith taught a view held by William E. Channing and other Unitarians living prior to the Civil War. Joseph declared that the Father and Son were separate and distinct beings and that Jesus was divine. Any person, he said, who "had seen the heavens opened knows that there are three personages in the heavens who hold the keys of power, and one presides over all." [^33] The Prophet further testified that whenever he had preached on the subject of the Deity, he had taught the doctrine of "the plurality of Gods." "I have always declared God to be a distinct personage," the Prophet added, "Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and . . . the Holy Ghost . . . a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods." [^34]

Although Joseph Smith recognized that there were elements of truth regarding Deity in the popular creeds of Christendom and in the writings of liberal religious leaders of early America, the Mormon Prophet declared in the year of his martyrdom that very few people in the world understood rightly the character of God and man's relationship to his Heavenly Father. Man should be keenly concerned about the nature of the being whom he worships, the Prophet reasoned. Such knowledge is essential for eternal life, he said, for the scriptures inform us that "This is life eternal that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." [^35]

One concept unfolded by the Latter-day Prophet that was not taught by his American contemporaries was that "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost . . . is a personage of Spirit." [^36] Although Christians of that age generally believed in a literal resurrection of the body and employed scriptures describing Christ's resurrection to substantiate this doctrine, Catholics and most Protestants disembodied Christ after his ascension so that the Savior could become one in essence with the Father, eliminating a plurality of Gods. Joseph Smith taught a simple truth that Christ retained his resurrected body and that when writers of the New Testament described Christ as an individual who was in the express image of his Father, they meant, in part, that the Father is a being with a body of flesh and bones. [^37]

When the Prophet described the resurrection, he shed further light on the composition of the bodies of the Father and the Son. Joseph Smith taught that man is resurrected after the pattern of Christ's resurrection. Death, he alleged, separated Christ's body and spirit, and when the spirit departed, the body was dead; but the body lived again when the spirit by the power of the resurrection reunited with it. The resurrected body, he held, is a perfect body, limbs and joints being restored to their proper frame. Blood, however, he said, would not flow in this perfect body, for flesh and blood cannot enter heaven, but flesh and bones, quickened by the Spirit of God can. [^38] In other words, Joseph Smith recognized that the Father and Son and all resurrected celestial personages are spiritual as well as physical beings. They are physical personages because spirit, not blood, flows through their bodies. Thus, Joseph Smith's interpretation of the well-known passage in Genesis, that man was created in the image of God, was different from that expressed by any of his contemporaries.

Man's Relationship to God

A distinct concept of man's relationship to God was unfolded when the Prophet discussed the doctrine of eternal marriage. Joseph Smith taught that men and women who enter into the everlasting covenant of marriage and are sealed by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood will be privileged to be husband and wife in the eternities and to bear children after the resurrection. [^39] During the winter of 1839-1840, Parley P. Pratt met Joseph Smith in Philadelphia and for the first time in his life heard the concept of eternal family organization and the eternal union of the sexes. After listening to the Prophet expound on these "glorious principles," Parley P. Pratt recorded ecstatically, "I learned that the wife of my bosom might be secured to me for time and all eternity; . . . while the result of our endless union would be an offspring as numerous as the stars of heaven, or the sand of the sea shore." Then, Parley P. Pratt wrote that he obtained a new understanding of why God is addressed, "Our Father who art in Heaven." [^40]

While the Prophet was unfolding the concept of eternal marriage, he was also issuing instructions on man's pre-mortal existence. "All spirit is matter," he said. "There is no such thing as immaterial matter." Man's intelligence, he added, was not created nor made. Man is co-eternal with God. Like God, man has always existed. [^41]

Joseph Smith also taught that in the pre-mortal life the offspring of God were free agents and attained varying degrees of intelligence. Some of the most competent personalities (such as Abraham) were chosen before they were born to be leaders in mortality. [^42]

After the Prophet revealed the principles of celestial marriage and man's eternal nature, Latter-day Saints understood more precisely what Joseph Smith meant when he informed the people that they were the offspring of God. Members of this denomination believe that celestial parents brought forth pre-existent spirits, by combining intelligence (which cannot be created) and spirit matter, thereby producing "intelligences." According to Latter-day Saints, the first born in the spirit world was Jesus Christ; therefore, the Savior of mankind is our elder brother. Moreover, Latter-day Saints believe that the premortal spiritual bodies are in a form like our mortal bodies. According to an account published in the Book of Mormon, Christ showed his body to one of the prophets who lived centuries before the Savior's birth on earth and this body was similar in appearance to Jesus' earthly body. [^43]

Christ's Role in the War in Heaven

The Prophet taught other distinct concepts regarding Christ when he restored information pertaining to the causes and consequences of the War in Heaven. At a great council held prior to man's advent on earth, Christ defended the Father's plan that all men be permitted to choose for themselves their course through life; and Jesus consented to take upon himself the sins of those who kept his commandments. Our "elder brother" further promised to give all glory and honor to the Father. Lucifer, another child of God, announced a counter proposal designed to save all men, but his plan deprived men of their free agency and of an opportunity to progress. Refusing to comply with the will of the Father, Lucifer rebelled.

After describing the reason for the war, the Prophet confirmed the view of other theologians by writing that one-third of the children of God followed Satan. After waging an unsuccessful campaign, Lucifer and his followers were driven from heaven and were denied the opportunity of obtaining tabernacles and living as mortals on this earth. Although the enemies of God were defeated in the war in heaven, Joseph Smith warned, Lucifer and other devils perpetually strive to thwart the work of God, "by going up and down the earth, seeking whom" they "may destroy." [^44]

Concept of the Bible

Joseph Smith's attitude toward the Bible was similar in many respects with the views held by his contemporaries. Although most Christians of pre-Civil War America held that the Bible was infallible and all-inclusive, Quakers, Catholics, Unitarians, Universalists, deists, and members of other religious societies denied this concept. Many Americans of the early republic recognized that the various editions of the Bible contained errors of omissions, additions, and incorrect translations; and many Christians, particularly members of societies who endorsed latter-day revelation, denied that visions and revelations ceased with the death of the apostles. The Prophet expressed his view of the Bible by stating, "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers." [^45] It is a work which "came from God." Men should diligently search the scriptures, he advised, for in this work one can learn the laws and commandments of God and the program of salvation. [^46] Let us not be deluded, the Prophet further preached, by the view that the Bible is infallible. Many plain and precious truths were taken from that work before it was compiled. "Ignorant translators, careless transcribers," and "designing and corrupt priests" have also inserted in the scriptures many errors. [^47] Because of the mutilations of the original text, the Prophet concluded that there is a significant difference between the actual meaning of the prophets and the present translation. [^48] The Prophet also criticized Christians who insisted that the Bible was all-inclusive and the sole norm of faith. Nowhere in that volume, the Prophet argued, do we read that visions and revelations ceased permanently with the death of the apostles. The canon of scriptures is not closed, Joseph insisted; the Bible does not contain all that God ever revealed or will reveal to man. [^49]

A Verification of the Old and New Testaments

While Joseph Smith was not the only individual of his generation to declare that the Bible was the word of God in so far as it was translated correctly, he was the only American religious leader to publish translated works disclosing that in most instances the King James Version and many other versions correctly reveal the word of God. Many Christians would consider the discovery of another gospel written by a disciple who was personally acquainted with Christ as one of the greatest discoveries of the modern era. Joseph Smith provided mankind with such a work. Within the covers of The Book of Mormon is a fifth gospel. This book is another evidence that the Savior lives, that he is literally the son of God, that he voluntarily atoned for the transgression of Adam, that he took upon himself the sins of all penitent souls, and that he inaugurated the resurrection. Furthermore, this record verifies portions of the Old Testament. Early immigrants to this continent transported to America writings of ancient prophets; and Latter-day Saints believe that a correct version of the teachings of Isaiah and other ancient spokesmen of God are contained in The Book of Mormon. These messages also provide Latter-day Saints with a key enabling them to interpret ambiguous statements in the Bible which have led to conflicting doctrines and practices among many Christians.

Latter-day Scriptures

In addition to acknowledging that the Bible and Book of Mormon contain revealed truth, Latter-day Saints regard the book of Doctrine and Covenants (which is primarily a collection of revelations and inspired statements recorded by Joseph Smith) and the Pearl of Great Price (a work containing translations and other writings of the Mormon Prophet) as scripture. Members of the Restored Church declare that these scriptures of the American continent do not supplant the Bible but supplement man's knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Latter-day Saints further believe that the scriptural contributions of Joseph Smith, which almost equal in volume the Old and New Testaments, provide the world with additional evidence that Jesus Christ has restored the everlasting gospel upon the earth.

Concept of the Fall and the Greatness of the Man Adam

The Mormon Prophet also contributed to man's understanding of the consequences of the Fall and Adam's position among the children of God. Like others of his generation, Joseph Smith declared that Adam was the first man, the grand progenitor of the human race and that his body was made out of elements found on the earth. Individuals advocating that men would be punished for their own sins and not for Adam's transgression, the Prophet added, teach a correct principle; and Joseph Smith affirmed that the Fall resulted in temporary misery for mankind, a physical death, and banishment from God's presence. [^50]

While one group of Christians condemned Adam for his transgression, and a few liberals indicated that men benefited from the Fall, and others denied that the Fall occurred, the Prophet specified in a distinct manner how the Fall benefitted mankind. According to the Book of Mormon, "If Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen," but he and Eve would have remained in the state of their original creation, which was a state of innocence. In this condition of innocence, they would have been unable to bear children. They also could not have sinned nor performed righteous acts. If there be no righteousness, the Book of Mormon reads, there can be no happiness. "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." [^51]

Because of Adam's prudent decision in the Garden of Eden and his faithfulness in the pre-mortal and mortal life, Joseph Smith announced that the first man was one of the most choice children of God, a noble servant who was blessed immeasurably for his integrity. According to the Prophet, Adam was taught the gospel of Jesus Christ and conscientiously embraced the principles of salvation. He was baptized, was given the priesthood, and was the first to hold spiritual blessings. Three years prior to Adam's death, Joseph uniquely asserted, Adam and his righteous posterity gathered in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, located in northern Missouri. On that occasion, Adam blessed his children. Then the Lord appeared and blessed Adam, calling him Michael ("who is like God"), the Prince, the Archangel, and said to him, "I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever." [^52] Another distinct concept of Adam's greatness was expressed by the Prophet when he informed the Saints that under the direction of Christ, Adam presides over the spirits of all men and that when the keys of the priesthood are brought from heaven and conveyed to man "it is by Adam's authority." [^53]

A Limited and Universal Application of the Atonement

When the Prophet instructed the Saints on the atonement of Christ, he acknowledged a popular view that the Savior was appointed to redeem man from the Fall before the foundations of the world were laid. He also affirmed that Jesus Christ lived and died to help men become reconciled to the will of God, thereby rejecting a controversial view that Christ died to induce the Father to alter his attitude toward man.

In addition to indicating the Mormon position on polemic issues of his age, the Prophet restored to divided Christendom a forgotten concept of the significance of the atonement. As previously mentioned, orthodox Calvinists held that the atonement applied only to God's elect. Arminians disagreed, contending that Christ died for all believers. Quakers believed that all righteous people, regardless of their faith, would benefit from Christ's actions and would be saved. Universalists insisted that Christ died for all men, and everyone who lives upon this earth will be cleansed from his sins preparatory to entering heaven. Joseph Smith's answer to this controversial topic was that Christ's atonement had a limited and a universal consequence. Because of the sacrifice of the only perfect man, the Prophet announced, all men will be resurrected, and individuals who accept the Savior and keep his commandments will be purified from their sins and will return to God's presence.

Method of Securing Salvation

When the Prophet informed others of the method of seeking salvation, he advocated a concept which was taught by a few Protestants but was not widely held by the Christians of his age. Catholics claimed that the sacraments of the church were vehicles through which men were purified of sin and prepared to enter God's presence. Most Lutherans and Calvinists believed that salvation was a gift of God and was bestowed upon man directly without the mediation of sacraments. Methodists and Arminians insisted that man's salvation involved two agencies—the actions of God and man. Liberal Unitarians of the early republic contended that salvation from sin was solely the result of faith and works of the individual. Joseph Smith declared that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind would be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. In other words, Latter-day Saints believe that salvation is the result of the grace of God, the sacraments or ordinances of the Church, and man's own faith and works. [^54]

First Principles of the Gospel

Many historians have noted parallels in the views popularized by Alexander Campbell and the teachings of Joseph Smith on the fundamental principles of salvation. Campbell emphasized five essential principles of the gospel: faith, repentance, believer's baptism by immersion, remission of sins, and the reception of the Holy Ghost. Joseph Smith expressed the Latter-day Saint position on this subject by writing that there were four fundamental principles and ordinances of the gospel: faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

While similarities in the views of Alexander Campbell and Joseph Smith are readily discerned, differences in the teachings of these men are also obvious. In addition to emphasizing that the gift of the Holy Ghost should be conveyed by the laying on of hands, Joseph Smith disagreed with Campbell by declaring that a man must be called of God by prophecy and by the laying on of hands by those in authority to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof. [^55] Joseph Smith claimed that the priesthood of God had been conveyed to him directly by authorized heavenly messengers who were contemporaries of Christ. In explaining the necessity for such authority, the Prophet preached, [^56]

All the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the earth are of no use to the children of men, unless they are ordained and authorized of God; for nothing will save a man but a legal administrator; for none others will be acknowledged either by God or angels.

I know what I say; I understand my mission and business.

Beyond the Grave

An examination of the Prophet's teachings regarding man's future destiny provides additional evidence that there were many similarities between the Restored Gospel and the views widely held by contemporaries of Joseph Smith, but that the Prophet did not formulate a theology by merely elaborating upon ideas proclaimed by other American religious leaders. Joseph Smith agreed with the Catholic view that there was a partial judgment at death, followed by a final judgment. He agreed with Quakers and other Protestant writers who held that the judgment was according to the works of mankind and specified that little children who died before the years of accountability would be saved. [^57] He shared the convictions of Catholics and Universalists who held that there was an interim between death and the resurrection. Similar to the views of many Protestants, the Mormon Prophet stated that following death, the wicked would suffer mental anguish. "A man," the Prophet said, "is his own tormentor and his own condemner. . . . The torment of disappointment in the mind of man is as exquisite as a lake burning with fire and brimstone." The unjust will suffer because they will come short of the glory others enjoy and will realize their failings. [^58]

Another view popularized by Americans of the early republic and advocated by Joseph Smith was that individuals would remain in the world of spirits until they were resurrected, the righteous coming forth during the first resurrection and the wicked rising from the dust in the second resurrection, that is, following the millennium.

An intensive analysis of the Prophet's teachings regarding life beyond the grave indicates that Joseph Smith unfolded a more reasonable, just, and comprehensive description of the future destiny of man than was taught by any of his contemporaries. The Prophet averred that immediately following death, the spirits of all men enter the world of spirits. The righteous enter paradise, a state of rest, peace, and happiness. There the just are exalted and blessed. Meanwhile, the wicked enter a spirit prison and because of their iniquity, suffer mental anguish and are in a state of remorse. In disagreement with most of his contemporaries, the Prophet declared, "Hades, Sheol, paradise, spirits in prison, are all one: it is a world of spirits. The righteous and the wicked all go to the same world of spirits until the resurrection," some being in a state of happiness and others in a state of misery depending upon the condition of the mind. [^59]

Many aspects of Joseph Smith's teachings on the gradations of heaven were different from the views popularized by the Shakers and a few other religious groups of nineteenth century America. [^60] The Prophet broached a distinct nineteenth century concept when he said that all men, except the sons of perdition, would be assigned to one of three degrees of glory in heaven. Individuals who participate in the resurrection of the unjust, Joseph stated, and do not deny the Holy Spirit, will enter the telestial glory. Honorable children of God who fail to embrace the pure gospel of Christ will enter the terrestrial world and will receive of God's glory but not of his fulness. The most faithful servants of God, the Prophet continued, will enter the celestial kingdom. In this kingdom are three degrees, he said. To enter this glory where God and Christ dwell, individuals must receive the testimony of Jesus and repent of their sins. They must also be baptized by immersion for the remission of sins and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands by one having authority. Such individuals, the Prophet added, fully benefit from Christ's atonement, being cleansed of all their sins preparatory to entering into God's presence. To be admitted into the highest degree in the celestial kingdom, one must enter into the everlasting covenant of marriage and be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. The rewards for such faithfulness will be innumerable, Joseph Smith testified. Righteous couples will remain husbands and wives; will have the privilege of bearing and rearing children; will progress more rapidly than others; will receive the title of god; will receive all things from God, including his fulness and glory; and will experience greater happiness than other children of God. [^61] Many Latter-day Saints believe that the doctrine of man's relationship to God and the concept that God will make his righteous sons like himself are among the greatest theological contributions of Joseph Smith.

One of the contemporaries of Joseph Smith, J. B. Turner, recognized that the Mormon Prophet unfolded many unique concepts and warned others, "Reader, remember that when you meet a full-blooded Mormon, you meet an angel that was, a Mormon that is, and a God that is to be!" [^62]

Salvation for the Dead

There were similarities but also differences in the teachings of the Prophet and the views of his contemporaries regarding salvation for the dead. While most Christians of the early republic held that individuals who failed to embrace the gospel of Christ (according to their definitions of the gospel) would suffer everlasting punishment in hell, Quakers, Universalists, Unitarians and Shakers believed that because of the justice and mercy of God, the Creator would not punish eternally individuals who were not granted an opportunity to embrace the gospel in this life. A few Universalist leaders of the revolutionary generation held that following Christ's crucifixion, the Savior preached to the spirits in prison. Some Universalists reasoned that since there was no everlasting hell, the purpose of Christ's missionary labors was to call the wicked to repentance preparatory for their entering heaven. [^63] The Shakers taught that Christ preached to the spirits in prison and organized a church in the spirit world so that all men would be granted the privilege of receiving the testimony of Jesus. Moreover, Shakers preached that if an individual, in this life or in the world beyond, repents and turns toward God, he will enter heaven. Heaven, they added, was a condition and state of the soul. "The soul's advance" will be "continuous in knowledge and goodness in spiritual powers and glory, toward the perfection of the Divine character." [^64]

Prior to the Restoration, a group of German Dunkers residing in western Pennsylvania became concerned over the fate of their deceased ancestors who had not, in their opinion, heard the pure gospel. Turning to the New Testament, they read that Christians in Corinth engaged in baptism for the dead. Resorting to an ancient practice, a few Dunkers in American backwoods communities baptized by proxy for their deceased ancestors and friends from about 1738 to 1840. [^65]

Joseph Smith agreed with others who held that those who did not learn the gospel in mortality would have an opportunity to embrace the truth in the life beyond the grave. "All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel," Joseph Smith preached, "who would have received [meaning accepted] it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God." [^66] He affirmed that Christ became a ministering spirit (while his body was lying in the sepulcher) to the spirits in prison, extending to departed spirits the privilege of hearing the gospel. The Mormon Prophet also taught that many early Christians who practiced baptism for the dead were engaged in the work of the Lord. [^67]

The Purpose of Latter-day Temples

When the Prophet discussed the nature and purpose of temples, he amplified men's understanding of the principle of salvation for the dead. Joseph Smith declared that baptism for the dead was an ordinance that should be performed in a sacred temple, a building dedicated as a House of the Lord. This ordinance, he said, when properly performed by those in authority, is efficacious for individuals who have received the testimony of Jesus in the spirit world. The Prophet further taught that "endowments" were temple ordinances which prepared Christians to become kings and priests and to receive the fulness of God's blessings, preparatory to man's entering the presence of God. In addition to these contributions, Joseph Smith declared that two additional ordinances should be performed in Latter-day temples—ordinations to the priesthood for those who died prior to embracing the gospel and marriage for time and all eternity for the living and for the dead. [^68]

To emphasize the importance of temple and genealogical work, the Prophet said, "The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead;" and he added, "Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their own salvation." [^69]

Antiquity of the Gospel

Another contribution of Joseph Smith was to restore knowledge concerning religious beliefs and practices of individuals living prior to the apostolic dispensation. While most Christians believed that the gospel of Jesus Christ was not known prior to the birth of the Son of God, a few liberals of the eighteenth century (such as John Murray, the influential Universalist) concluded that the "gospel" was preached by all of "God's holy Prophets, from the beginning of the world." [^70] Joseph Smith agreed that the Savior did not reveal for the first time the gospel and declared that the Son of God restored truths which he had previously unfolded to people living in the eastern and western hemispheres. In a unique manner, the Prophet specified the nature of the gospel which was proclaimed by Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and other ancient prophets. According to the Prophet, the fulness of the gospel (including the principles of faith, repentance, baptism by immersion, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost) was taught and accepted by many of God's children before the advent of Christ. [^71]

A Unique Organization

Joseph Smith not only unfolded many doctrines which were distinct tenets of his age, but he established an organization different from the polity of other religions. Recognizing similarities in the names of officers in the Restored Church and administrators in other denominations, the Prophet declared, "The Irvingites, are a people that have counterfeited the truth, perhaps the nearest of any of our modern sectarians." He said that members of this religious sect (which was founded by Edward Irving in London about 1830) "have apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, and angels. They profess to have the gift of tongues, and the interpretation of tongues, and, in some few instances, to have the gift of healing." [^72] Although the Prophet was aware of parallels in the Irvingite and Mormon religions, Joseph Smith also recognized that there were significant divergencies in the calling, the authority, and the responsibilities of Latter-day Saint leaders and officials of the Irvingite and other denominations. For example, the duties of Mormon bishops, elders, deacons, and patriarchs differ appreciably from the responsibilities extended to these offices in other religious societies. The Prophet also unfolded the unusual offices of stake president, high council, and seventies and stipulated that there were in the Church two priesthoods, the Melchizedek and Aaronic. Then the Prophet classified the the offices of high priest, seventy, and elder as appendages of the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood and specified that three offices of the Aaronic Priesthood were priest, teacher, and deacon.

Principles of Church Government

Another contribution of Joseph Smith was to establish the principle of authority and at the same time preserve man's natural right of free agency. In the Restored Church, no man may properly aspire to any office. All who occupy positions are called by those in authority and no person may officiate until the membership votes to support the individual in the position to which he has been called. [^73]

In the Church established under the direction of Joseph Smith all worthy men, regardless of their social position or economic status are ordained to the priesthood. All worthy members are considered eligible to receive inspiration pertaining to the offices which they hold, but only the president of the Church is eligible to receive revelation pertaining to the entire Church. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints the membership is given the responsibility to preside, to teach, to preach, and to carry the gospel throughout the world. Because innumerable responsibilities are extended to the membership, Mormons realize that the welfare of the Church depends upon their righteousness, their industry, and their competence. [^74]

The Importance of Education

In order that members would be better equipped to assume Church responsibility, to serve as more effective ambassadors of the Lord, and to prepare for the eternities, Joseph Smith emphasized the importance of education. "The glory of God is intelligence," the Prophet instructed the Saints. "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." [^75] Constantly the Prophet urged members to study diligently languages, history, geography, and science. The many schools founded under the direction of Joseph Smith are evidence that the Mormon Prophet was one of the most energetic pre-Civil War American leaders in the field of adult education.

The Word of Wisdom

The Mormon Prophet also issued a code of healthful living specifying that which is beneficial and that which is harmful to the body. Although Joseph Smith did not introduce novel views on this subject, most aspects of the Word of Wisdom revealed by the Prophet have been substantiated by modern scientific scholarship; whereas some views popularized by Sylvester Graham and other leaders of the Physiological Reform movement have been discarded.

The writings of Joseph Smith clearly reveal that the Mormon Prophet was well acquainted with the beliefs and polity of many American denominations. Undoubtedly, the Prophet learned many truths from others which were substantiated by Latter-day revelation. But Joseph Smith could not have become acquainted with the concepts popularized by all his contemporaries. Therefore, the fact that similarities appear in the teachings of the Prophet and the doctrines espoused by others does not necessarily mean that Joseph Smith formulated a theology by elaborating upon the tenets held by his contemporaries. Moreover, a careful examination of parallels advanced by critics of Mormonism reveals that some similarities dissipate when the teachings of Joseph Smith are considered in their context. While isolated statements indicate resemblances, a number of the so-called similarities become distinct theological contributions when viewed in connection with the Mormon religious system.

The unique theological contributions of Joseph Smith bear evidence that Mormonism is not essentially a composite of the religions of early nineteenth century America. While promulgating concepts which conform to Biblical teachings, Joseph Smith unfolded a number of important beliefs which were distinct doctrines of his generation and restored the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ for the benefit of all mankind.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Le Roy Edwin Froom, The Prophetic Faith of Our Fathers (4 vols., Washington, D.C.: Review and Herald, 1950-54), IV, 879-81; Francis D. Nichol, The Midnight Cry (Washington, D.C.: Review and Herald, 1945), 247-48; 458-60; Walter R. Martin, The Truth About Seventh-day Adventism (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House), 31-33; Herbert S. Bird, Theology of Seventh-Day Adventism (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eedmans Publishing Co., 1961), 13-14.
[^2] Nichol, op. cit., 180-85; Martin, op. cit., 34.
[^3] Information on the life of Ellen Harmon White has been based primarily on the autobiography published in E. G. White, Testimonies for the Church with a Biographical Sketch of the Author (Mountain View, Calif., [n.d.]), I.
[^4] Ibid., 52.
[^5] Ibid., 58-61.
[^6] Ibid., 62. See also pages 9-13, 55, 67, 80, 86, 87, 92, and 93 for references to Mrs. White's physical and emotional problems. After adopting a program of diet reform her health improved, and during the later years of her life, she enjoyed average good health.
[^7] E. G. White, The Great Controversy Between Christ and Satan (Mountain View, Calif., 1888), 480.
[^8] White, Testimonies, 86.
[^9] Froom, op. cit., IV, 975, 1235-37; Bird, op. cit., 19.
[^10] Nichol, op. cit., 463. For additional information on the early history and evolution of government of the Seventh-day Adventists see John N. Loughborough, Rise and Progress of the Seventh-day Adventists (Battle Creek, Mich., 1892).
[^11] Seventh-day Adventists Answer Questions on Doctrine: An Explanation of Certain Major Aspects of Seventh-day Adventist Belief (Washington, D.C.: Review and Herald, 1957), 11, 22, 36, 48, 644-46. Quoted by permission.
[^12] Ibid., 27-28, 89-98; Froom, op. cit., IV, 975. Although Mrs. White did not lay claim to the title of prophet or prophetess, stating that she was instructed that she was the Lord's messenger, she believed that her work was that of a prophet, and Adventists endorse this view today. The current position of the Seventh-day Adventists regarding Ellen Harmon White is that, "The Holy Spirit opened to her mind important events and called her to give certain instructions for these last days. And inasmuch as these instructions, in our understanding, are in harmony with the Word of God, which Word alone is able to make us wise unto salvation, we as a denomination accept them as inspired counsels from the Lord. But we have never equated them with scripture as some falsely charge." Questions on Doctrine, 93.
[^13] Questions on Doctrine, 24.
[^14] Ibid., 22-23, 347-48, 651.
[^15] Ibid., 350-52.
[^16] Ibid., 23, 105-08, 404-06, 417.
[^17] Ibid., 13-14, 501-03, 512-15, 520.
[^18] Ibid., 498-99, 504-08.
[^19] Ibid., 12.
[^20] Ibid., 24.
[^21] Many controversial biographies have been written on Mary Baker Eddy. Mrs. Eddy wrote a brief history of her life under the title Retrospection and Introspection (Boston, 1915). Norman Beasley's The Cross and the Crown (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1953) and Sibyl Wilbur's The Life of Mary Baker Eddy (New York, 1907) are sympathetic accounts of this religious leader while the most popular critical biographies are E. F. Dakin, Mrs. Eddy: The Biography of a Virginal Mind (New York, 1929); Fleta Campbell Springer, According to the Flesh (New York: Coward-McCann, Inc., 1930); and Allen Johnson, "Mary Morse Baker Eddy," Dictionary of American Biography, Allen Johnson and Dumas Malone, eds. (20 vols., New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1929-36), VI, 7-15.
[^22] Eddy, Retrospection and Introspection, 25.
[^23] Walter R. Martin and Norman H. Klann, The Christian Science Myth (New Jersey: Biblical Truth Publishing Society, Inc., 1954), Chap. III; H. W. Dresser, ed., The Quimby Manuscripts (New York, 1921), 436; Beasley, op. cit., 142-45.
[^24] Eddy, Retrospection and Introspection, 25.
[^25] Beasley, op. cit., 35-36.
[^26] Ibid., 204.
[^27] Ibid., 347.
[^28] Johnson, op. cit., 14.
[^29] Mary Baker Eddy, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures (Boston: Trustees under the Will of Mary G. Eddy, 1934), 331-32. Used by permission. Copyright in Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures by Mary Baker Eddy is owned by the Trustees under her Will. (c) 1906 renewed 1934.
[^30] Ibid., 331.
[^31] Ibid., 468.
[^32] Ibid., 71-73, 295, 521.
[^33] Ibid., 73.
[^34] Mary Baker Eddy, The First Church of Christ Scientist and Miscellany (Boston, 1914), 112-114.
[^35] Eddy, Science and Health, 126, 497.
[^36] Beasley, op. cit., 549-50. See also Christian Science Quarterly, LXXV, No. 1 (January-February-March, 1964), ii.
[^37] Eddy, Science and Health, 73, 530, 545-46.
[^38] Ibid., 529.
[^39] Ibid., 267.
[^40] Ibid., 593.
[^41] Beasley, op. cit., 42.
[^42] Eddy, Science and Health, 266.
[^43] Ibid., 588.
[^44] Ibid., 291.
[^45] Beasley, op. cit., 541-42.
[^46] Eddy, Science and Health, 35, 241, 581.
[^47] Ibid., 43.
[^48] Thomas Linton Leishman, Why I Am a Christian Scientist (New York: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1958), 87, 91.
[^49] Eddy, Science and Health, 159.
[^50] Ibid., 153.
[^51] Ibid., 157, 176.
[^52] Ibid., 162.
[^53] George Channing, "What is a Christian Scientist?" Religions in America, Leo Rosten, ed. (New York: Simon and Schuster, Inc., 1963), 42-43.
[^54] William H. Cumberland, "A History of the Jehovah's Witnesses" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Iowa, 1958), 7-8, 91. A very brief but excellent account of the rise of the Jehovah's Witnesses is also found in Milton Stacey Czatt, The International Bible Students: Jehovah's Witnesses (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1933). One of the best accounts of the rise of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society written by a member is Marley Cole, Jehovah's Witnesses (New York: Vantage Press, 1957).
[^55] Cumberland, op. cit., 9-10; Cole, op. cit., 77-78.
[^56] Cumberland, op. cit., 12, 20, 24.
[^57] Ibid., 17, 23-24; Cole, op. cit., 173-74.
[^58] Cumberland, op. cit., 82-84, 90, 121.
[^59] Ibid., 155-58; Cole, op. cit., 149.
[^60] Cumberland, op. cit., 167.
[^61] Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose (Brooklyn: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., 1959), 312; Benson Y. Landis, ed., Yearbook of American Churches, Edition for 1963 (New York: National Council of Churches of Christ in the U.S.A., 1963), 54.
[^62] One of the best summaries of the beliefs of the Jehovah's Witnesses published by this Bible society is Let God Be True (Brooklyn: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Inc., 1946). Descriptive accounts of the views of this society regarding the Trinity are found in Chaps. II and VII. See also Cole, op. cit., 155.
[^63] Let God Be True, 87.
[^64] Cole, op. cit., 138-39.
[^65] Cumberland, op. cit., 99; Let God Be True, 41.
[^66] From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained (Brooklyn; Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., 1958), 186, 214, 231, 240.
[^67] Ibid., 170-71, 174-80, 227; Milton G. Henschel, "Who Are Jehovah's Witnesses?" Religions in America, Leo Rosten, ed., 99.
[^68] 1959 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, [n.d.]), 41-42. See also Studies in the Scriptures (Brooklyn, 1912), Series VI, Ch. X.
[^69] Henschel, op. cit., 182-83.
[^70] Ibid., 63.
[^71] 1965 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (Brooklyn: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., [n.d.]), 42-43.
[^72] D.H.C., IV, 577.
[^73] William E. Berrett, Lowell L. Bennion, and T. Edgar Lyon, Contributions of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1940), 48-49.
[^74] Ibid., 70.
[^75] D.&C. 93:36; 130:18-19.
