Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER EIGHT

Three Native American Religions

Shortly following the martyrdom of the Mormon Prophet, three of the most controversial religious societies of this country were formed—the Seventh-day Adventist; the Church of Christ, Scientist; and the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. The celebrated founders of these denominations were reared in the largest churches of mid-nineteenth century America; but after rebelling against several popular Protestant tenets, they inaugurated a quest for religious truth. Their search for truth led to the conclusion that conscientious reformers of the past had failed to reestablish the religion introduced by the Savior of mankind. Following a pattern set by many other protestors of Christendom, these leaders reevaluated the major themes of the Bible and unfolded a peculiar version of the gospel message. After gathering converts in this land, they witnessed the transplanting of their distinct religion to nations scattered throughout the world. Today, the lives of thousands residing in many different countries are profoundly influenced by the unusual messages popularized by Ellen G. White, Mary Baker Eddy, and Charles Taze Russell.

I. The Rise of the Seventh-day Adventists and the "Spirit of Prophecy" as Claimed by Ellen G. White

Historical Roots of Seventh-day Adventism

The history of the Seventh-day Adventist religion stems back to the decade of the 1840's, the era when William Miller proclaimed the imminent return of Christ to the earth. Although the Millerites disbanded following the failure of Christ to reappear in 1844, many millennial conscious Protestants reorganized; and eventually three segments of former Millerites fused, producing the Seventh-day Adventist denomination.

One of the zealous leaders who emerged into the spiritual vacuum created by the disintegration of the Millerite movement was Hiram Edson. On the morning following the "Great Disappointment" of 1844, Edson walked into a secluded corn field in New York state to avoid rebukes from his associates. While gazing into heaven with a prayerful heart, he claimed that "light and knowledge" burst upon him. According to Edson, he suddenly perceived that on October 22, 1844, the date the Millerites had set for Christ's return, the Savior entered the Holy of Holies in the heavenly sanctuary. Whereas the Millerites anticipated Christ's return to earth to cleanse the sanctuary, Edson declared that the sanctuary to be cleansed was in heaven, and Christ entered the second apartment of the sanctuary in 1844 to inaugurate a second phase of his ministry. Later, Adventists developed the view that Christ's work was to determine those eligible to enter God's presence. According to these Protestants, this work, called the "investigative judgment," will continue until Christ leaves the heavenly sanctuary and returns to earth. [^1]

A second group of former Millerites who played an important role in the formation of the Seventh-day Adventist religion was lead by Joseph Bates, a retired sea captain and temperance leader of Massachusetts. In 1846, Bates published a tract, The Seventh-day Sabbath a Perpetual Sign, in which he argued that the Sabbath day was a divine institution revealed by God to man in Eden and reaffirmed at Sinai. This law of God, he taught, was ordained to be observed on the seventh day and was improperly changed to the first day of the week. [^2]

The third group of former Millerites that formed the nucleus of the Seventh-day Adventist religion was led by Ellen Gould Harmon White and her husband James White. Ellen Gould Harmon was born in Gorham, Maine, on November 26, 1827, and was reared in Portland. When she was nine, Ellen was struck by a rock and remained in a stupor for three weeks. After recovering, her face was blemished by a broken nose. This disfigurement caused great discouragement, embarrassment, and emotional disorder, and her general health was impaired. Because of her nervousness and continued sickness, Ellen Harmon withdrew from school and except for short periods of private tutoring in her home, received no additional formal education after arriving at her twelfth birthday. [^3]

In 1840, William Miller launched his crusade in Portland, inaugurating a general awakening in that town. Ellen Harmon was numbered with those who were impressed with his scriptural interpretations regarding the second coming of Christ and sat with others in the "anxious seat" in an attempt to secure salvation. Seeking a pardon of her sins and the assurance that God would save her, Ellen devoted many hours to prayer and deep meditation. While attending a Methodist camp meeting, she perceived that Christ recognized her peculiar trials and extended sympathy and love to her. The pessimism and dismay that had plagued her thoughts since her injury were replaced by serenity and happiness, and Ellen claimed that suddenly her life became beautiful.

After the camp meeting, Ellen Harmon was admitted into the Methodist church on probation. Although the Methodist minister believed that sprinkling was an acceptable mode of baptism, Ellen Harmon and a few other converts insisted that immersion was the proper scriptural method; and since the minister did not object to such a procedure, he immersed Ellen and her friends in the turbulent Atlantic.

Ellen Harmon remained a Methodist for only a few months, for after William Miller returned in 1842 to remind others of the imminence of the second coming, the impressionable young woman acknowledged her acceptance of the views of this revivalist. While attending Adventist meetings, she heard that after death the soul sleeps and that punishment of the wicked was not everlasting in the sense of unlimited duration. Upon re-examining the Bible in light of Adventist claims, Ellen contended that the Millerites were correct and that the Methodists erred on several important doctrines. When she professed in public views which conflicted with the Methodist articles of religion (particularly insisting that Christ would return on a specified date), Ellen Harmon was excommunicated.

After severing relations with the Methodists, the conscientious woman concentrated on preparing to meet the Savior. For weeks, Ellen studied, prayed, and evaluated her innermost thoughts and emotions. But the day of the expected Second Advent passed without any miraculous manifestations, and she was gravely perplexed and disappointed. Instead of renouncing the Adventist faith, Ellen concluded that she had properly kept her faith and had acted in harmony with the will of God. Since the signs of the times, she insisted, clearly indicated that the "end of all things was at hand," she decided to continue preparing for the eventful day of Christ's return. [^4]

While reviewing her convictions and struggling to find an answer for the failure of Miller's calculations, Ellen Harmon joined four other Adventist women in prayer. While meditating, the seventeen-year-old woman claimed that the power of God came upon her as she had never previously felt this spirit. "I seemed to be surrounded with light," Ellen said. I "saw a straight and narrow path, cast up high above the world." Under the direction of God, she continued, Advent people were traveling toward a heavenly city. Some fell by the wayside, but 144,000 marched over a sea of glass to the gate of the city. Upon their arrival, "Jesus raised his mighty, glorious arm, laid hold of the pearly gate, swung it back on its glittering hinges," and welcomed those who were worthy to enter. After being given "harps of gold," the 144,000 gathered near the tree of life and throne of God and, touching their golden harps, "sat down to look at the glory of the" heavenly city. [^5]

After Ellen Harmon announced to a small group of Adventists of Portland that she had received a vision, she was told by several friends that God was responsible for the manifestation. She later wrote that other visions followed. Throughout the remaining years of her life, Ellen Harmon alleged that she was an instrument in God's hand, revealing light and knowledge to the inhabitants of the earth.

For many years, Ellen Harmon's health did not improve. She declared, "My health was so poor that I was in constant bodily suffering, and to all appearance, had but a short time to live." The Adventist leader also admitted that throughout most of her life she was "unusually sensitive," was plagued with emotional and physical problems, and was subject to fainting spells. [^6] But notwithstanding her nervous disorders and serious illness, Ellen Harmon insisted that on many occasions when her body seemed to be in an unconscious state, heavenly beings sent from God were communicating with her. Moreover, she claimed that during one of the early visions, an angel instructed her to publicize the information unfolded to her.

During one of her early preaching engagements, Ellen Harmon met James White, another former Millerite and minister of the Christian Religion. The acquaintance developed into genuine love; and after their marriage on August 30, 1846, they united to proclaim a distinct religious message, gathered converts primarily from the Adventist fold, and organized congregations.

In 1846, after learning the views of Joseph Bates regarding the Sabbath, Ellen White adopted Saturday as the proper day of rest, and subsequently received, as she claimed, a vision on the subject. Mrs. White also learned of Hiram Edson's interpretation of the event of October 22, 1844, after which she confirmed by "prophetic insight" that on that historic date, Christ entered the holy of holies and appeared in the presence of God "to make an atonement for all . . . entitled to its benefits." [^7]

Meanwhile, Bates, Edson and other former Millerites concluded that Mrs. White possessed the gift of prophecy. Subsequently, many segments of the Adventist movement united and the work of gathering converts progressed more rapidly.

On August 18, 1848, James and Ellen White conducted a conference in New York in the small community of Volney. About thirty-five congregated in a barn; and, as the Adventists discussed their beliefs on many themes, sharp differences emerged. According to Ellen White, "Some were holding serious errors, and each strenuously urged his own views, declaring that they were according to the scriptures." Perturbed and perplexed because of the controversies which flared, Mrs. White fainted. Later she described the events of that day by writing: [^8]

The light of Heaven rested upon me, and I was soon lost to earthly things. My accompanying angel presented before me some of the errors of those present, and also the truth in contrast with their errors. These discordant views which they claimed to be according to the Bible were only according to their opinion of the Bible, and they must yield their errors and unite upon the third angel's message. Our meeting closed triumphantly. Truth gained the victory. The brethren renounced their errors, and united upon the third angel's message, and God greatly blessed them and added to their numbers.

The information unfolded by Mrs. White following her asserted visions became a key, disclosing to Adventists the proper interpretation of the scriptures. According to James White, Ellen received from one to two hundred visions prior to 1868; and present-day custodians of her estate estimate that she received at least two thousand visions. Mrs. White also became a prolific writer. Her published works consist of about sixty books and more than four thousand articles which appeared in periodicals. Since many former Millerites held that this women possessed the gift of prophecy, many viewed Ellen Harmon White's writings and "inspired" talks as a magnifying glass, not revealing something new, but unfolding "details that otherwise might be missed by the unaided human eye." [^9] Therefore, Mrs. White became the spiritual spokesman for Adventists and by revealing what was regarded as the pure principles of the gospel, settled theological disputes and unified dissonant elements of the Adventist movement.

Not all Millerites supported the claims of Hiram Edson, Joseph Bates, and Ellen G. White. In the 1860's three other Millerite groups formed national organizations, the Advent Christian Association, the Life and Advent Union, and the Church of God (Adventist), the latter society being formed by persons who denied the inspiration of Mrs. White.

The publishing ventures of James White soon became a significant element uniting the Adventists. In 1849 he began publishing Present Truth; and one year later, the name of the paper was changed to The Advent Review and Sabbath Herald. Meanwhile, the family moved from Rocky Hill, Connecticut, to Paris, Maine, to Saratoga Springs, New York, and to Rochester, New York.

In 1855, James and Ellen White transferred their publishing interests to Battle Creek, Michigan, where fellow believers offered to share financial and other burdens. Five years later, the name "Seventh-day Adventist" was officially adopted, and in May, 1863, the formal denominational organization was finalized with a representative form of church government directed by a number of competent leaders. [^10] Mrs. White was never ordained a preacher nor appointed to an office in the church, but through her preaching and writing greatly influenced the theological course of Seventh-day Adventism.

Following the establishment of a formal association, James and Ellen White resumed their intense proselyting activities, preaching incessantly from Maine to California and from Michigan to Texas. They established two publishing houses in this country; and for many years, James White supervised the publishing work of the Adventists. They also sent many missionaries into the world who reaped a harvest in many nations.

Four years after the death of her husband, Ellen G. White sailed to Europe, where she labored from 1885 to 1887. Soon after returning from the Continent, she traveled to Australia where she engaged in missionary work for nine years. During the last fifteen years of her active life, she resided in Northern California and journeyed several times across the continent by way of the southern states. Mrs. White also promoted the establishment of a medical college in Southern California and encouraged others to move the headquarters of the church to Washington, D.C., in 1903.

In 1915, seventy years after commencing missionary activities, the eighty-seven year old religious leader died.

II. Beliefs of the Seventh-day Adventists

Adventist Definition of the Godhead

An examination of the basic beliefs held by the Seventh-day Adventists clearly reveals that members of this evangelical faith are fundamentalists, clinging to many beliefs that were popular prior to the Civil War. Although a few Adventists are Arians in the sense that they believe the Father and Son are distinct beings, most members hold that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are three beings of one essence. In the work, Seventh-day Adventists Answer Questions on Doctrine, an explanation of the fundamental beliefs of this denomination published under the direction of the officers of the General Conference, the heavenly trio is described as "three living persons," the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Eternal Father is regarded as a "personal, spiritual Being, omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient, infinite in wisdom and love." Jesus Christ, Adventists declare, has existed from eternity and "is very God, being of the same nature and essence as the Eternal Father." Although the second member of the Godhead is "a distinct person" and took "upon himself human nature," he is still "one with the Father." Jesus Christ, Adventists explain, is equal in power and authority with the Father, possesses the same glory and divine attributes as the Father and is the Creator of all things. They also believe that Jesus was born of a virgin, lived a sinless life on earth, suffered a vicarious atonement, rose with his body in the resurrection, ascended to heaven, and will ultimately return to earth. They further assert that the Holy Spirit is the "great regenerating power in the work of redemption." [^11]

Concept of the Bible

Like most Christians of Early America, Adventists of the mid-twentieth century hold that the Bible is the sole rule of faith and practice and that all theological beliefs and practices should be judged according to the information found in that work. That which does not harmonize with the Bible message, they insist, should be rejected.

Seventh-day Adventists do not regard the writings of Ellen G. White as additions to the Bible nor do they believe that her messages "supersede, surpass, or supplant the Holy Scriptures," for they aver that the canon of scripture closed with the book of Revelation. They argue, however, that the closing of the canon of scripture did not terminate heaven's communication with men through the gifts of the Spirit. While they do not require members to accept Mrs. White's writings as a test of faith, they believe that her visions were of God, that she uttered true prophecies and teachings, and that she was a "messenger" through whom God relayed his desires and admonitions. Instead of testing the Bible by her writings, Adventists proclaim, they test the writings of Ellen White by the Bible. Her writings are regarded as a "lesser light to lead men and women to the greater light [the Bible]." [^12]

Disregarding general revisions of the Genesis account of the creation by major denominations, Seventh-day Adventists insist that the Bible teaches "that God created the world in six literal days" and deny that the "creation was accomplished by long aeons of evolutionary process." [^13]

Belief Regarding the Fall and Atonement

The fundamentalist position of the Adventists is further revealed by their explanation of the Fall and atonement. Adam, they believe, was created a pure, sinless being, without a taint of sin, but fell by transgression. Because of Adam's sin "his posterity was born with inherent propensities of disobedience," in a state of alienation and depravity. But Christ, taking upon himself human nature, came to earth, was assailed with temptations in the wilderness, did not yield to sin, and met in full the penalty of the broken law by making a sacrificial atonement on the cross. [^14] The atonement performed on the cross, Adventists add, was "provided" for all men, and in the heavenly priestly ministry of Christ, this sacrificial atonement is applied to the seeking soul. Therefore, members of this denomination hold that the atonement is "actually and ultimately efficacious" only for individuals who repent, accept the grace of God, and surrender their lives to God. [^15]

The Means of Salvation

Seventh-day Adventists also state that they are neither Calvinists nor Arminians. They do not share the views of John Calvin that "some men are predestinated to eternal death without any demerit of their own, merely by his sovereign will." And while they do not classify themselves as Arminians, they embrace the teachings of many Arminian groups. For instance, Adventists teach that to secure salvation, individuals must experience new birth, a transformation of life and character through faith in Christ. "Salvation is available to any and all members of the human race." While "man is free to choose or reject the offer of salvation," they contend, man cannot save his soul by complying with God's commandments. "Salvation proceeds wholly from God, and is a gift from God received by faith." [^16] Consequently, Adventists regard good works as the result of an implanted faith and not as the means to salvation.

Life Beyond the Grave

According to the Seventh-day Adventists, the Bible declares that the soul of man is the entire man and the spiritual body cannot exist independent of the physical body. They conclude that after death all men rest in the tomb until the resurrection morning. During this period of slumber, men are in a state of total unconsciousness. Meanwhile, since 1844, Christ, in the "investigative judgment," has been determining the destinies of all men. At the beginning of the millennium when Christ appears in glory, the just will be resurrected, and the righteous immortal souls will enter the kingdom of glory. The unjust, they also teach, will not be resurrected until the end of the thousand years. Denying that everlasting punishment means without duration, Adventists contend that the wicked will not burn eternally in hell but will be annihilated. [^17]

Millennial Views

In addition to subscribing to a second, personal, imminent and pre-millennial advent of Christ, Adventists conclude that the wicked residing on the earth will die at the beginning of the thousand years. While the righteous remain in heaven during this period, Satan will be imprisoned on the earth. After the thousand years, Christ will return with the Holy City, the earth will become a paradise as it was before the fall of Adam, and the righteous will make the new earth their celestial home. Moreover, at the end of the millennium, Adventists declare, Satan will be loosed for a season, after which he will be destroyed with all the unrepentant inhabitants of the earth. [^18]

Description of Christian Ordinances

Baptism, in the view of Adventists, should be observed by all believers following genuine repentance and the securing of forgiveness of sin. This ordinance, which they declare should be performed by single immersion, is regarded as a sign indicating a Christian's faith in the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ. [^19] Seventh-day Adventists also celebrate the Lord's Supper. Approximately four times a year, Adventists commemorate the Savior's death by partaking bread and wine, elements which are regarded as symbols of the flesh and blood of Christ. This sacrament, which is preceded by the preparatory ordinance of foot washing, is considered essential to Christian growth and fellowship. [^20]

Other Distinguishing Beliefs

Members of this evangelical faith are distinguished by many other beliefs and practices. In addition to gaining a reputation for conscientiously observing Saturday as the Sabbath, Seventh-day Adventists generously contribute to their church a tenth of their income. This payment of a tithe does not eliminate other financial obligations. Many members faithfully contribute to missionary funds and other church sponsored projects designed to raise money to advance their religious views. Members of this denomination are also active in Civil Defense and various welfare programs and support the principles of separation of church and state and religious liberty. They believe that the church has a responsibility to emphasize the need for healthful living. Abstinence from liquor, tobacco, tea, coffee, and meats classified in the Old Testament as unclean (such as pork, lobsters, and crabs) is specified as a requirement for membership. Many Adventists are vegetarians and patronize health stores where they frequently purchase carrot juice, soybean beefsteaks, and bread made from unsifted flour. They dress simply, refrain from card playing and dancing, avoid wearing fancy jewelry, and sometimes address one another as brothers and sisters.

III. Mary Baker Eddy and the Founding of the Church of Christ, Scientist

While men were responsible for the formation of the theology of all the major Christian societies of the United States organized before 1845, women were the most influential leaders in the formation of the distinct beliefs adopted by two of the three major American religions instituted after the mid-eighteen forties. Mary Baker Eddy, the well known founder of the Christian Scientist faith, was born on July 16, 1821, in Bow, New Hampshire, a small farm community located a few miles south of Concord. Mary Baker was the youngest child in a family of three girls and three boys. Throughout her childhood days, Mary lived about seventy-five miles from Portland, Maine, the home of Ellen Harmon; and like Ellen, she experienced an unpleasant childhood, marred by continual illness. Although Mary's education was occasionally impeded because of ill health, she studied at home, learned quickly, and possessed an unusual memory. Unlike Ellen Harmon, however, Mary Baker had several years of formal education in academies and received periodic instruction from private tutors. [^21]

Although Mary Baker learned the fundamentals of Congregational theology from orthodox parents, she couldn't accept all tenets of this religion. It is not reasonable, she thought, that a just God would elect men to hell, or that the horrors of hell are of unlimited duration. When she was twelve, Mary was interviewed by the Congregational minister in her community; and even though her unconventional answers were not considered entirely satisfactory by the pastor, at the age of seventeen, she was admitted as a communicant member.

The marital life of Mary Baker was blemished by misfortunes and unhappiness. In 1844, less than a year after her first marriage, her beloved husband, George W. Glover, died, leaving the sick widow with inadequate financial support. After returning to her parent's home and giving birth to her only child, the frail woman requested another mother to nurse and raise her son. Hoping to regain her boy, Mary sought another husband. The second marriage to an itinerant dentist, Dr. Daniel S. Patterson, resulted in frequent quarrelling, and ended in divorce in 1873. The marriage which continued for twenty years, also failed to establish a bond of love between mother and son. After inaugurating the Christian Science movement, she married one of her students, but her third husband, Asa G. Eddy, died in 1882, five years after the wedding.

The Origin of Christian Science

Following a period of marital unhappiness, chronic illness, and nervous ailments, Mary Baker Eddy declared that she discovered "the Science of divine metaphysical healing" which she named Christian Science. This discovery, she explained, occurred in 1866, following an "immediate recovery from the effects of an injury caused by an accident, an injury that neither medicine nor surgery could reach." [^22]

Not all historians endorse Mrs. Eddy's description of the origin of an unusual system of healing. Some critics suggest that the concept of healing taught by Mary Baker Eddy stems from the ideas advanced by Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, a spiritual healer in Maine. In 1862, during one of her prolonged periods of illness, Mary Baker Patterson, as she was known at that time, was a patient of "Dr." Quimby and while under his care, secured some relief from her ailments. Emphasizing that Mrs. Eddy obtained and memorized writings of Quimby, critics insist that the parallels in Mrs. Eddy's published works and the teachings of Quimby reveal that the founder of the Christian Scientist religion was not a discoverer but a popularizer. In reply to charges of plagiarism, Christian Scientist apologists argue that about 1853 Mrs. Eddy conducted her first experiments in mental healing and in 1862 gave Quimby some of her writings. Subsequently, her views were recorded and taught by the faith healer of Maine. But critics retort that such a defense can not be substantiated with reliable evidence; and since Christian Scientists reject the testimonies introduced by the critics, the controversy continues. [^23]

While authors and scholars disagree on the origin of Mrs. Eddy's ideas on healing, most historians agree that Mary Baker Eddy introduced a novel religious system. Employing the Bible as a text, Mrs. Eddy developed an unusual interpretation of the scriptures, revealing the teachings of Jesus and his actions in light of what she called "the principle and rule of spiritual Science and metaphysical healing." Describing her definitions of various terms, she wrote, [^24]

God I called immortal Mind. That which sins, suffers, and dies, I named mortal mind. The physical senses, or sensuous nature, I called error and shadow. Soul I denominated substance, because Soul alone is truly substantial. God I characterized as individual entity, but his corporeality I denied. The real I claimed as eternal; and its antipodes, or the temporal, I described as unreal. Spirit I called the reality; and matter, the unreality.

The Emergence of an Unusual Religious Movement

In 1870, after four years of studying, writing, and discussing her religious views with boarders in the homes where she resided, Mrs. Eddy organized her first school in Lynn, Massachusetts. To provide for her support, she charged students who could afford the tuition one hundred dollars for ten lessons; and graduates who subsequently engaged in spiritual healing agreed to pay their tutor ten per cent of their income. Shortly after instituting a formal program of instruction, Mary Baker Eddy purchased a home in Lynn, where she continued conducting classes. As the months passed, the fee for the course "the Science of Life" tripled, but promising students who could not afford the education continued to be admitted without charge. [^25]

After Mrs. Eddy's controversial work, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures, was published in 1875, the unusual views of this religious leader were widely circulated. In the same year that the Christian Science text book was printed, Sunday services were held in private homes, consisting primarily of a sermon by Mrs. Eddy, prayers, and hymns. For many months, the gatherings remained small, usually numbering fewer than twenty. Although few converts had been gathered, in 1879, about fifteen people assembled in Boston and endorsed Mrs. Eddy's proposal to establish a church which was named the Church of Christ, Scientist.

In the decade following the organization of the religious society which emphasized faith healing, Mrs. Eddy founded the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, published and edited the Christian Science Journal, and changed the Sunday services from the afternoon to the morning, so that the society would no longer be considered "subordinate, or supplementary to any other religious system." [^26] In the eighteen nineties, Mrs. Eddy reorganized the church; prepared a Church Manual describing the procedure of church government; and delivered her last public sermon. Although Mrs. Eddy's last appearance behind a pulpit occurred on January 5, 1896, after her retirement, the influential woman continued to direct the affairs of the church by means of written messages. [^27]

One of the most notable accomplishments of Mrs. Eddy in the twentieth century was the founding in 1908 of the internationally known Christian Science Monitor. Two years later, on December 3, 1910, the eighty-nine-year-old founder of one of America's most unusual religions died, leaving a church with a membership of nearly 100,000 and an estate worth 2 1/2 million dollars. [^28]

IV. The Metaphysical Theology of Mary Baker Eddy

The Christian Science faith is one of the most unusual denominations endorsed by the middle-class of urban America. While scientific knowledge was increasing at an accelerated rate, Mary Baker Eddy, promulgated a body of beliefs that not only challenged many generally accepted facts of the scientific and medical world, but also was a radical departure from traditional Christianity. In addition to issuing metaphysical (meaning alien and inimical to physical science) interpretations of the Godhead, the fall and atonement, life after death, and the sacraments, Mrs. Eddy advanced abstract definitions of sin, sickness and death and introduced a peculiar Sabbath service.

A God Who is All-in-all

After rejecting the popular view of the Trinity and vehemently denouncing the doctrine that God was a corporeal being, Mrs. Eddy announced that "Life, Truth, and Love constitute the triune Person called God." The one God, she explained, is omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent; is a Spirit; is a supreme goodness; is Love, and is "multiform in office: God the Father-Mother; Christ the spiritual idea of sonship; divine Science or the Holy Comforter." The supreme Deity, she continued, is properly called "Father-Mother" because this name indicates God's "tender relationship to his spiritual creation." Jesus, Mrs. Eddy added, was born of the virgin Mary, was the reflection of God, was the divine message from God to man, was appointed to speak God's word to humanity in a form which men could understand and perceive, and was the true idea voicing good. Denying that Jesus and Christ were synonyms, she said, Jesus is the name of the human man and Christ refers to the divine idea. [^29]

A cornerstone of Christian Science theology is Mrs. Eddy's explanation of the unlimited nature of God's presence: [^30]

The scriptures imply that God is All-in-all. From this it follows that nothing possesses reality nor existence except the divine Mind and his ideas. The scriptures also declare that God is Spirit. Therefore in Spirit all is harmony, and there can be no discord; all is Life, and there is no death. Everything in God's universe expresses him. . . . He fills all space, and it is impossible to conceive of such omnipresence and individuality except as infinite Spirit or Mind. Hence all is Spirit and spiritual.

Since God is omnipresent and a spirit and man is in God's image and likeness, Mrs. Eddy asserted, man, a reflection of God, is not material but spiritual. In fact, she argued, "Spirit, the synonym of Mind, Soul, or God, is the only real substance." [^31] Since the benevolent God pronounced his creation good, she continued, man must be good like God and incapable of committing sin. God would not create that which was opposite of himself, she argued. Hence, "God, good, being ever present, it follows in divine logic that evil, the suppositional opposite of good, is never present." [^32] And since "God controls man, . . . any other control or attraction . . . is a mortal belief." [^33] Therefore, Mrs. Eddy concluded, mortal physical man, matter, sin, sickness, suffering, and death are illusions of the mind or misconceptions of man.

The Bible and Science and Health

According to the founder of Christian Science, the source of her inspiration and ideas was the Bible. [^34] This work, she informed others, is the only authority for religious truth and a sufficient guide to eternal life. [^35] However, since she claimed that men altered the original text and developed erroneous interpretations of the scriptures, Mrs. Eddy published a key unlocking what she regarded as the truths of the Bible. Christian Scientists believe that this textbook, Science and Health, is based upon the Biblical message, does not supersede the Bible, and is a complete statement of Christian Science. The importance of this guide is further revealed by observing a Christian Science Sabbath meeting, for the worship service consists of silent prayers, reciting the Lord's Prayer, congregational singing, a song by a professional vocalist, and the reading of selections from the King James Version of the Bible and Science and Health. In the first volume of the Christian Science Sentinel, the official position of the church regarding the Lesson-Sermons read at every Sabbath meeting was dogmatically defined: [^36]

As these discourses are made up wholly of passages from the Bible and the Christian Science text-book, they contain nothing of human opinion; they are devoid of man made theories. . . .

They are free from sensationalism, and they make no effort to please the fancy or foster the pride of mortals. . . .

The gospel preached from our pulpits is not after man, neither was it taught of men, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

An Allegorical Interpretation of the Fall

In describing the creation and the Fall, Mrs. Eddy taught that the account recorded in the second and third chapter of Genesis is an "allegory," a "myth," a "dream narrative." Adam was not created a mortal being by God, she contended. "The mortality of man is a myth." Man was never born. Man is immortal, she insisted. The belief that spirit was submerged in matter to be emancipated at a future time is erroneous. [^37] Adam, she explained, is the scriptural term for error and stands for a belief of material mind. [^38] And Adam was not the first of God's creations, she added. Since God is "eternal, self-created, infinite" and "made all 'that was made,' . . . man and the spiritual universe coexist with God." [^39]

A Metaphysical Explanation of Salvation, Heaven, and Hell

Salvation, as defined by Mrs. Eddy, is understanding "Life, Truth, and Love," and demonstrating one's convictions by surmounting sin, sickness, and death. [^40] By declaring that there is no death, the Christian Scientist theologian meant that "man, in his real definition, is never separate from his Maker, and that as his Maker is eternal, so is man." [^41] Heaven and hell, she explained, are conditions of the mind, not places of abode where men are sent after death. "The sinner makes his own hell by doing evil, and the saint his own heaven by doing right." [^42] As long as our thoughts are evil we shall remain in hell, she further taught, for hell is a self-imposed agony, a self-inflicted belief in sin, sickness, death, and suffering. [^43] When we learn to contemplate pure thoughts, we create a divine state which is heaven. And there is no final judgment, she taught, "for the judgment-day of wisdom comes hourly and continually, even the judgment by which mortal man is divested of all material error." [^44]

Christian Scientists also accept an unusual solution to the problem of evil. The problem of evil, they maintain, should be corrected by teaching mankind to recognize that sin, hell, and the devil are erroneous beliefs. [^45]

Spiritual Sacraments

Although Christian Scientists have discarded all ceremonies and ritual and do not regard baptism, confirmation, nor the Lord's Supper as specific acts, they believe in spiritual sacraments. According to their metaphysical reasoning, baptism is a continuous act, a perpetual purification from all error. As Mrs. Eddy wrote, "The baptism of Spirit" is "washing the body of all impurities," signifying that the pure in heart are approaching spiritual life. [^46] Members of this denomination also believe that the scriptural account of the descent of the Holy Ghost refers to the influx of divine Science. By his death and resurrection, Jesus taught others that matter disappears and reappears, Mrs. Eddy declared; and when the apostles learned this concept, they wrote that the Holy Ghost descended upon them. [^47]

While Christian Scientists do not participate in a ceremony during which communicants partake of bread and wine, twice a year the active members attend a communion or sacrament service. At this meeting, the congregation silently communes with God. Communion with God, however, is not limited to these special occasions, for members of this Christian society believe in daily prayer and frequent communication with Deity. [^48]

A System of Healing

While few Americans are acquainted with the religious system advanced by Mary Baker Eddy, the majority of the people in this land have heard that Christian Scientists emphasize healing by faith. Accounts of miraculous healings periodically appear in publications of this denomination; and Christian Scientists testify at their Wednesday evening gatherings that they have experienced the eradication of sickness through the application of "divine Science."

There is no simple explanation of Mrs. Eddy's principle of healing, but an examination of this controversial woman's attitude toward disease partially reveals her curative program. "Man's belief produces disease and all its symptoms," Mrs. Eddy said. [^49] "We weep because others weep, we yawn because they yawn, and we have smallpox because others have it; but mortal mind, not matter, contains and carries the infection." [^50] Since Mrs. Eddy held that diseases arise from association and are a mental condition, she declared that men are cured by dispelling the erroneous belief in disease. Although many sick people recover by use of drugs, she reasoned, the cure is not the result of the medicine but the application of faith. "Christian Science . . . rests on Mind alone as the curative Principle, acknowledging that the divine Mind has all power." [^51] Mrs. Eddy also declared, [^52]

Christian Science acts as an alternative, neutralizing error with Truth. It changes the secretions, expels humors, dissolves tumors, relaxes rigid muscles, restores carious bones to soundness. The effect of this Science is to stir the human mind to change of base, on which it may yield to the harmony of the divine Mind.

Repudiating the principles governing the actions of medical doctors, Christian Scientists turn to practitioners for assistance. After demonstrating evidence of successful work of healing, the practitioners are registered by the officers of the Mother Church at Boston; and these metaphysical healers then labor to destroy human errors and ills. Christian Scientists emphasize, however, that the sole object of these religious leaders is not to eradicate disease. Their mission is to "regenerate human thought through spiritual understanding." [^53]

V. Charles Taze Russell and the Establishment of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society

The Rise of a Modern-day Bible Society

Another American who became dissatisfied with the popular denominations of his age and inaugurated a major religious movement inimical to the late nineteenth century trends in Christianity was Charles Taze Russell. In 1868, three years following the Civil War and ten years prior to the publication of Mrs. Eddy's Science and Health, the sixteen-year-old youth withdrew from the Congregational church. After concluding that the orthodox Calvinistic view of everlasting punishment for unregenerates could not be reconciled with the New Testament description of a just and merciful God, Russell examined writings of Biblical critics and subsequently decided that he was a "Christian skeptic." Like many other reformers, this conscientious seeker claimed that none of the religions which he investigated was God's church and bemoaned the increasing popularity of liberal theology, church union, and the social gospel. God's religion, he eventually concluded, should be void of all human opinions and creedal expressions and should be built upon a single norm, the infallible Bible. [^54]

Recognizing the problem of interpreting the Word of God, Charles Russell sought companions who could unlock to him the mysteries of the scriptures. After contacting a group of former Millerites who had organized a society in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, the seeker developed a keen interest in Bible chronology and the millennium. While associating with the Adventists, Russell also adopted an unusual definition of the word ransom. Christ's ransom on the Cross, he reasoned, was not solely a guarantee that believers would be pardoned of their sins, but a promise that during the millennium, nearly all men, believers and unbelievers, would come forth from their graves and be given "full opportunity to gain everlasting life." [^55]

The Adventists of Pittsburgh also contributed to Russell's beliefs regarding the Second Coming. This small group of Protestants had reset the date of Christ's return, declaring that the Savior would reappear in 1873 or 1874. After they had experienced a second disappointment, Russell informed the Adventists that Christ returned in 1874, but not physically as they predicted. Christ has appeared, he alleged, as an invisible, spiritual creature. The separation of the "wheat" from the "tares" has commenced; and the gathering of God's children, Russell predicted will continue until 1914, the date when the Battle of Armageddon will inaugurate the millennial reign. [^56]

In the 1870's, Russell became an itinerant preacher; recorded and published his distinct interpretations of the scriptures; issued his most famous publication, Zion's Watch Tower; and supervised the distribution of over 6,000 free copies of this journal. After organizing his followers, he authorized many to serve as missionaries. And in order to finance the proselyting activities, Russell liberally spent money earned from a successful mercantile business which he had developed during his quest for religious truth.

The work of organizing a religious society continued into the ensuing decade. In 1884, three years after organizing a Bible society, "Pastor" Russell secured a charter enabling him to establish the Zion's Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, a corporation designed to "spread the truth." A few years later, Russell changed the title of the corporation to its current name, Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and moved the headquarters of this society from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to Brooklyn, New York. Although the staff of the corporation was transferred early in the twentieth century, a registered headquarters was retained in Pittsburgh; and the members of this corporation continued to hold annual meetings in the town where the society was organized. [^57]

As the year 1914 approached, Russell sensed that he might have erred in his analysis of Bible chronology and announced that a mistake on the precise date of the Battle of Armageddon would not invalidate his descriptions of other major themes of the scriptures. When World War I erupted and inaugurated an era of unprecedented death and destruction, Russell confidently proclaimed that death, anarchy, and revolution would continue until Christ commenced his rule on earth. The predicted conflict, Russell further declared, between the forces of Satan and the soldiers of God is imminent. But Russell did not live to witness the creation of a new world. In 1916, two years before the cessation of hostilities in Europe, the founder of this unusual religious corporation died, leaving to his successor an established society of approximately 50,000 adherents. [^58]

Significant Developments During Joseph F. Rutherford's Tenure as President

After considering the qualifications of members of the Board of Directors, leaders of the Watch Tower Corporation decided that Joseph F. Rutherford should be appointed president. This attorney had served for many years as a member of the board, had been a legal counsellor for "Pastor" Russell, had served for a short time as a special judge in the Fourteenth Judicial District in Missouri, and had demonstrated qualities of leadership in performing many assignments. Although Rutherford was the only officer nominated to fill the vacancy, members of the Bible society were invited to participate in an election by contributing ten dollars for every vote they desired to cast. After 150,000 votes were counted, word was circulated that Joseph Rutherford had been unanimously elected president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Corporation.

The second president of the corporation was industrious and domineering. Instead of continuing to emphasize Russell's interpretation of the ransom, the atonement, the nature of everlasting punishment, and physical resurrection, "Judge" Rutherford introduced a new set of doctrinal themes. In the 1930's, he proclaimed that a central message of the Bible was the vindication of Jehovah's name, meaning that eventually God would defeat Satan and restore conditions on earth to a state of original perfection. Equipped with another "vital message" to proclaim to mankind, the Bible students intensified their missionary labors. If people neglected to heed their message, militant missionaries reasoned, the unbelievers would be held accountable while they would have accomplished the will of God. [^59]

Rutherford also introduced a new explanation of events transpiring between 1874 and 1918. Revising Russell's prediction, the "Judge" declared that the Battle of Armageddon was not designed to erupt in 1914. In the year the World War I erupted, Satan was cast out of heaven, he said, and Jehovah placed Christ upon his throne, authorizing him to be king. After commencing to rule in heaven in 1914, Rutherford added, Christ began to rule on earth in 1918; and for a few years, the King would permit Satan to continue his reign of terror. [^60]

Another change occurring during the administration of Joseph Rutherford was the adoption of the name Jehovah's Witnesses. This name is applied to those who adhere to the doctrines held by the Watch Tower Corporation and differentiates the largest group of followers of Russell from other branches of this movement.

Rapid Growth During the Presidency of Nathan H. Knorr

After serving as president of the Bible society for twenty-five years, the autocratic Rutherford died, and five days later, on January 13, 1942, Nathan H. Knorr was elected by the Board of Directors as the third president. Under Knorr's competent direction, the Jehovah's Witnesses have grown in membership at an astonishing rate, increasing from approximately 100,000 in 1942 to about 1,000,000 in 1962. [^61]

VI. Distinguishing Beliefs of the Jehovah's Witnesses

Concept of the Godhead

An examination of the major doctrines held by the Jehovah's Witnesses reveals the nature of this society's reaction to fundamentalism and the liberal theological trends in post-Civil War America. When discussing their concept of God, Witnesses sometimes argue that the term "Trinity" originated with Satan and was inherited by Christians from Babylonians and Egyptians. They vehemently deny that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are of one essence, are co-eternal, and co-equal. In the fourth century, Witnesses explain, Arius correctly taught that God and Jesus are two distinct personages. They also state that the Holy Ghost is not a member of the Godhead, but is a divine influence or active force, emanating from God and motivating men to serve their Creator. [^62]

As they amplify their belief in Christ, they teach that there was a time when Jesus did not exist. The Almighty God, referred to by the prophets as the great "Jehovah," is the creator of all things. God was once alone in the universe, Witnesses also declare. After initiating the creation, Jehovah brought forth a son who was called Michael in his pre-mortal existence and Jesus during his journey on earth. Michael, the only pre-mortal being who has been born on earth, was God's favorite and beloved son, was given the title of God, but was not given all of God's power and authority.

Although Jehovah's Witnesses endorse a popular fundamentalist belief that Christ was born of a virgin and lived a perfect life void of sin, they deny that Jesus was a God while residing on earth. Since the mission of the Messiah was to provide a ransom, Witnesses preach, the ransom must be equal to the loss. Adam was a perfect being while living in Eden, not a God. Therefore, "the justice of God would not permit that Jesus . . . be more than a perfect man; and certainly not be the supreme God Almighty in the flesh." [^63]

Denying the bodily resurrection of the Savior, Witnesses state that even though Jesus rose from the grave and appeared as a man, his true resurrected form was like the Almighty God's, a spirit that was neither earthly, human, nor confined to a particular form.

Importance of the Bible

When Jehovah's Witnesses testify that the Bible is inerrant they do not mean that this work is free from alterations of the original text. The Holy Scriptures, they claim, were written by individuals who recorded accurately the messages dictated by God; but recognizing that scribes marred the writings of the prophets, Witnesses have published the New World Translation of the Scriptures (1961), a work based upon translations from what is regarded as the "select" or "preferred" texts.

Since Witnesses do not classify their society as a church, but as an organization of Bible students, they emphasize that all members should become intimately acquainted with the Word of God. To assist individuals in their studies, the Watch Tower Corporation has issued a guide, entitled Studies in the Scriptures, which contains selections from the Old and New Testaments arranged in topical sequence. The corporation also publishes works informing members of the proper procedures in preparing and delivering spiritual messages; and the society trains public speakers who in turn instruct other members in weekly class studies and drills. [^64]

Attitude Toward the Fall, Atonement, and Means of Salvation

Witnesses continue to preach the concept of the Fall and atonement as described by Russell, insisting that since the fallen Adam transmitted sin and death to his posterity, an atonement was necessary. Christ laid down his life, they teach, not only to cancel the sins of believing men but to free them from death's condemnation by a guarantee that everyone will receive full opportunity during the millennium to embrace the gospel. [^65]

In order to be elected to everlasting life, Jehovah's Witnesses instruct others that they must learn to conform to the will of the Father. Those who are dedicated, and are begotten of the Holy Spirit, and who serve God shall be resurrected and exalted to positions in the heavenly kingdom.

Conditions following Death

Jehovah's Witnesses agree with Seventh-day Adventists on many principles of life after death, such as believing that man's spirit (or soul) and body are never separated, that the soul sleeps after death, that the earth will be restored to a state of Edenic paradise and become an abode for righteous believers, and that the wicked will not burn in everlasting hell but will be destroyed.

Not everyone will be judged at the same time, Witnesses declare. Many who have lived an unrighteous life on this earth and have sinned against the Holy Spirit have already been judged. Those beyond reform and correction will not stand before Christ on the day of judgment but will remain asleep forever. The "lake which burneth with fire and brimstone," they say, is a scriptural expression which means that there is no recovery or resurrection for the most wicked creatures. They further contend that at the end of Christ's thousand-year reign on earth, all of God's children, except those beyond reform, will gather for one last test. Satan will then be released from his prison and will cunningly strive to turn men from God. Individuals who succumb to the temptation will be exterminated with Satan and his demons. All who remain loyal to God during this last trial will be blessed with eternal life. These obedient souls will be freed from sickness, sorrow, confusion, and pain and will be warmed by the pure love of God.

One of the most distinguishing doctrines emphasized by the Bible students is that the 144,000 mentioned in Revelation 7:4 are the only Christians who will inherit heaven. These elite will be raised with spiritual bodies (without flesh, bones, or blood) and will assist Christ in ruling the universe. Others who benefit from Christ's ransom, will be resurrected with healthy, perfected physical bodies (bodies of flesh, bones, and blood) and will inhabit this earth after the world has been restored to a paradisiacal state. [^66]

Millennial Views

Members of this religious society also teach a unique view regarding events which will transpire immediately preceding the millennium. The period of time extending from 607 B.C., the date Nebuchadnezzar became king of Babylon, to 1914 is referred to as the "Times of the Gentiles." During these centuries, the Devil ruled the world without God's interference. In 1914, they add, war erupted in heaven between Christ (known as Michael) and Satan. After his defeat, the "Dragon" was cast out of heaven and down to earth, and Christ commenced ruling in heaven as King. During the time period in which we live (called the Time of the end of this world), Witnesses militantly proclaim that the gospel will be carried to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, and the wicked will be separated from God's people. Witnesses also insist that one of their primary responsibilities is to inform others of the drama described in the Bible, including the birth of God's kingdom, the imminent and final defeat of the Devil, and the creation of a new earth. Moreover, members of this Bible society dogmatically predict that billions "who are now living will never die," but will live beyond the end of Satan's rule and will reside in a state of peace and happiness in "Jehovah's righteous new world." [^67]

Position Regarding Baptism and the Lord's Supper

According to the Witnesses, everyone who accepts Jehovah as the Almighty God and agrees to serve Him should indicate this dedication by being baptized by immersion. Since baptismal fonts are not built in their meeting houses, known as "kingdom halls," the rite is generally performed in lakes, rivers, oceans, municipal baths, or in tanks especially installed for the occasion. Any God-fearing Witness is authorized to perform the ordinance, baptizing candidates "in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit." During the International Assembly of 1958 held in New York City, a quarter of a million Jehovah's Witnesses gathered and 7,136 converts were baptized in two and a half hours. Thirty lines were formed. At the end of each line stood three "immersers" who repetitiously baptized the enthusiastic throng. [^68]

Although many of their beliefs regarding baptism are not different from views espoused by individuals within the Baptist fold, the attitude of the Witnesses toward the Lord's Supper is very different from the position held by members of other major Protestant denominations in this country. According to the Witnesses, individuals who are classified among the 144,000 should partake of the bread and wine once a year as a symbol of the death of Christ and of their dedication to God. All Witnesses may attend this important meeting; and all are served the emblems of the sacrament, but only those numbered among the 144,000 partake. They further believe that the celebration of the Memorial of Christ's death should take place on the day corresponding to Nisan 14 of the Jewish calendar (occurring sometime in March or April). [^69]

Other Characteristics of this Religious Movement

In addition to their aggressive missionary techniques, members of this Bible society are known as conscientious objectors, refusing to participate in the world's wars and obeying only laws which conform to their interpretations of the Bible. Since they believe that the Bible forbids man to eat blood (Leviticus 17:10; Acts 15:20), they regard transfusions as a violation of God's injunction. Although Witnesses refuse blood transfusions, in emergencies they will allow injections of blood substitutes. [^70] They are also assiduous opponents of the evolutionary theory of man. Schoolteachers further realize that children of this society invariably refuse to salute the flag, for Witnesses regard such a practice as unchristian image worship.

Witnesses are further distinguished by their voluminous publication and prolific distribution of Bibles, books, tracts, and journals. All baptized members, male and female, are identified as ministers and are given the responsibility of serving as full-time or part-time missionaries. Although the vast majority of these ministers receive from the society no monetary remuneration, Witnesses conscientiously devote many hours each month to missionary labors. According to their 1964 records, 1,075,523 ministers reported 162,808,312 hours of preaching (an average of almost 13 hours each month for every member) and distributed 17,735,153 books and 127,055,165 magazines in the homes of people residing in 194 countries. [^71]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lyman Abbott, Henry Ward Beecher (New York, 1903), 314-16.
[^2] Ibid., 317.
[^3] John Fiske, The Idea of God as Affected by Modern Knowledge (New York, 1891), 58-59.
[^4] Milton Berman, John Fiske: The Evolution of a Popularizer (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1961), 193-94; Henry Ward Beecher, Evolution and Religion (New York, 1885), 49-52, 61-68.
[^5] George W. Gilmore, "Comparative Religion," The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, Samuel M. Jackson, ed. (13 vols., Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1949-50), III, 190-203.
[^6] James Freeman Clarke, Ten Great Religions: Part II (Boston, 1911), 71-72.
[^7] Herbert H. Gowen, A History of Religion (Milwaukee, Wis.: Morehouse Publishing Co., 1934), 416-18.
[^8] Frank N. Riale, "The Value and Danger of the Study of Comparative Religion," The Biblical World, IV, No. 1 (July, 1894), 14.
[^9] Lewis G. Janes, "The Comparative Study of Religions: Its Pitfalls and Its Promise," The Sewanee Review, VII, No. 1 (January, 1899), 6-7, 16, 19.
[^10] James Freeman Clarke, An Outline of Christian Theology (New York, 1898), 7.
[^11] John Edward Dirks, The Critical Theology of Theodore Parker (New York: Columbia University Press, 1948), 17-20, 33, 40-44, 63-64, 130.
[^12] For information on the conflicting conclusions of Biblical critics see Edward Lewis Curtis, "The Present State of Old Testament Criticism," The Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine, XLV (Nov., 1892-April, 1893), 727-34; Bernard W. Anderson, Rediscovering the Bible (New York: Association, 1951); J. Patterson Smith, How God Inspired the Bible (New York, 1918); John W. Haley, Alleged Discrepancies of the Bible (Andover, 1884); John P. Peters, The Old Testament and the New Scholarship (New York, 1902); and Emel G. Kraeling, The Old Testament Since the Reformation (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1955).
[^13] Washington Gladden, How Much is Left of the Old Doctrines? (Boston, 1899), 2.
[^14] Ibid., 85-86, 174-75, 187, 291.
[^15] William Adams Brown, "The Old Theology and the New," Harvard Theological Review, IV, No. 1 (1911), 16.
[^16] Lyman Abbott, The Theology of an Evolutionist (New York, 1897), 186-90; George A. Gordon, "Some Things Worth While in Theology," Harvard Theological Review, III, No. 4 (Oct., 1910), 391.
[^17] Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 70-74, 188-89.
[^18] Arthur Cushman McGiffert, The Rise of Modern Religious Ideas (New York, 1922), 206-08.
[^19] Brown, op. cit., 15-16.
[^20] Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 190.
[^21] Brown, op. cit., 15.
[^22] Walter Rauschenbush, A Theology for the Social Gospel (New York, 1917), 60.
[^23] Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 182. For additional information on Liberal Christianity at the turn of the century, read the excellent summary in H. Shelton Smith, Robert T. Handy, and Lefferts A. Loetscher, American Christianity (2 vols., New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1960-63), II, 255-308.
[^24] Herbert Wallace Schneider, Religion in 20th Century America (New York: Atheneum, 1964), 151-56; John Herman Randall, Jr., "Naturalistic Humanism," Patterns of Faith in America Today, F. Ernest Johnson, ed. (New York: Collier Books, 1962), 156-60.
[^25] W. M. Horton, "The Development of Theological Thought," Twentieth Century Christianity, Stephen Neill, ed. (New York: Doubleday and Co., 1963), 261-69; Schneider, op. cit., 143-47; John Dillenberger and Claude Welch, Protestant Christianity Interpreted Through Its Development (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1954), 268-83; Sidney E. Ahlstrom, "New-Orthodoxy Demythologized," The Christian Century, LXXIV, No. 21 (May 22, 1957), 649-51; Gustaf Aulen, The Faith of the Christian Church (Philadelphia: Muhlenberg Press, 1948); and William Hordern, The Case for a New Reformation Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1959).
[^26] James Freeman Clarke, Manual of Unitarian Belief (Boston, 1924), 23, 36.
[^27] Ibid., 88.
[^28] Stewart Grant Cole, The History of Fundamentalism (Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books, 1963), 34; "What is a Fundamentalist?" The Forum, LXXVI, No. 6 (December, 1926), 861-62.
[^29] George Herbert Betts, The Beliefs of 700 Ministers (New York, 1929), 52-56.
[^30] John and June Robbins, "The Surprising Beliefs of Our Future Ministers," Redbook Magazine, CXVII, No. 4 (August, 1961), 36, 107.
[^31] Used by permission of The American Institute of Public Opinion (The Gallup Poll), Princeton, New Jersey. Release of April 15, 1960.
[^32] Used by permission of The American Institute of Public Opinion (The Gallup Poll), Princeton, New Jersey. Release of December 23, 1961.
[^33] Carl N. Degler, Out of Our Past (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1959), 339-40.
[^34] C. H. Hopkins, The Rise of the Social Gospel in American Protestantism, 1865-1915 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1942), 155.
[^35] David O. Moberg, The Church as a Social Institution: The Sociology of American Religion (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1962), 146-50. See also P. A. Carter, The Decline and Revival of the Social Gospel, 1920-1940 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1956); and Hartzell Spence, The Story of America's Religions (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1960).
[^36] Dillenberger and Welch, op. cit., 292-94.
[^37] Benson Y. Landis, ed., Yearbook of American Churches, Edition for 1964 (New York: National Council of the Churches of Christ in the U.S.A., 1964), 279-80.
[^38] Leo Rosten, ed., Religions in America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963), 243.
[^39] Ibid., 247; Landis, op. cit., 282-83.
[^40] Rosten, op. cit., 248.
[^41] John A. Widtsoe, "What are the Occupations of the Latter-day Saints?" The Improvement Era, LV, No. 3 (March, 1952), 143.
[^42] Seminaries and Institutes Annual Report, 1964-65, L.D.S. Department of Education.
[^43] James B. Allen and Richard O. Cowan, Mormonism in the Twentieth Century (Provo: Brigham Young University Extension Publications, 1964), 106-07.
[^44] Ibid., 107-12.
[^45] Ibid., 143.
[^46] William E. Berrett and Alma P. Burton, Readings in L.D.S. Church History (3 vols., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1958), III, 441-42, 451.
[^47] The Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1952), 4:2-7
[^48] Thomas Linton Leishman, Why I Am a Christian Scientist (New York: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1958), 87, 91.
[^49] Eddy, Science and Health, 159.
[^50] Ibid., 153.
[^51] Ibid., 157, 176.
[^52] Ibid., 162.
[^53] George Channing, "What is a Christian Scientist?" Religions in America, Leo Rosten, ed. (New York: Simon and Schuster, Inc., 1963), 42-43.
[^54] William H. Cumberland, "A History of the Jehovah's Witnesses" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Iowa, 1958), 7-8, 91. A very brief but excellent account of the rise of the Jehovah's Witnesses is also found in Milton Stacey Czatt, The International Bible Students: Jehovah's Witnesses (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1933). One of the best accounts of the rise of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society written by a member is Marley Cole, Jehovah's Witnesses (New York: Vantage Press, 1957).
[^55] Cumberland, op. cit., 9-10; Cole, op. cit., 77-78.
[^56] Cumberland, op. cit., 12, 20, 24.
[^57] Ibid., 17, 23-24; Cole, op. cit., 173-74.
[^58] Cumberland, op. cit., 82-84, 90, 121.
[^59] Ibid., 155-58; Cole, op. cit., 149.
[^60] Cumberland, op. cit., 167.
[^61] Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose (Brooklyn: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., 1959), 312; Benson Y. Landis, ed., Yearbook of American Churches, Edition for 1963 (New York: National Council of Churches of Christ in the U.S.A., 1963), 54.
[^62] One of the best summaries of the beliefs of the Jehovah's Witnesses published by this Bible society is Let God Be True (Brooklyn: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Inc., 1946). Descriptive accounts of the views of this society regarding the Trinity are found in Chaps. II and VII. See also Cole, op. cit., 155.
[^63] Let God Be True, 87.
[^64] Cole, op. cit., 138-39.
[^65] Cumberland, op. cit., 99; Let God Be True, 41.
[^66] From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained (Brooklyn; Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., 1958), 186, 214, 231, 240.
[^67] Ibid., 170-71, 174-80, 227; Milton G. Henschel, "Who Are Jehovah's Witnesses?" Religions in America, Leo Rosten, ed., 99.
[^68] 1959 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, [n.d.]), 41-42. See also Studies in the Scriptures (Brooklyn, 1912), Series VI, Ch. X.
[^69] Henschel, op. cit., 182-83.
[^70] Ibid., 63.
[^71] 1965 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (Brooklyn: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., [n.d.]), 42-43.
