Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

CHAPTER NINE

Religious Trends in Post-Civil War America

The southern Confederacy had been crushed. A civilization had collapsed. Lands had been devastated and proud plantations lay in ruins. But the war had ended. Americans began to turn their attention from destruction to reconstruction, and a new nation emerged from the ordeal of war and its aftermath. If there had been no conflict, numerous modifications would have occurred in this country, but the tragedy, like many other wars, acted as a propelling cataclysm, hastening the process of change. Life changed more abruptly during the century following the Civil War than had occurred during any other age in the history of mankind. America was refashioned from an agricultural to an urban, industrial society. Technological advancements altered the living habits of many citizens. Cities became the centers for social and intellectual progress. They served as magnets drawing leaders into their realm; and within their domains, educational opportunities were enhanced. A larger percentage of the public had access to libraries, schools, and newspapers. The new environment proved to be a breeding ground for the rapid dissemination of ideas. Removed from their rural provinces, men were brought into direct contact with a variety of beliefs and opinions; and increasing numbers began to cherish reason as the source of valid knowledge.

I. The Liberalization of Protestant Theology

The post-Civil War American environment proved to be a fertile field for the diffusion of liberal theological concepts which have been cultivated by Europeans. While rationalism had been transplanted to America during the Age of the Enlightenment, only a small per cent of the Revolutionary generation embraced views sponsored by deists or free thinkers; and in the first half of the nineteenth century, the numbers of religious liberals increased slowly. The decades preceding the Civil War were years of intense religious revivalism in which doctrines such as the mode, purpose, and prerequisites of baptism were discussed with feverish enthusiasm. After Appomattox, however, a profound reorientation of Christian thinking occurred. This movement was not limited to a few intellectuals as occurred during the Revolutionary Era, but swept through the universities and cities, altering traditional beliefs of most Protestants.

The Impact of Darwinism on American Christian Thought

One of the influential scientists of the nineteenth century who played an imposing role in advancing the "Third Reformation" was Charles Darwin. In 1859, Darwin published his controversial work, The Origin of Species by Natural Selection, in which he argued that the various forms of animal life have evolved gradually from lower orders of life. Some forms of life, he contended, are more adaptable to the environment than others; and by the process of "natural selection," the favorable species tend to survive while the weaker ones are destroyed. The unceasing struggle for existence, the inevitable changes in the forms of life, the victory of the strongest species, Darwin concluded, eventually led to the creation of new species.

In his Origin of Species, Darwin intentionally omitted discussion of the origin of man, but in the Descent of Man (1871), the scientist boldly announced that the human race was also a product of evolution from lower forms.

After securing copies of Darwin's publications, many began reading his detailed descriptions, but after scanning a few pages, most readers turned to reviews of Darwin's books and learned the evolutionary theory from literary critics. Others became acquainted with Darwinism by reading the popular works of the English philosopher Herbert Spencer, who aptly summarized Darwin's convictions by coining the phrase, "Survival of the fittest."

Darwinism was greeted in America by violent storms of protest which were generated by scientists and theologians. The theory was regarded as blasphemous nonsense that challenged the inspiration of the Word of God. Many declared that this concept could not be reconciled with the orthodox view of the fall of Adam, the depravity of man, and the need for a redemption by sacrificial atonement. [^1] Moreover, evolution was denounced because many Americans believed that the theory threatened the popular view that man had a direct relationship with God.

While one group of Americans denounced Darwinism, another element in the society embraced the theory, confessing that in light of recent discoveries they could no longer subscribe to orthodox Protestantism. [^2] "We find ourselves in the midst of a mighty revolution in human thought," John Fiske, the noted American philosopher and historian, wrote in the 1880's. "Time-honoured creeds are losing their hold upon men; ancient symbols are shorn of their value; everything is called in question. . . . No religious creed that man has ever devised can be made to harmonize in all its features with modern knowledge." [^3]

As the nineteenth century drew to a close, the numbers subscribing to the theory of evolution increased rapidly. Instead of denouncing the concept, scientists sought additional evidence to support the principles popularized by Darwin; and after revising some features of Darwinism, many scientists in this and other countries accepted the principle of evolution as an established fact.

Meanwhile, many clergymen studied the conclusions of the scientists, and after their conversion to the Darwinian theory, reinterpreted Protestant doctrines in light of modern scientific thinking. The reformers of the late nineteenth century denounced the traditional view that God created the world in the space of six days of twenty-four hours each and denied that God specially created Adam about 4,000 B.C. After repudiating the orthodox view of the Fall and the atonement, the modern reformers sought to reconcile evolutionary theory with the concept of man's direct relationship to God. Such an explanation seemed necessary. Deists had reduced God to a first cause and placed the Creator out of the reach of the masses. A God who ruled the universe by unalterable laws failed to become a practical object of worship. To correct this deficiency, Christian evolutionists announced that man was the intended goal of the evolutionary process. The book of Genesis, liberal ministers explained, was not written to describe the complex scientific method employed in the creation. Instead, the principal theme of Genesis is that God created man; and modern science, many argued, has unlocked the mystery of the process of the creation. [^4]

The Birth of Comparative Religions

While Charles Darwin was gathering information to support the theory of evolution, others were collecting data on the religions of the past, and the facts which were uncovered induced the weakening of men's attitude toward orthodox Protestantism. After concluding that all denominations of mankind were subjects worthy of study and collecting information on numerous world religions, scholars aimed "to discover the nature, genesis, development and laws of religions." [^5]

One of the foremost leaders in popularizing comparative religions in America was the influential Unitarian minister, James Freeman Clarke. In his celebrated book, Ten Great Religions (pt. I, 1871; pt. II 1883), Clarke described dominant beliefs of many major religions and then compared the beliefs of mankind, indicating many significant parallels. He wrote that the major religions of the world originated from the life of a nation or race (national tendencies), from the teachings and personal influence of an "inspired" leader, and from the teachings of earlier faiths. [^6]

Shortly after the birth of this science, scholars engaged in the study of comparative religions gained a reputation of disagreeing on the origins of the world religions. Many concluded that religion, like man, evolved from primitive and crude beliefs and practices to more advanced and nobler forms. Some individuals held that by reason of her geographical position, the Hebrew nation was able to take liberally from the Gentile world; and after assimilating beliefs held by others, the Israelites transported their sect to many other lands. [^7] Others engaged in this study insisted that various Old Testament stories were not descriptions of historical events but were myths conveyed to the Hebrews by Babylonians, Egyptians, and other cultural groups.

After examining the beliefs of many cults, one critic announced that he no longer regarded Christianity as a faith founded upon the inspiring messages of "angels of paradise." [^8] Some investigators attempted to trace Christian ideas and ceremonies to a Buddhist origin, while others held that Christianity was a mere confluence of earlier religions, a synthesizing of pre-existing beliefs and rituals. The majority of scholars in this country who recognized the similarities of Christianity and the sects which preceded the birth of Christ contended that the religion which evolved from the teachings of Jesus assimilated the best of all world religions, complementing all other faiths and correcting deficiencies in the former religions of man. [^9] "Christian theology enters no field that has not been entered by other theologies," James Freeman Clarke observed. "This superior religion," he continued, "answers old religious questions in a new light. Its themes are as old as man, but the grace and truth in the light of which it treats them came through Jesus Christ. Christianity," Clarke concluded, "differs from other religions . . . by possessing fresh experience and knowledge, richer than any other that men have known, upon the great themes of universal interest." [^10]

Diffusion of Biblical Criticism in America

Coinciding with the advent of Darwinism in America and the birth of the study of comparative religions was the development of a scientific study of the Bible. During the Revolutionary generation, deists attacked the popular view that the Bible was infallible and all-inclusive, but the views of these liberals were not based on a critical examination of Bible manuscripts and were buried under a flood of tracts issued by orthodox Protestants.

While theologians in America were defending Biblical inerrancy, scholars in Europe were implementing the work of Biblical critics of former ages. Historical criticism of the Bible had been employed shortly after the birth of Christianity by opponents of the church and by a few Christians; and during the Renaissance and Reformation, a few men carefully examined the Bible in an objective manner. Then in the seventeenth century, a French theologian, Richard Simon (1638-1712) initiated a critical study of Bible manuscripts. Believing that the authors of the scriptures were inspired and recognizing that many conflicting versions of the prophets' writings existed, Simon aimed to determine the purest text. In addition to launching a study of the Biblical text, which became known as Textual or Lower Criticism, the French theologian sought to determine the authors of the books. A similar study of the Bible continued by Johann Gottfried Eichhorn (1752-1827). In order to gain an increased understanding of the messages recorded in the scriptures, Eichhorn sought to learn the authors of the Biblical books, the dates when the works were written, and the meaning of the messages recorded in the text. This study became known as Higher Criticism and Eichhorn gained the reputation of being the first representative of modern Biblical Criticism.

The writings of the Biblical critics residing in France and Germany were carried to England; and subsequently, the methods of study and the conclusions of Biblical scholars were transplanted in the new nation. One of the first Americans to popularize the opinions of Europeans engaged in a scientific study of the Bible was the liberal Unitarian minister Theodore Parker. According to Parker, the Bible was fallible because mistakes were made in copying the original Hebrew consonants; words, passages, and books were misplaced or omitted; editors and scribes consciously and unconsciously changed the wording and meaning of the text; and errors were made when individuals attempted to adopt the document to a new historical setting. [^11]

For several decades, the views of Theodore Parker were refuted or ignored; but following the Civil War, many Americans investigated the discipline of objective Bible study. The subject was incorporated into the lectures of professors and was eventually added to the curriculum of many universities; and teachers, clergymen, and students diffused Biblical Criticism among the citizens of the United States.

Although individuals engaged in this study denounced the orthodox conviction of Biblical inerrancy, Bible experts failed to agree on the authorship of many Biblical books, on the date when many works were written, and on the meaning of many passages included in the Old and New Testaments. Some scholars held that the prophets acted under the inspiration of God and recorded accurately God's will. Other men rejected all miracles, insisting that the prophets did not receive direct revelation from God nor possess a gift of prophecy but recorded myths of ancient peoples. [^12]

Recognizing the inevitable, explosive impact of Biblical Criticism on orthodox theology, many Americans cautiously investigated this subject. While scholars debated, many Protestants complained that if they refuted their belief in an infallible Bible, they would destroy the foundation upon which their theology had been based. Some realized that a deflation of their sole norm of faith would result in a major reconstruction of the old-time religion, initiating a more profound reformation than that which erupted in the sixteenth century.

An Age of Conflict

At the turn of the century, a major conflict between science and religion caused disruptions in many American churches. Fundamentalists declared that a person could not endorse the teachings of evolutionists and Biblical critics and remain a Christian. Liberals objected. Heresy trials were held. A few prominent ministers were excommunicated and were forced to seek employment in liberal wings of the Protestant fold. But the actions of the Fundamentalists failed to stop the flowing tide of liberalism. In many American communities, liberals became the most popular and influential preachers. Liberal ministers proclaimed that they no longer accepted the traditional creeds of Christendom. They taught that the fallible Bible should not to be regarded as the one source of religious truth and preached a sophisticated gospel of works based upon an impressive foundation of rationalism.

Characteristics of the Christocentric Movement at the Turn of the Century

To determine that which was deemed reasonable, Christocentric liberal Protestants of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries adopted two major guides, modern science and the life and teachings of Jesus. Scientists disagreed, however, on many fundamental issues, and scientific theories changed. Scholars in various fields debated numerous problems; and liberal theologians failed to advance interpretations of the scriptures that won popular acclaim. No individual emerged as the authority of the "progressive religion." Nevertheless, the leaders of the movement solved the problem of diversity by acknowledging that a wide latitude of belief should be permitted and also by refusing to crystallize their opinions in articles of faith. They held that there was no infallible authority in religion; neither was there a code that could satisfy the needs of future generations. And they did not create a schism in Christianity by organizing a new denomination, but the Christocentric liberals retained their membership in the major religious societies of America, thereby creating diversity within the established churches. Few major denominations survived the theological revolution, for liberal Christians emerged as influential leaders in the Baptist, Methodist, Presbyterian, Episcopalian, Congregational, and other Protestant societies.

While diversity was a marked characteristic of the Christocentric movement, elements of uniformity are clearly revealed by reading the publications of influential liberals such as Newman Smyth's Old Faiths in New Light (1879), Henry Ward Beecher's Evolution and Religion (1885), Lyman Abbott's The Theology of an Evolutionist (1897), William Newton Clarke's An Outline of Christian Theology (1898), Washington Gladden's How Much is Left of the Old Doctrines? (1899), William Adams Brown's Christian Theology in Outline (1906), Walter Rauschenbush's A Theology for the Social Gospel (1917), and Arthur Cushman McGiffert's The Rise of Modern Religious Ideas (1915). One of the dominant themes in the teachings of these Protestants was the denunciation of many orthodox Protestant doctrines. The liberals condemned vehemently the Five Points of Calvinism; refuted the popular belief of a creation out of nothing in a period of six days of twenty- four hours each; rejected the popular view of Biblical inerrance; objected to the necessity of any sacraments; and denied the reality of the Fall, the necessity of a Redeemer to mend a broken law, the inevitable return to Christ to the earth, and the casting of individuals into a place or state of everlasting punishment.

Liberals also criticized the popular concept that doctrines should remain unalterable. According to Washington Gladden, if Christian doctrine is to be a living guide, it should undergo periodic changes. Growing knowledge, he said, demands that we adopt new interpretations of the old doctrines. "As the generations pass, and men learn more about themselves and the world in which they live and the works of God in the world, their point of view changes, and their doctrines are modified by their growing knowledge." [^13] Many principles and doctrines of Christ have progressively evolved into more rational concepts and "higher" and "truer" views of the real meaning of Christianity. The doctrine of the atonement, for example, has passed through many phases of evolutionary development—a ransom paid to the Devil, a satisfaction of justice, a vindication of divine government, and a motivation which transforms character. The doctrine of the Devil, Gladden continued, was derived by the Persians and transplanted into Christian theology, but today is regarded as an irrational concept. Only those ideas which are in harmony with the environment should survive, he added. Men should continually reevaluate their religion in light of modern science and retain only the fittest doctrines. [^14]

Popular Tenets of New Theology

Although liberal Protestants in this country were deeply impressed with theological developments in Germany, the leaders of the Christocentric movement did not transplant in this land the views of German contemporaries without significant modifications. In the United States, liberal Christians emphasized the life and teachings of Jesus as a norm of faith and were in general agreement on a few doctrines. These few positive themes became the heart of a new theology.

In light of major themes incorporated in the New Testament, American liberal Christians adopted a definition of God that emphasized the Creator's fatherhood and immanence. Shifting from the Calvinistic theme of God's sovereignty, liberals concentrated on God's desire to unite all his children under his fellowship. All mankind, William Adams Brown wrote, will fulfill ultimately the purposes of God by conforming to the pattern established by Christ. "God is an ever-present spirit," Brown added, "guiding all that happens to a wise and holy end," uniting men into an ideal society of brotherly service. "We meet him in nature. We meet him in history. We meet him in the Bible. We meet him in the lives of great men, and supremely in Jesus." [^15] Liberal Christians further believed that God speaks and reveals himself to men through all phenomena, by means of storms and earthquakes, in the degradation of rocks and the upheaval of mountains, and the movement of men's minds. God dwells in all his children, liberals concluded, for God is all and in all. [^16]

Even though the liberal Protestants disagreed on the internal nature of Christ and the Father, most adopted a Trinitarian view of God. When leaders of this movement, however, attempted to explain the mystery of the Trinity, they were unable to reconstruct a belief based upon one of their major norms of faith—rationalism directed by the results of the modern scientific movement. One of the popular liberal Christians, Lyman Abbott, expressed his interpretation of the Trinity by stating that the difference between God and man is that "God is holy, man is sinful; God is infinite, man is finite." If God came to earth and became finite, Abbott reasoned, he would become a perfect man. Christ was "God in man, God so perfectly possessing one unique soul that in that soul we see reflected at once the image of God and the perfection of manhood." Christ, Abbott concluded, is "the supreme product of evolution." He "is the manifestation of God in a human life and character;" that is "God brought within the horizon of humanity." [^17] Arthur Cushman McGiffert also attempted to solve the mystery of the Trinity by declaring that the doctrine of divine immanence eliminates the concept "that God and man are of wholly diverse natures." In a sense, all men are divine, McGiffert said, for God, who is all, is in Christ, in all other beings, and in nature. Christ's deity "resides in the completeness of his consciousness of God," his knowledge that he is one with God and his ability to live a life in harmony with the will of God. He is, therefore, divine in a sense that "we are not yet but hope eventually to become." [^18] And William Adams Brown explained that "Jesus is not God and man, he is God in man, . . . the clearest revelation of his character and purpose." [^19]

Although most liberal Christians believed in the Trinity and incarnation, they refused to endorse the traditional interpretation of the virgin birth of Jesus and rejected the popular view that Christ was sent upon the earth to atone for the transgression of Adam. Liberal Christians generally agreed that Christ came to earth to establish a pattern of living that would enable all men to draw nearer to God. Instead of relieving men from future torment or personal sins, liberals held that Christ's mission was to 402 and perfect men by teaching them correct principles, preparatory to their unification with God. [^20]

In addition to elucidating on the nature of God, liberal Christians often discussed the origin and nature of man. Although they denied that God specially created man, they refused to embrace the humanist view that man was solely the product of natural development. The Protestants generally contended that God manifest himself in the creation by employing the principle of evolution to create man. Since the liberal Christians could not harmonize the traditional view of the Fall with organic evolution, they denied that Adam rebelled against God or that he transmitted the original sin to his posterity. But after denouncing the orthodox view of the origin of sin, the liberals couldn't agree on the origin of man's transgressions. William Adams Brown believed that sin was the "survival of the animal in man, his failure to rise to the higher capacities within him." [^21] Another liberal, Walter Rauschenbush, popularized the theory that "sin is lodged in social customs and institutions and is absorbed by the individual from his social group." [^22]

Instead of dissipating their influence by perpetual debate on the origin of evil, liberal Christians emphasized the injurious effects of sin and the value of living the moral teachings of Jesus. Moreover, these Protestants replaced the orthodox view that salvation was a product of faith in Christ, of sacraments, or of a sudden conversion with the doctrine that salvation was a process of righteous living, lifting men to nobler deeds. Pure religion, Lyman Abbott taught, "is love toward God and love toward men." He insisted that true religion was not a body of doctrines or a kind of ritual but a spiritual life. "It is reverence toward God; . . . repentance for sin; . . . finding inspiration from the Bible as a book of spiritual experiences; seeing in Christ one worthy to follow; and . . . looking forward with hope beyond the grave for one's self and for one's loved ones." [^23]

The Rapid Increase of Theological Pluralism

The Liberal Christian movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries opened the gates of diversity, and innumerable discordant religious opinions emerged in many dominant religions. While the numbers who rejected elements of orthodox Protestantism increased rapidly, the liberals failed to formulate a popular system of belief, and reinterpretations of the Christian religion arose in response to the changing conditions in American life. Although authors are unable to summarize accurately the current beliefs of liberal Baptists, Congregationalists, Episcopalians, Lutherans, Methodists, and Presbyterians, scholars have detected some of the dominant patterns of Protestant thought in mid-twentieth century America.

Humanism—A Liberal Reaction to Liberal Christianity

One group of Protestants, sometimes called humanists, regard the Christocentric liberal movement as too conservative, irrational, and hostile to modern scientific trends. Humanists insist that the doctrines sponsored by the Christian liberals at the turn of the century revealed their flight from reason and exhibited a desire to revive dogma. These free thinkers refuse to emphasize any tenets. In addition to condemning all creeds, humanists denounce religious exclusiveness, believing that exclusiveness promotes intolerance. Religious pluralism is defended on the basis that all men should be granted freedom of expression and on the premise that no one can determine religious truth. Most humanists further believe that there is no distinction between sacred and secular, and that religion consists of all significant human experiences in the realms of art, science, philosophy, work, play, love, and friendship. Endorsing Thomas Jefferson as a patron saint, individuals who are classified in this wing of the Protestant fold generally believe that God plays no direct role in the affairs of men, insisting that by the application of technological skills, men direct life on earth. [^24]

The New Reformation Theology

While one group of Americans considered the Christocentric movement too conservative and irrational, a much larger group of influential theologians eventually concluded that the movement was in some respects too extreme and in need of quasi-conservative revision. This decision of reforming the new theology arose in response to the rising tide of humanism and as a result of the crises of the early twentieth century. The eruption of World War I; the failure of the League of Nations, the peace movement, and prohibition; and the impact of the great depression caused widespread dismay. A few ministers reacted to the depressing changes by replacing the optimistic theology of the turn of the century with a few pessimistic themes. Some ministers lost faith in the capacities of men to work out their own salvation and attacked the scientific method of determining religious truth. After Karl Barth, a German liberal, reinterpreted Christianity, Reinhold Niebuhr, Paul Tillich, and other influential theologians popularized another new version of Christianity in this country. The new religious philosophy has sometimes been called neo-orthodoxy or neo-radicalism, but usage of these terms is declining, and some men suggest replacing the terms with the title "new reformation theology." Moreover, since the middle of the century, American theologians have been searching for modernized patterns of thought that better reflect the profound changes that have occurred in the past decade.

Although the myriad distinctions of liberal belief prevent concise summaries, most liberals of mid-twentieth century America are modernists in that they accept Higher Criticism, deny Biblical infallibility, endorse evolution, and agree with the liberals of the turn of the century who rejected the orthodox Protestant concept of the Fall, atonement, virgin birth, second coming of Christ, literal resurrection of the body, and everlasting punishment of unregenerates.

Meanwhile, many liberal theologians of the mid-twentieth century lean toward Fundamentalism by emphasizing the sovereignty of God, the Trinity, and man's sinfulness. Today, instead of concentrating on the immanence of God by describing the presence of God in man, liberals frequently discuss God's transcendence and sovereignty. The new theologians argue that God is not fully in man, as is evidence by the modern wars and depressions. God is active in the world, they often state, but at the same time he is apart from the world. God is not confined to this one creation, liberals declare, and he sometimes acts through natural laws. To avoid pantheism, they argue that God is not bound by natural laws, for he is above and beyond them, eternally separate and apart. In other words, many contemporary theologians say that God is transcendent, yet immanently active.

Many liberals of the mid-twentieth century also teach that leaders of the Christocentric movement neglected the human aspect of Jesus. While liberals of today often regard Jesus as the revelation of God and as God among men, they also rigorously defend Christ's humanity, arguing that Jesus was a man among men. Jesus is considered as Godman, truly God and truly man.

Although post-liberal thought in America denies that man inherited sin from Adam, the view is generally advanced that man is naturally evil, being self-centered, egotistical, and despotic. Some liberals assert that the Fall is not an historical event, but a continual process of man's rejection of God. This tendency of sinning, this innate depravity, is considered to be so deeply rooted that it can not be changed except by the redeeming action of God.

Many neo-orthodox liberals have also returned one short step toward Fundamentalism by advancing a modified concept of miracles and the Bible. Many liberals do not deny the existence of miracles, but they are skeptical when considering reports of miracles, including events recorded in the Bible that deviate from the known laws of nature. The most popular view today among liberals is that most miracles are myths and that many miraculous events recorded in the Bible probably are not historical facts.

Adopting an existential pattern of thinking, the new reformers emphasize the importance of self-determination of truth, suggesting that men seek truth by using faith blended with reason. Before theological reasoning can be initiated, liberals teach, a person must be moved to start an investigation. The moving power or the dynamic force directing rationalism is faith. Faith is considered a gift of God, inspiring men to search for knowledge of God. The new theologians further teach that faith must continue to be illuminated by God so that reasoning will lead men to a better understanding of religious truth.

Many liberals today also teach that revelation should not be defined as words contained in creeds or the scripture. Many assert that revelation is God's presentation of himself, his acts and his presence among men. When men endorse a belief in a creed or an infallible Bible, liberals contend, they misplace their devotion. Man's trust in God, they say, is incorrectly diverted to faith in a creed, a book, or a church. [^25]

Denominational Responses to the Age of Faith in Science

In addition to the appearance of Christocentric liberals, humanists, and new-reformation theologians in the major Protestant societies of America, there have been other significant theological developments in many denominations during the past century. A major change, for instance, has occurred in the beliefs of most Unitarians. In 1924, James Freeman Clarke published a Manual of Unitarian Belief in which he described the modernized Unitarian theology that was more in harmony with the teachings of Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Paine, and Theodore Parker than the views popularized by the "Father of American Unitarianism," William Ellery Channing. In explaining the essentials of Christianity, Clarke wrote that there is only one God. This person is not three beings of one essence, he declared, for Jesus was not God, but a "man, human in soul and body, born like other human beings." To attribute to Jesus supernatural powers, he continued, is to deprive him of the power of example. [^26] After denying that faith in Jesus Christ was necessary for salvation, Clarke expressed a popular Unitarian concept that the primary duty of man is to love one's neighbor as one's self, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God. [^27]

Significant changes have also occurred in Baptist, Presbyterian, and Quaker societies. Most twentieth century Baptists have rejected the Calvinistic concept that God alone saves, and have granted man a role in the salvation experience. Many Presbyterians approve a revised version of the Westminster Confession of Faith which also sanctions the Arminian view that salvation is a product of two agencies, that of God and that of man. And many Quakers are members of a reformed society that has altered the pattern of worship and modified many doctrines of the orthodox Society of Friends.

Fundamentalism—A Rejection of Liberalism

While liberals were creating new patterns of faith, orthodox Christians were restating their beliefs. In 1895, a group of Protestants gathered at the Niagara Bible Conference and prepared Five Points of doctrine which were regarded as the essentials of classical Christianity. The Fundamentalists confirmed their belief in the inerrancy of the scriptures, the Deity of Christ, the virgin birth of the Savior, the substitutionary atonement of Christ, and Christ's bodily resurrection and physical return to earth. [^28]

Evidence of the Widespread Influence of Liberalism

Although it is impossible to measure precisely the extent to which liberalism has influenced Protestant theology, a survey published by George Herbert Betts in 1929 indicated that liberal ideas prevailed at that time among a large minority of the five hundred ministers and a majority of the two hundred theological students who replied to the questionnaire. The ministers represented the Baptist, Congregational, Episcopalian, Evangelical, Lutheran, Methodist, Presbyterian, and thirteen other denominations, while the students attended five theological schools located in and near Chicago, representing three large denominations. The following summary is most revealing: [^29]

QUESTIONS CONCLUSIONS (Percentages)

DO YOU BELIEVE— YES NO UNCERTAIN

That God is three distinct persons in one? 80 13 7 (Ministers)

44 35 21 (Students)

That the idea of evolution is consistent with 61 33 6 (M)

belief in God as Creator? 94 2 4 (S)

That the Devil exists as an actual being? 60 33 7 (M)

9 82 9 (S)

That the Bible is wholly free from legend 38 55 7 (M)

or myth? 4 95 1 (S)

That Jesus was born of a virgin without a 71 19 10 (M)

human father? 25 51 24 (S)

That while upon earth, Jesus possessed and 82 9 9 (M)

used the power to restore the dead 45 27 28 (S)

to life?

That hell exists as an actual place or 53 34 13 (M)

location? 11 76 13 (S)

In the resurrection of the body? 62 33 5 (M)

18 69 13 (S)

In a visible bodily second coming of Jesus 40 49 11 (M)

to establish a reign of righteousness 8 75 17 (S)

on earth?

That man was originally in a state of 61 33 6 (M)

complete moral perfection which he 18 70 12 (S)

lost by his disobedience and fall?

That all men, being sons of Adam, are born 53 43 4 (S)

with natures wholly perverse, sinful, 13 80 7 (S)

and depraved?

That prayer has the power to change con- 64 25 11 (M)

ditions in nature—such as drought? 21 57 22 (S)

In a more recent report of trends in Christian thinking which was published in the August, 1961, issue of Redbook Magazine, it was pointed out that more than 50 per cent of the one hundred students polled from some of America's most prominent theological schools (such as Yale Divinity School, Union Theological Seminary, Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, and the Augsburg College Seminary) agreed with Reverend James A. Pike, Episcopal Bishop of California, when he stated that the Biblical account of the virgin birth of Christ was a "primitive religious myth," and that Joseph, Mary's husband, was probably the physical father of Jesus. Moreover, only 46 per cent of the students who replied to the questionnaire believed that Jesus ascended physically into heaven after his crucifixion, only 44 per cent believed in the virgin birth of Christ, and only one per cent endorsed the doctrine of the second coming of Christ. The vast majority of these students were not seriously interested in dogma, but emphasized a theology centered around the Golden Rule, the fatherhood of God, and brotherhood of man. [^30]

Although the vast majority of church members of the early republic believed in the second coming of Christ and many anticipated that Christ's return was imminent, the American Institute of Public Opinion (Gallup Poll) reported in 1960 that 55 per cent of persons of all faiths in all sections of America acknowledged a belief in Christ's eventual return to earth. [^31]

Liberalism has had a more profound impact on the thinking of Europeans than Americans. The American Institute of Public Opinion recently announced the results of the poll, "Do you believe in life after death?" This question was presented to large groups in several nations. The following figures indicate the results: [^32]

Country Yes No Undecided

United States 74% 14% 12%

Norway 71 15 14

Canada 68 19 13

Holland 63 27 10

Great Britain 56 18 26

Switzerland 55 27 18

West Germany 38 29 33

II. The Social Gospel and the Institutional Church

While liberal ministers were promulgating many versions of a new theology, reformers inaugurated a variety of programs designed to alleviate economic and social ills of the less fortunate Americans. The post-Civil War industrial revolution created many new problems in this country, such as the inequalities of wealth, unemployment, and widespread labor unrest; and for years most Christian ministers ignored the needs of those living in wretched conditions. Instead of organizing to help the poor, some ministers alienated the oppressed by preaching that millionaires were God's elect and visible saints, while the poor were visible sinners. One of the most famous preachers of mid-nineteenth century America, Henry Ward Beecher, argued that no man suffers poverty unless he sins. "God has intended the great to be great and the little to be little." One should not whimper at God's decision. A dollar a day, Beecher further exclaimed, is not enough to support a man and five children if the man insists on smoking and drinking beer, for "the man who cannot live on bread and water is not fit to live." Urban churches gained the reputation of being sanctuaries of the rich. One minister aptly revealed the condition which developed when he told students of the Andover Theological Seminary in the mid-1880's, "Everybody knows that the Protestant Churches, as a rule, have no following among the workingmen." A survey conducted in Pittsburgh in 1888 verified this situation, for business and professional men constituted 60 per cent of the membership of Protestant churches in Pittsburgh but made up only 10 per cent of the population. [^33]

As the nineteenth century drew to a close, many ministers developed an interest in the social significance of Christianity. After recognizing that many immigrant peasants had not been granted the same opportunities afforded American entrepreneurs, reformers popularized new explanations of poverty. Moreover, many clergymen concluded that if the masses were to be gathered into churches, Protestants would have to live the ethical teaching of Christ by assisting those who needed help. Reshaping of beliefs was followed by action, resulting in the rise of the social gospel and the institutional church.

Many progressive leaders were responsible for launching the program of applied Christianity. One of the pioneers of the institutional church was William A. Muhlenberg, the great-grandson of the famous colonial Lutheran preacher and organizer Henry M. Muhlenberg. After promoting the construction of St. Luke's Hospital in New York City, Reverend William Muhlenberg sponsored an experiment in Christian communal life on the north side of Long Island, providing industrial workers with schools, a church, an orphanage and a home for the elderly. Another Episcopalian minister, Reverend William S. Rainsford, advanced the spirit of the social gospel by abolishing pew rents and opening his church building to the public daily for various social programs. Other celebrated leaders of the social gospel movement were Washington Gladden, a Congregationalist, and Walter Rauschenbush, a Baptist. These two ministers clearly unfolded to the American public the problems resulting from the industrial revolution and recommended that the churches organize to help the working men and others who needed assistance.

The Social Gospel in Action

In the last decade of the nineteenth century institutional churches developed numerous social-service programs. Church groups united, encouraging people to help themselves through educational programs. They provided the public with sewing and cooking schools; open forums; lecture series; libraries; and elementary schools, high schools, and colleges. Recognizing the value of recreation, Christians organized boys' and girls' clubs, and built game rooms, gymnasiums, and parks. And members of the institutional churches further helped the needy by supporting clinics, dispensaries, hospitals, loan funds, banks, employment agencies, and soup kitchens. [^34] In some American communities, surveys were conducted by social workers designed to determine the needs of the people; and after gathering information, Christians industriously worked to provide individuals with essentials of life. While big business and many members of the upper class opposed or refused to support the social gospel movements and some revivalistic societies ignored the programs in favor of proselyting activities, the Methodist, Northern Baptists, Congregationalists, Presbyterians, and Disciples of Christ led a major movement of social reform in the United States.

In the 1920's, the social gospel movement declined, but the spirit of this movement has recently revived. The de-emphasis in dogma in many religious societies has been replaced by an emphasis on social Christianity. All Protestant societies of over a million members have established agencies to foster a social gospel, but a major weakness of the Christian programs of today is that resolutions regarding social ills and suggestions of action have too frequently been ineffective. Nevertheless, the churches of mid-twentieth century America are engaged in many social welfare programs. Church interest in applied Christianity is manifest in congregational care of the poor, in organizing specialized social welfare programs, in reminding the public of man's obligations to his neighbors, in training people for constructive community leadership, and in direct financial support of many community welfare agencies. Members of churches are providing assistance to those who grieve following the loss of a loved one, are visiting the sick and the aged, and are bringing joy to individuals with Christmas and Thanksgiving Day baskets of food. [^35]

American religious societies are also providing funds to maintain schools, hospitals, orphanages, and homes for the aged and other individuals in need of care and attention. In 1960, the Methodist church supported 76 hospitals, 96 homes for the elderly, and 44 homes for children at an annual operating cost of $184,000,000. At that time, eight universities, twelve graduate schools of theology, seventy-seven senior colleges, and twenty-one junior colleges also had Methodist ties. In 1963, the Southern Baptist Convention, the largest of the Baptist bodies, supported forty-three hospitals, twenty-seven children's homes and seventy-one Southern Baptist educational institutions. Lutherans have gained a reputation as active social workers by providing many chaplains for hospitals, penitentiaries, and private industries and by establishing excellent facilities for the rehabilitation of the deaf and blind. They have also established 462 health and welfare agencies and institutions, staffed by more than 12,000 doctors, nurses, and social workers. They support 120 homes for the aged, 85 homes for children, and 87 hospitals. In addition to these activities, the Lutherans are the most active Protestant supporters of parochial schools, financing 1460 elementary schools, 32 colleges, plus high schools, junior colleges, and seminaries enrolling over 15,000 students. The most extensive parochial school system in this country is maintained by the Roman Catholics. Members of this communion support over 250 colleges and universities, provide schools for approximately one eighth of all elementary and high school students in the United States, and spend $1.8 billion annually to maintain their school system. They also support 245 schools for exceptional or handicapped children, 54 schools on Indian reservations, 495 clinics, and 273 hospitals for the care of the handicapped.

Another active supporter of the social gospel movement is the Salvation Army. This nonsectarian organization was founded by William Booth in London in 1865 and was transplanted from England to America in 1880. Evangelists of this religious philanthropic society are well-known for the assistance they render alcoholics. In addition to this admirable service, the Salvation Army provides shelter, rehabilitation centers, clinics, children's homes, employment bureaus, summer camps, and social and religious instruction to many individuals.

Social Christianity has expanded to include people throughout the world. A variety of foreign missionary programs of the Protestants and Catholics provide people in underdeveloped nations with educational opportunities, economic assistance, and medical aid.

In recent years, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has inaugurated one of the most efficient social gospel programs operating in modern America. The Welfare Program was launched during the great depression when 18 per cent of the Church members were on relief. More than 16 per cent of the destitute members received aid from the country and less than two per cent received relief from the Church. Recognizing the problem gripping many Mormon families, Church leaders announced in 1936 that they were establishing a system under which the curse of idleness would be abolished, the evils of a dole eradicated, and independence, industry, thrift and self-respect would be reestablished. Work was to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle in the lives of the people, and members were provided with a program enabling them to take care of themselves.

Mormon bishops (unsalaried local leaders in charge of the congregations) were given the responsibility of seeing that no one in the ward (parish) was hungry, cold, or insufficiently clad. Latter-day Saints, functioning as ward teachers and members of a women's Relief Society were charged with the responsibility of helping bishops discover and appraise the wants of the needy. In addition to gathering and storing food, clothing, and bedding, members of the Church were instructed and advised to produce necessities of life. Under the direction of Church leaders, members purchased farms, cattle ranches, dairies and erected canning, clothing, and soap factories. The farms and industries were operated primarily by members who were unemployed or who voluntarily donated their time; and the products of the people's labors were shipped to storehouses where they were freely distributed to needy members and destitute families living in Mormon communities.

Today, welfare canneries are located in Utah, Idaho, Oregon, Colorado, California, Arizona, and Washington. Throughout the West, Latter-day Saints are producing fresh fruits, milk, butter, cheese, beef, mutton, and pork. Grain produced on farms in Utah and Idaho are milled into cereal and flour at the Deseret Mills located at Kaysville, Utah. L.D.S. members in the Kansas City region produce gelatin dessert. Members in Texas provide bishop's storehouses with peanut butter. Latter-day Saints in San Diego contribute tuna fish to the program, and members in Alaska donate salmon. Workers in Salt Lake City produce bleach and cleansers. Saints in St. George, Utah, supply the program with brooms. Shaving cream and tooth paste are produced in Chicago and shoe polish in New York. Coal is mined in Utah, and clothing for men, women, and children is produced in large and varied quantities in the Deseret Industries and clothing factories located in several western towns.

III. The Movement for Christian Unity

Paralleling the increased popularity of a liberalized Protestant theology and a growing interest in the social gospel, has been a movement for Christian solidarity, sometimes called the ecumenical movement. Some leaders of this program are working to establish increased interdenominational cooperation, while others optimistically envision that such cooperation will eventually lead to the merger of all Christians into a single world-church.

One of the most powerful forces precipitating the current interest in programs of church unity has been the gradual erosion of differences dividing many Protestants. In many Protestant circles, interest in creeds and theology has been replaced with the conviction that no authority (a church, a leader, a creed, or the Bible) should compel conformity of belief. Many religious leaders contend that since Christian living is the primary essential of Christianity, Protestants should not become involved in theological disputes or competitive programs. Interdenominational diversity has further been reduced by the acceptance within many congregations of similar terminology and church service.

Another force promoting the ecumenical movement has been the desire of Protestant missionaries to eliminate competition in the work of converting non-Christians. For decades, some missionaries have suggested that the success of interdenominational missionary societies should encourage Protestants to demand church unity. [^36]

One of the leading organizations promoting Christian solidarity is the National Council of Churches, an interdenominational society formed in 1950. This body, supported by twenty-five Protestant denominations and five Eastern Orthodox bodies with a combined membership of over thirty-seven million, has rapidly become an influential agency promoting a variety of projects. Some leaders of this council anticipate the eventual creation of a super-church in America and desire to initiate such a goal by giving to the National Council the right to ordain clergy, administer sacraments, and accept churches into membership. This plan, however, has not won general acceptance among the supporters of the Council.

Although leaders of the ecumenical movement labored for years with little success, during the past few years several significant mergers have taken place which have spurred leaders of unification into increased activity. In 1957, the Congregational Christian Churches (a union in 1931 of the General Convention of Christian churches and the National Council of the Congregational Churches) merged with the Evangelical and Reformed church. This union was consummated in 1961 and the name United Church of Christ was adopted, thereby forming a society with a membership of approximately two million. In 1958, the marriage of the United Presbyterian Church of North America and the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. occurred, uniting over three million. In 1961, the American Unitarian Association and the Universalist Church of America became the Unitarian Universalist Association with a membership of 170,000. And in 1962, four bodies of Lutherans (the American Evangelical Lutheran church, the Augustana Evangelical Lutheran church, the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, and the United Lutheran Church of America) merged under the name of the Lutheran Church of America, thereby uniting over three million Lutherans.

Plans have also been drafted for the merger of many other denominations, which would unite bodies of Methodists with the Evangelical United Brethren, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, and members of the United Church of Christ.

Another expression of modern Christian cooperation is the rise of community churches in many towns, especially suburbs and college towns. Disregarding denominational lines, community churches capitalize on the public spiritedness within a town or neighborhood, and these churches aptly reflect the liberal view that people should worship without regard to theological themes.

While many mergers have taken place in recent years, the current ecumenical movement has not always led to union. Some Protestants have refused to abandon their traditional articles of faith in favor of a new theology. Since a minority involved in programs of unification have refused to abandon the old-time religion, mergers have sometimes led to the creation of a new church without eliminating older religious societies.

IV. From a Protestant Nation to a Three-Religion Culture

Another significant development in post-Civil War America that has had a profound impact on the religious situation in this country is the tremendous increase in population. In 1800, there were only about 5,000,000 Americans; in 1850 there were approximately 23,000,000 Americans; by 1900, the population was more than 76,000,000; and fifty years later, there were 150,000,000 living in the United States. This population explosion has continued. In 1960, the population was estimated at 180,000,000. The tremendous post-Civil War increase was primarily due to new immigration. Never before in the history of mankind had so many people been uprooted from their homes and transplanted to another land as occurred between 1880 and 1914. In five different years between 1900 and 1914 more than 1,000,000 immigrants came to this country.

Prior to the Civil War, most of the immigrants to the Thirteen Colonies and the new nation were Protestants who migrated from Western Europe. After the war, most of the "uprooted" emigrated from Italy, eastern Germany, Poland, Greece, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. While numerous settlers were arriving in this land from Eastern Europe, many Canadians moved into New England and thousands of Mexicans crossed the border, settling in the southwestern section of the United States. Since many of the immigrants migrated from Catholic countries, the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox communions witnessed a remarkable growth. Whereas the Roman Catholic church was not one of the seven largest denominations in the Thirteen Colonies and numbered only 600,000 in 1830 (an estimate that includes many who had not been gathered into their society), in 1960, after the influx of Catholic immigrants, this religious society reported a membership of more than 42,000,000, a figure representing almost 22 per cent of the population. The Roman Catholics, thereby, became the largest single body of Christians in America, claiming nearly double the membership recorded by the Baptists, the largest single Protestant denomination.

The Lutheran church benefited more from the new immigration than any other Protestant group. Its membership increased from less than half a million in 1870 to more than two million in 1910. Many members of the Eastern Orthodox church and numerous Jewish immigrants also settled in this country during this era. Consequently, following the Civil War, the United States changed from a Protestant nation to a three-religion culture. In 1960, of the approximate 114,449,217 Americans who were classified by the National Council of Churches as church members, 55 per cent were Protestants, 40 per cent were Catholics (37 per cent Roman Catholic, 2.5 per cent Eastern Orthodox, and .5 per cent Old Catholics and Polish National churches), and almost 5 per cent were Jews.

V. The Increase in Church Membership and Attendance

While population soared following the Civil War, church membership increased at a more remarkable rate. Even though membership in religious societies declined in the 1860's due primarily to the disastrous consequences of the Civil War, the downward trend was arrested in the 1870's. In the 1890's, the per cent of Americans belonging to a religious society equalled the previous high recorded at the outbreak of the war. Between 1890 and 1960 the percentage of church members in this country continued to increase, rising from 22 per cent to 64 per cent during these seven decades. [^37] Today, a greater per cent of the population is classified as "churched" than has been so designated in any other period in American history.

The rapid increase in church membership is the result of many factors. The rise of the city has brought most people within the shadows of a meeting house, and the advent of the automobile has brought the church to within a few minutes driving time of most American families. Requirements for membership have also been relaxed. Individuals are admitted into some Protestant societies without confessing any formal belief. Church membership is regarded by many as socially, politically, and economically desirable. And while church statistics of 1964 reveal that 64 per cent of the population is churched, 96 per cent of the American people who were recently asked, "What is your religion?" or "What is your religious preference?" readily identified themselves as Catholics, Jews, or Protestants. Only three per cent replied that they had no religion; and one per cent refused to answer. [^38]

Changing definitions of church membership has also resulted in an increase in the statistics. Lutherans, Episcopalians, and Roman Catholics count as members all baptized infants. Orthodox churches enumerate all persons in their nationality or cultural group, and Jews regard as members all Jews living in a community where congregations have been organized. Since many individuals are classified as church members today who would not have been enumerated prior to the Civil War, accurate comparisons of different periods and of denominations is difficult. Nevertheless, available figures clearly indicate that in the twentieth century there has been a steady and significant increase in church membership. In 1926, for example, about 18 per cent of the church members were under thirteen years of age, and if all these children were eliminated from the membership figures, the percentage of members would be reduced from 46 to 38 per cent, the latter figure being much higher than estimates of the pre-Civil War period. However, because of the growth of the Sunday School movement, far more children attend church in the twentieth century than in any previous modern era.

Church attendance of adults has also increased significantly in recent years. Many more Americans attend church regularly today than traveled to meeting houses in the colonial period or in the early republic. Since 1939, the American Institute of Public Opinion has conducted a poll in which civilian adults have been asked if they attended church during the week preceding the interview. Results of polls taken show that between 1939 and 1962 from 36 to 49 per cent of the American adults attended church the week prior to the examination. Although the percentages appear unreasonably high, throughout the decade of the 1950's about 47 per cent stated that they attended church the previous week. Catholics were more faithful in their church attendance than Protestants (71 per cent compared to 41 per cent) and Protestants attended more regularly than those of the Jewish faith (21 per cent). Women were more regular church-goers than men (50 per cent compared to 43 per cent, and people living in the East and South attended more frequently than individuals residing in the far West (49 per cent Eastern and Midwestern states, 47 per cent South, and 36 per cent far West). [^39]

While nearly half of the adults in the United States reported that they attended church on a specified Sunday, Gallup polls conducted in European countries reveal that only in Switzerland did church attendance compare favorably with that of the United States. In Holland, Great Britain, and Norway almost four persons in ten confessed that they did not participate in a religious service once during the previous year. [^40]

VI. Mormonism in the Mid-Twentieth Century

Occupational changes

While the religious complexion of the United States has altered appreciably during the past century, significant changes have also occurred in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The changing occupational status of the Mormons and the increase in the number and per cent of urban Saints has paralleled the transformation of America from an agricultural to an urban nation. This change, however, has not been as great in the Church as in the country. Nevertheless, after the great depression created an economic crisis in L.D.S. communities, many Saints moved from farms to the cities; and in recent years, proselyting activities have centered in urban areas. About 23 per cent of the Latter-day Saints were engaged in agricultural pursuits in 1950, compared to the national figure of 12 per cent. While farm workers comprised the largest single occupational group in the Church, 19 per cent of the Mormons in the mid-twentieth century were skilled craftsmen or foremen, 10 per cent were clerical and other sales personnel, 10 per cent were machine operators (trucks, busses, etc.), 8 per cent owned or managed businesses, 6.5 per cent were laborers (excluding farm and mine workers), 5 per cent were professional workers, and 2 per cent were educators. [^41]

Educational Advancements

One of the major accomplishments of the Church in the twentieth century has been the establishment of a variety of educational programs. At the beginning of the century, the Church supported academies throughout the intermountain region, thereby enabling many people to secure education beyond elementary school. As state governments founded public high schools, the Church abandoned its academy program; and by 1930, most L.D.S. academies had been closed or had been transferred to the states. Although Church leaders decided not to compete with local governments in the field of secondary education, they desired to continue to provide high school students with constant spiritual nourishment; and this desire resulted in the establishment of the Latter-day Saint seminary program. Since its inception in 1912, the seminary system has grown steadily, becoming one of the most effective religious training programs in the Church. During the school year of 1964-65, more than 97,000 students attended the 185 released-time seminaries and the 2,041 non-released time classes located in forty-one states and six foreign countries.

Fourteen years after the first seminary was founded adjacent to Granite High School in Salt Lake City, an Institute of Religion was organized in Moscow, Idaho, near the University of Idaho. This program proved to be very successful. By providing college students with religious instruction, counseling, leadership opportunities, and social activities, the Institute of Religion program in 1964-65 served 23,764 students attending 165 institutions of higher learning. [^42]

While Church leaders have promoted the seminary and institute programs, they have directed the growth of one of the former academies, Brigham Young University. This school, which offers the doctorate program in many fields, is the largest and most complete institution of the Unified Church School System and has become the largest church-related university in the United States. Many services are provided by this university, such as a motion picture studio which produces excellent films on a variety of subjects, a communications department providing the Church with visual aid material, and several programs which offer various educational opportunities to adults.

Recently, Church sponsored educational programs have expanded to Latin America and the islands of the Pacific. In addition to supporting a college in Mexico, Hawaii, and New Zealand, the Church maintains four grade schools and two high schools in Samoa, a combined grade and high school in Tonga, two elementary schools in Chile, and more than twenty elementary schools in Mexico. [^43]

Church efforts to help the Indians have also increased. Indian seminaries have been established; financial assistance, counseling, and special classes have been provided; an Indian placement bureau has been created; and an Indian student home-placement program has given many Indians friendly associations, brotherly love, and improved opportunities. [^44]

Church Growth

A remarkable growth in membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the twentieth century has enabled the Church to become one of the major American denominations and one of the fastest growing religions of the United States. In 1900, there were 268,000 Latter-day Saints. Membership increased to 597,000 in 1925 and to 1,079,000 by 1950. In the decade of the 1950's, 537,000 individuals were added to the Church; and between January 1, 1960 and January 1, 1964, the Church increased from 1,616,000 members to 2,117,000, presenting another increase of almost a half million (451,000). During the three year period dating from 1961 to 1964, there were approximately 300,000 convert baptisms, a figure larger than the total membership in 1900. In one year, 1963, the Church increased by 151,665 members.

One of the areas where missionaries labored for years without great success was in South America; and although thirty-three years were required to convert the first 10,000 members in that part of the world, between 1960 and 1964 Church membership increased in the South American missions by 31,000.

In recent years, missionaries laboring in Japan, Korea, South Africa, France, and many other countries have also witnessed unusual success.

While the number of full-time missionaries serving the Church has more than doubled since 1950 (increasing from 5,000 to 12,000), the number of converts per missionary has increased during this period from 1.86 to 8.94. [^45]

Church Expansion

In the twentieth century, the Church has become world-wide. In 1900, approximately 90 per cent of all Latter-day Saints lived in Utah, Idaho, or Arizona. The first major dispersal of Mormons from this region commenced during the great depression. Between 1929 and 1938 more than 45,000 L.D.S. members emigrated from Utah; and many settled in Washington, Oregon, and California. Although the initial expansion declined when the depression subsided, in recent years the per cent of members residing outside the three states of Utah, Idaho, and Arizona has increased rapidly due to the successful missionary program and a new emphasis that Latter-day Saints should remain in the mission fields. In 1954, more Mormons were still residing in Utah than any other state, Idaho was second, California a close third, Arizona fourth, and Wyoming fifth. [^46]

Extension of the Building Program

The growth and expansion of the Church has created a need for additional meeting houses in various parts of the world. While the Church is building schools, supporting a Welfare Program, developing the largest genealogical society in the world, constructing temples, and supporting a great missionary program, the Church by means of the tithes and other contributions of the Saints is helping members in many communities build beautiful and practical chapels and recreation centers. The building program has been aided by the services of work-missionaries, who, like the proselyting missionaries, voluntarily contribute two years or longer without monetary remuneration to promulgate the everlasting gospel.

Changing Image of the Church

The image of the L.D.S. Church in the United States and many other parts of the world has changed considerably in the twentieth century. Because of the accomplishments of L.D.S. businessmen, politicians, educators, and athletes and because of the admirable living habits of numerous Latter-day Saints, the Church is gaining the respect of many people. The activities of the temple block missionaries, the broadcasts of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, the presentations of the Palmyra pageant, the Church sponsored athletic programs, and the construction of a Mormon Pavilion at the New York World's Fair have also contributed to the creation of a respected image.

Perpetuation of Basic Doctrines

While the Church has grown and the organization has expanded to meet the needs of people living in a changing world, the basic doctrines of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have not been altered. The liberalization movement that has influenced the lives of many Protestants has not resulted in a reorientation of Latter-day Saint theology. Members of this denomination continue to maintain that God and Christ are two separate beings with tangible bodies of flesh and bones and that God is the literal Father of our spirits. They have not rejected their belief in the virgin birth of Jesus, the fall of Adam, the atoning sacrifice of Christ, the second coming of the Savior, the millennial reign of Christ, and the resurrection of the body. Mormons repeatedly testify to the world that God hears and answers prayers, that through faith and the power of the priesthood miracles are performed, and that God continues to direct his children through a living prophet. Latter-day Saints in the mid-twentieth century further hold that men and women who embrace the gospel and are sealed in Latter-day temples will remain husband and wife throughout the eternities, having the assurance of a continuation of their family relationship and the privilege of eternal increase. The work of salvation for the dead has increased in the Church, and more members are actively engaged in genealogical work today than in any other period in the history of the Church.

Today's Challenge

Among the many challenges facing Latter-day Saints is that of carrying the restored gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Many people throughout the world are seeking additional knowledge of God and his plan of salvation. Many are not satisfied with concepts described in the creeds of Christendom and cannot endorse aspects of the new theology. In increasing numbers, people are willing to investigate religions and compare the doctrines taught by the various churches. Such a comparison has enabled many to realize that while there is good and truth in all denominations, one, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, provides individuals with the fulness of the gospel.

While conditions were ripe for the restoration in the early nineteenth century, conditions are more favorable for the rapid promulgation of the gospel in the mid-twentieth century than during any other era in the recent history of mankind. An inspired message recorded by the Prophet Joseph Smith aptly describes the challenge confronting all Latter-day Saints: [^47]

O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day

Therefore, if ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work;

For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul;

And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work.

Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence.

Ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] SOURCE BOOKS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL GUIDES
[^2] ENCYCLOPEDIAS AND DICTIONARIES
[^3] GENERAL DESCRIPTIONS OF BELIEF
[^4] DENOMINATIONAL HISTORIES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF BELIEF
[^5] LEADERS OF RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS
[^6] CHRISTIANITY THROUGH THE AGE OF THE REFORMATION
[^7] HISTORY OF RELIGION IN THE UNITED STATES
[^8] Frank N. Riale, "The Value and Danger of the Study of Comparative Religion," The Biblical World, IV, No. 1 (July, 1894), 14.
[^9] Lewis G. Janes, "The Comparative Study of Religions: Its Pitfalls and Its Promise," The Sewanee Review, VII, No. 1 (January, 1899), 6-7, 16, 19.
[^10] James Freeman Clarke, An Outline of Christian Theology (New York, 1898), 7.
[^11] John Edward Dirks, The Critical Theology of Theodore Parker (New York: Columbia University Press, 1948), 17-20, 33, 40-44, 63-64, 130.
[^12] For information on the conflicting conclusions of Biblical critics see Edward Lewis Curtis, "The Present State of Old Testament Criticism," The Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine, XLV (Nov., 1892-April, 1893), 727-34; Bernard W. Anderson, Rediscovering the Bible (New York: Association, 1951); J. Patterson Smith, How God Inspired the Bible (New York, 1918); John W. Haley, Alleged Discrepancies of the Bible (Andover, 1884); John P. Peters, The Old Testament and the New Scholarship (New York, 1902); and Emel G. Kraeling, The Old Testament Since the Reformation (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1955).
[^13] Washington Gladden, How Much is Left of the Old Doctrines? (Boston, 1899), 2.
[^14] Ibid., 85-86, 174-75, 187, 291.
[^15] William Adams Brown, "The Old Theology and the New," Harvard Theological Review, IV, No. 1 (1911), 16.
[^16] Lyman Abbott, The Theology of an Evolutionist (New York, 1897), 186-90; George A. Gordon, "Some Things Worth While in Theology," Harvard Theological Review, III, No. 4 (Oct., 1910), 391.
[^17] Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 70-74, 188-89.
[^18] Arthur Cushman McGiffert, The Rise of Modern Religious Ideas (New York, 1922), 206-08.
[^19] Brown, op. cit., 15-16.
[^20] Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 190.
[^21] Brown, op. cit., 15.
[^22] Walter Rauschenbush, A Theology for the Social Gospel (New York, 1917), 60.
[^23] Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 182. For additional information on Liberal Christianity at the turn of the century, read the excellent summary in H. Shelton Smith, Robert T. Handy, and Lefferts A. Loetscher, American Christianity (2 vols., New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1960-63), II, 255-308.
[^24] Herbert Wallace Schneider, Religion in 20th Century America (New York: Atheneum, 1964), 151-56; John Herman Randall, Jr., "Naturalistic Humanism," Patterns of Faith in America Today, F. Ernest Johnson, ed. (New York: Collier Books, 1962), 156-60.
[^25] W. M. Horton, "The Development of Theological Thought," Twentieth Century Christianity, Stephen Neill, ed. (New York: Doubleday and Co., 1963), 261-69; Schneider, op. cit., 143-47; John Dillenberger and Claude Welch, Protestant Christianity Interpreted Through Its Development (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1954), 268-83; Sidney E. Ahlstrom, "New-Orthodoxy Demythologized," The Christian Century, LXXIV, No. 21 (May 22, 1957), 649-51; Gustaf Aulen, The Faith of the Christian Church (Philadelphia: Muhlenberg Press, 1948); and William Hordern, The Case for a New Reformation Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1959).
[^26] James Freeman Clarke, Manual of Unitarian Belief (Boston, 1924), 23, 36.
[^27] Ibid., 88.
[^28] Stewart Grant Cole, The History of Fundamentalism (Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books, 1963), 34; "What is a Fundamentalist?" The Forum, LXXVI, No. 6 (December, 1926), 861-62.
[^29] George Herbert Betts, The Beliefs of 700 Ministers (New York, 1929), 52-56.
[^30] John and June Robbins, "The Surprising Beliefs of Our Future Ministers," Redbook Magazine, CXVII, No. 4 (August, 1961), 36, 107.
[^31] Used by permission of The American Institute of Public Opinion (The Gallup Poll), Princeton, New Jersey. Release of April 15, 1960.
[^32] Used by permission of The American Institute of Public Opinion (The Gallup Poll), Princeton, New Jersey. Release of December 23, 1961.
[^33] Carl N. Degler, Out of Our Past (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1959), 339-40.
[^34] C. H. Hopkins, The Rise of the Social Gospel in American Protestantism, 1865-1915 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1942), 155.
[^35] David O. Moberg, The Church as a Social Institution: The Sociology of American Religion (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1962), 146-50. See also P. A. Carter, The Decline and Revival of the Social Gospel, 1920-1940 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1956); and Hartzell Spence, The Story of America's Religions (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1960).
[^36] Dillenberger and Welch, op. cit., 292-94.
[^37] Benson Y. Landis, ed., Yearbook of American Churches, Edition for 1964 (New York: National Council of the Churches of Christ in the U.S.A., 1964), 279-80.
[^38] Leo Rosten, ed., Religions in America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963), 243.
[^39] Ibid., 247; Landis, op. cit., 282-83.
[^40] Rosten, op. cit., 248.
[^41] John A. Widtsoe, "What are the Occupations of the Latter-day Saints?" The Improvement Era, LV, No. 3 (March, 1952), 143.
[^42] Seminaries and Institutes Annual Report, 1964-65, L.D.S. Department of Education.
[^43] James B. Allen and Richard O. Cowan, Mormonism in the Twentieth Century (Provo: Brigham Young University Extension Publications, 1964), 106-07.
[^44] Ibid., 107-12.
[^45] Ibid., 143.
[^46] William E. Berrett and Alma P. Burton, Readings in L.D.S. Church History (3 vols., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1958), III, 441-42, 451.
[^47] The Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1952), 4:2-7
