Milton V. Backman, American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism ( 1965)

Appendix C

A Comparison of Selections from the Augsburg Confession, Westminster Confession and the American Revision (1801), as Prepared by the Protestant Episcopal Church, of the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England (1571)

Historical Origins of Several Popular Creeds of Christendom

The Augsburg Confession, which became the most popular Lutheran Creed, was written by Philip Melanchthon, a close associate of Martin Luther. The confession of faith was based upon the teachings of the leading instigator of the Reformation and was presented to Charles V at the Diet of Augsburg in 1530. Recognizing that the followers of Luther were misrepresented by some of their opponents, Melanchthon endeavored to describe and then produce a scriptural defense of the basic beliefs of Lutheranism.

The Westminster Confession of Faith was written by a group of religious leaders who assembled in Westminster Abbey during the Puritan Revolution, and this standard of faith was adopted as a proper expression of Christian beliefs by a vast majority of the Presbyterians. It is still endorsed, with a few revisions, by many members of this church. Prior to the mid-nineteenth century, the theology expressed in this creed was also accepted by most Congregationalists, and with a few exceptions (such as the doctrine of baptism) served as a basis of several popular Calvinist Baptists creeds, the London Confession of 1677 and 1688 and the Philadelphia Confession of Faith of 1742.

The Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England are a revision of the Forty-two Articles which had been written during the reign of Edward VI. The principal author of the statement of faith was Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. During the Elizabethan Settlement, the Thirty-nine Articles were approved by Parliament, after which the Latin text was revised and translated by the religious leaders of England who met in Convocation. In 1571, the Articles were signed by the royal head of the Church of England, Queen Elizabeth. The selections representing concepts described in this creed which appear below are reproduced from Andrew Fowler, An Exposition of the Articles of Religion of the Protestant Episcopal Church, in the United States of America (Charleston, 1839), and are statements of faith which the members of the Protestant Episcopal church adopted in the Convention of 1801 without significant modifications from the Thirty-nine Articles. Nearly all the selections cited also appear in the Methodist Articles of Religion (1784), a revision made by John Wesley of the Thirty-nine Articles and adopted by the Methodist Conference of 1784.

The following abbreviations are employed to designate the source of the selections cited below:

(A) refers to statements appearing in the Augsburg Confession.

(W) refers to statements appearing in the Westminster Confession.

(T) refers to statements appearing in the American Revision, as prepared by the Protestant Episcopal church, of the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England.

Descriptions of Belief

Of God and the Holy Trinity

The decree of the Council of Nicaea concerning the Unity of the Divine Essence and concerning the Three Persons, is true and to be believed without and doubting; that is to say, there is one Divine Essence which is called and which is God: eternal, without body, without parts, of infinite power, wisdom and goodness, and Maker and Preserver of all things, visible and invisible; and yet that there are three Persons, of the same essence and power, who also are co-eternal, the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. And the term "person" [is] . . . used . . . to signify, not a part or quality in another, but that which subsists of itself. (A)

There is but one only living and true God, who is infinite in being and perfection, a most pure spirit, invisible, without body, parts, or passions, immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy, most free, most absolute, working all things according to the counsel of his own immutable and most righteous will, for his own glory; most loving, gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, the rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and withal most just and terrible in his judgments; hating all sin, and who will by no means clear the guilty. . . . God . . . hath most sovereign dominion over them, to do by them, for them, or upon them, whatsoever himself pleaseth. In his sight all things are open and manifest; his knowledge is infinite, infallible, and independent upon the creature; so as nothing is to him contingent or uncertain. . . . In the unity of the Godhead there be three persons of one substance, power, and eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. The Father is of none, neither begotten nor proceeding; the Son is eternally begotten of the Father; the Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son. (W)

There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts or passions [incapable of suffering]; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; the Maker, and Preserver of all things both visible and invisible. And in the unity of this Godhead there be three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. . . . The Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one substance, majesty, and glory, with the Father and the Son, very and eternal God. (T)

Of Christ

The Son of God, did take man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, so that there are Two Natures, the divine and the human, inseparably conjoined in one Person, one Christ, true God and true man, who was born of the Virgin Mary, truly suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, that he might reconcile the Father unto us, and be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but for all actual sins of men. He also descended into hell, and truly rose again the third day; afterward he ascended into Heaven, that he might sit on the right hand of the Father, and forever reign, and have dominion over all creatures, and sanctify them that believe in Him, by sending the Holy Ghost into their hearts, to rule, comfort and quicken them, and to defend them against the devil and the power of sin. The same Christ shall openly come again to judge the quick and the dead, etc., according to the Apostles' Creed. (A)

The Son of God, the second person in the Trinity, being very and eternal God, of one substance, and equal with the Father, did when the fulness of time was come, take upon him man's nature, with all the essential properties and common infirmities thereof, yet without sin: being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, of her substance. So that two whole, perfect, and distinct natures, the Godhead and the manhood, were inseparably joined together in one person, without conversion, composition, or confusion. Which person is very God and very man, yet one Christ, the only mediator between God and man. . . . Jesus . . . was crucified and died; was buried, and remained under the power of death, yet saw no corruption. On the third day he arose from the dead, with the same body in which he suffered; with which also he ascended into heaven, and there sitteth at the right hand of his Father, making intercession; and shall return to judge men and angels at the end of the world. . . . Although the work of redemption was not actually wrought by Christ till after his incarnation, yet the virtue, efficacy, and benefits thereof, were communicated unto the elect, in all ages. (W)

The Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very and eternal God, of one substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin of her substance: so that two whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood, were joined together in one Person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God, and very Man; who truly suffered, was crucified, died, and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for actual sins of men. . . . Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his body, with flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there sitteth, until he return to judge all men at the last day. (T)

Of the Holy Scripture

The Holy Scripture . . . [is] the word of God, . . . the infallible truth. . . . The whole counsel of God, concerning all things necessary for his own glory, man's salvation, faith, and life, is either expressly set down in Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture: unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelations of the Spirit, or traditions of men. Nevertheless we acknowledge the inward illumination of the Spirit of God to be necessary for the saving understanding of such things as are revealed in the word. . . . The Old Testament in Hebrew . . . and the New Testament in Greek . . . being immediately inspired by God, and by his singular care and providence kept pure in all ages, are therefore authentical. . . . The infallible rule of interpretation of Scripture, is the Scripture itself. (W)

Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. In the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church. (T)

Of Creation

It pleased God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the glory of his eternal power, wisdom and goodness, in the beginning, to create or make of nothing the world, and all things therein, whether visible or invisible, in the space of six days, and all very good. (W)

Of the Fall and Original Sin

Since the Fall of Adam, all men begotten according to nature, are born with sin, that is, without the fear of God, without trust in God, and with concupiscence [fleshly desires]; and that this disease, or vice of origin, is truly sin, even now condemning and bringing eternal death upon those not born again through baptism and the Holy Ghost. (A)

Our first parents, being seduced by the subtilty and temptation of Satan, sinned in eating the forbidden fruit. . . . By this sin they fell from their original righteousness . . . and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body. They being the root of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was imputed, and the same death in sin and corrupted nature conveyed to all their posterity, descending from them by ordinary generation. From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all actual transgressions. This corruption of nature, during this life, doth remain in those that are regenerated. (W)

Original sin . . . is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusteth always contrary to the Spirit; and therefore in every person born into this world, it deserveth God's wrath and damnation. And this infection of nature doth remain, yea, in them are regenerated. (T)

Of Free Will

Man's will has some liberty for the attainment of civil righteousness, and for the choice of things subjected to reason. Nevertheless, it has no power, without the Holy Ghost, to work the righteousness of God, that is spiritual righteousness, . . . but this righteousness is wrought in the heart when the Holy Ghost is received through the Word. (A)

Man, by his all into a state of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of will to any spiritual good accompanying salvation. . . . When God converts a sinner, and translates him into a state of grace, he freeth him from his natural bondage under sin, and by his grace alone enables him freely to will and to do that which is spiritually good. (W)

The condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and good works, to faith, and calling upon God: wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God. (T)

Of God's Eternal Decree

God from all eternity did by the most wise and holy counsel of his own will, freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass; yet so as thereby neither is God the author of sin; nor is violence offered to the will of the creatures, nor is the liberty or contingency of second causes taken away, but rather established. Although God knows whatsoever may or can come to pass, upon all supposed conditions; yet hath he not decreed any thing because he foresaw it as future, or as that which would come to pass, upon such conditions. By the decree of God, for the manifestation of his glory, some men and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life, and others foreordained to everlasting death. . . . Their number is so certain and definite that it cannot be either increased or diminished. . . . The elect . . . are redeemed by Christ. . . . The rest of mankind, God was pleased, according to the unsearchable counsel of his own will, whereby he extendeth or witholdeth mercy as he pleaseth, for the glory of his sovereign power over his creatures, to pass by and to ordain them to dishonour and wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious justice. (W)

Of Predestination and Election

All those whom God hath predestinated unto life, and those only, he is pleased, in his appointed and accepted time, effectually to call by his word and Spirit. . . . This effectual call is of God's free and special grace alone, not from any thing at all foreseen in man. . . . Elect infants, dying in infancy, are regenerated and saved by Christ through the Spirit, who worketh when, and where, and how he pleaseth. So also are all other elect persons, who are incapable of being outwardly called by the ministry of the word. (W)

Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of the world were laid) he hath constantly decreed, by his counsel secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he hath chosen in Christ out of mankind; and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor. . . . We must receive God's promise in such wise as they be generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture. And in our own doings, that will of God is to be followed. (T) [The doctrine of predestination does not appear in the Methodist Articles of Religion.]

Of Justification

Men cannot be Justified [obtain a forgiveness of sins and righteousness] before God by their own strength, merits or works, but are freely justified for Christ's sake through faith, when they believe that they are received into favor and that their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake, who, by His death, hath made satisfaction for our sins. This faith God imputes for righteousness in his sight. Rom. 3 and 4. (A)

Those whom God effectually calleth, he also freely justifieth; not by infusing righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting and accepting their persons as righteous: not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone: not by imputing faith itself, the act of believing, . . . but by imputing the obedience and satisfaction of Christ unto them. (W)

We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or deservings. Wherefore, that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine. (T)

Of Sanctification

They who are effectually called and regenerated, having a new heart and a new spirit created in them, are further sanctified . . . by his [Christ's] word and Spirit dwelling in them; the dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts . . . weakened. . . . This santification is throughout in the whole man, yet imperfect in this life: there abideth still some remnants of corruption in every part. (W)

Good Works

Faith is bound to bring forth Good Fruits, and that it is necessary to do good works commanded by God, because of God's will, but not that we should rely on those works to merit justification before God. For remission of sins and justification are apprehended by faith. (A) word. . . . [Man's] ability to do good works is not at all of themselves,

Good works are only such as God hath commanded in his holy but wholly from the Spirit of Christ. . . . Works done by unregenerate men . . . cannot please God, . . . yet their neglect of them is more sinful, and displeasing unto God. (W)

Albeit that good works, which are the fruits of faith, and follow after justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of God's judgment; yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith; insomuch that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree discerned by the fruit. Work done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive grace. (T)

Of the Perseverance of the Saints

They whom God hath . . . effectually called and sanctified . . . can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state of grace; but shall be . . . eternally saved. . . . Nevertheless they may . . . fall into grievous sins . . . and bring temporal judgments upon themselves. (W)

Of the Church

The Church is the congregation of saints, in which the Gospel is rightly taught and the Sacraments rightly administered. And to the true unity of the Church, it is enough to agree concerning the doctrine of the Gospel and the administration of the Sacraments. Nor is it necessary that human traditions, rites, or ceremonies, instituted by men, should be everywhere alike. (A)

The [invisible] church . . . consists of the whole number of elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one, under Christ. . . . The visible church . . . consists of all those throughout the world, that profess the true religion, together with their children. (W)

The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered according to Christ's ordinance, in all things that of necessity are requisite to the same. (T)

Of the Sacraments

Sacraments were ordained, not only to be marks of profession among men, but rather to be signs and testimonies of the will of God toward us, instituted to awaken and confirm faith in those who use them. Wherefore we must so use the Sacraments that faith be added to believe the promises which are offered and set forth through the Sacraments. . . . No one should publicly teach in the Church or administer the Sacraments, unless he be regularly called. . . . It is lawful to use the Sacraments, which are administered by evil men. (A)

Sacraments are holy signs and seals of the covenant of grace, immediately instituted by God, to represent Christ and his benefits, and to confirm our interest in him: as also to put a visible difference between those that belong unto the church, and the rest of the world; and solemnly to engage them to the service of God in Christ. There be only two sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to say, baptism and the supper of the Lord: neither of which may be dispensed by any, but by a minister of the word, lawfully ordained. (W)

Sacraments . . . [are] not only badges of tokens of Christian men's profession; but [are] . . . sure witnesses, and effectual signs of grace, and God's good will towards us, by the which he doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in him. There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. . . . It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of public preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called, and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men who have public authority given unto them in the Congregation. (T)

Of Baptism

Baptism . . . is necessary to salvation, and . . . through Baptism is offered the grace of God. . . . Children are to be baptized, who, being offered to God through Baptism, are received into His grace. (A)

Baptism is a sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ, not only for the solemn admission of the party baptized into the visible Church, but also to be unto him a sign and seal of the covenant of grace, . . . of regeneration, [and] of remission of sins. . . . The outward element to be used in this sacrament is water, wherewith the party is to be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, by a minister of the gospel lawfully called thereunto. Dipping of the person into the water is not necessary; but baptism is rightly administered by pouring and sprinkling water upon the person. Not only those that do actually profess faith in and obedience unto Christ, but also the infants of one or both believing parents are to be baptized. Although it be a great sin to condemn or neglect this ordinance, yet grace and salvation are not inseparably annexed unto it, as that no person can be regenerated or saved without it, or that all that are baptized are undoubtedly regenerated. . . . The sacrament of baptism is but once to be administered to any person. (W)

Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from others that be not christened: but it is also a sign of regeneration or new-birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that receive baptism rightly are grafted into the Church: the promises of the forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed: faith is confirmed, and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God. The baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained in the Church as most agreeable with the institution of Christ. (T)

Of the Lord's Supper

The Body and Blood of Christ are truly present [under the form of bread and wine], and are distributed to those who eat in the Supper of the Lord. (A)

In this sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father, . . . but only a commemoration of that one offering up of himself. . . . Worthy receivers . . . spiritually receive and feed upon Christ crucified, . . . the body and blood of Christ being then not corporally or carnally in, with, or under the bread and wine; yet as really, but spiritually, present to the faith of believers in that ordinance, as the elements themselves are, to their outward senses. (W)

The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought to have among themselves one to another; but rather it is a sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's death; insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith, receive the same, the bread which we break is a partaking of the body of Christ; and likewise the cup of blessing is a partaking of the blood of Christ. . . . The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten, in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith. (T)

Of the State of Men after Death and the Last Judgment

At the Consummation of the World, Christ shall appear for judgment, and shall raise up all the dead; he shall give to the godly and elect eternal life and everlasting joys, but ungodly men and the devils he shall condemn to be tormented without end. (A)

The bodies of men, after death, return to dust, and see corruption; but their souls (which neither die nor sleep), having an immortal subsistence, immediately return to God who gave them. The souls of the righteous . . . are received into the highest heaven; where they behold the face of God . . . waiting for the full redemption of their bodies: and the souls of the wicked are cast into hell, where they remain in torments and utter darkness. . . . At the last day . . . all the dead shall be raised up with the self-same bodies. . . . God hath appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world. . . . The end of God's appointing this day, is for the manifestation of the glory of his mercy in the eternal salvation of the elect; and of his justice in the damnation of the reprobate. . . . The righteous go into everlasting life, and receive the fulness of joy and refreshing which shall come from the presence of the Lord: but the wicked who know not God, and obey not the gospel of Jesus Christ, shall be cast into eternal torments, and be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. (W)

Christ [shall] return to judge all men at the last day. . . . God . . . hath . . . decreed . . . to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he hath chosen in Christ out of mankind; and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation. (T) [In the Methodist Articles of Religion, the only references to life after death are the statements that Christ shall "return to judge all men at the last day" and that the "Romanish doctrine of purgatory . . . is . . . repugnant to the word of God." A popular Methodist Baptismal creed, however, includes the Apostles' Creed (the Apostles' Creed is also sanctioned by the Thirty-nine Articles) which states that "I believe in . . . the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting."]
