# List of Terms

Aaronic PriesthoodThe lesser priesthood. This priesthood includes the authority to baptize and is named for Aaron in the Old Testament of the Bible.

ApostasyWhen individuals, the Church, or entire nations forsake or abandon the gospel of Jesus Christ. Apostasy results in division, confusion, and loss of priesthood authority, or the right to act in the name of God.

ApostleThe title Jesus Christ gave to the twelve men He chose as His closest associates during His ministry on earth and to whom He gave authority to act in His name. In modern times, Jesus Christ has called other men to serve as His Apostles. As in former times, an Apostle is a special witness of Jesus Christ and has authority from Him.

AtonementThe event that enables us to be reconciled to God. To atone is to suffer the penalty for sin, thereby removing the effects of sin from repentant sinners. Jesus Christ was the only one capable of making a perfect Atonement for all mankind. His Atonement included His suffering for our sins, the shedding of His blood, and His death and Resurrection. Because of the Atonement, everyone who has lived will be resurrected. The Atonement also provides us with a way to be forgiven of our sins and to live forever with God.

BaptismAn essential step in receiving forgiveness of sins. Through baptism and confirmation by priesthood authority, we become members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Baptism is by immersion, meaning that the person being baptized is briefly submerged in water. Baptism shows our willingness to follow Christ’s example and to make covenants with God.

GospelHeavenly Father’s plan to help us have peace in this life and joy in eternity. The gospel is centered on the Atonement of Jesus Christ and requires us to have faith in Him, repent, be baptized, receive the Holy Ghost, and endure to the end.

Holy GhostAlso called the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, and the Comforter. He witnesses, or testifies, of Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and reveals and teaches the truth.

Melchizedek PriesthoodThe higher or greater priesthood. It is named for Melchizedek in the Old Testament of the Bible, who was a righteous high priest and king.

OrdinanceA sacred, formal act performed by the authority of the priesthood. An example is baptism.

PriesthoodThe authority and power of God. God gives this power to man to act in His name. The Aaronic Priesthood was restored to Joseph Smith by John the Baptist, who baptized Jesus. The Melchizedek Priesthood was restored by Peter, James, and John, three of Jesus’s Twelve Apostles.

RestorationMaking something as it was; reestablishing it; bringing it back anew. After truth and authority had been lost from the earth, the gospel was restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Restoration differs from reformation in that to reform means to modify an existing organization or practice in an effort to return it to its original state, while to restore means to reestablish or renew the original organization or practice in its entirety.

ResurrectionAfter physical death, the reuniting of the spirit with the perfected physical body of flesh and bones. Jesus Christ was the first to be resurrected.

RevelationCommunication between God and His children, usually through the Holy Ghost. Individuals can receive revelation to guide their own lives, but only God’s chosen prophet can receive revelation for the whole world. Revelation comes in many forms, but most often it comes as thoughts, feelings, and impressions.
