# Why Should I Contribute Tithing?

Everything that is good in your life is a gift from your loving Heavenly Father. When you contribute 10 percent to Him in return, you express your love, faith, and gratitude. You show God that you will follow Him even when it may be difficult; you show Him that you will rely on Him rather than trusting in money or material things. Because of your faithfulness, your Heavenly Father promises you blessings that are far greater than anything you give up.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="128328692" id="aside1_p1">Paying tithing shows your faith in Jesus Christ. As you rely on Him, you will receive the strength, guidance, and support you need in your life.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Although some people have difficulty believing that they can afford to contribute one-tenth of their income, faithful tithe payers learn that they cannot afford not to pay tithing. In a very real and wonderful way, the windows of heaven are opened, and blessings are poured out upon them. As one widowed mother explained to her son, “I cannot [raise you children] without the blessings of the Lord, and I obtain those blessings by paying an honest tithing. When I pay my tithing, I have the Lord’s promise that he will bless us, and we must have those blessings if we are to get along” (Dallin H. Oaks, Ensign, May 1994, 33).

Spiritual strength comes from relying on the Lord. As we face the serious trials of life, we need increased faith, inspiration, and courage. These blessings can be poured out of the windows of heaven as a result of obeying the law of tithing.

In addition, many people find that because they are faithful tithe payers they are better able to manage their finances and meet their needs. Paying tithing teaches us to control our desires for material things and to be honest with our fellowmen. We learn to trust that what we have been given, through the blessings of the Lord and our own diligent efforts, is sufficient for our needs.

No matter the amount of your income, you will be blessed as you pay tithing. When Jesus saw a woman put her few coins into the temple treasury, He told His disciples, “This poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury: for all they did cast in of their abundance; but she … did cast in all that she had” (Mark 12:43–44).
