H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

Preface

Searching, researching, and teaching classes on the history and doctrine of the Pearl of Great Price has been an exciting adventure spanning nearly thirty years. Preparing this manuscript on the historical aspects has been very tedious and demanding. On some segments of the story my files and folders are quite adequate, while on others my knowledge and documents range from meager to woefully lacking.

In 1989 I presented a paper in a Brigham Young University summer lecture series in which I explained how my intense interest in this topic began:

When I began teaching classes in the Pearl of Great Price in 1965 at Brigham Young University, I spent little class time discussing the historical background of this book of scripture because only limited information was available, particularly about the Book of Abraham. It was commonly believed that the mummies and papyri that came from Egypt via Ireland were sold to the early Church leaders by a Michael H. Chandler, a nephew of the excavator. Joseph Smith had translated some of the papyrus manuscripts; then all were reportedly burned in the great Chicago fire of 1871. Little more was known. This much I had learned in a graduate class on the Pearl of Great Price taught by James R. Clark, author of The Story of the Pearl of Great Price. He had meticulously detailed all that was known in those days relative to the Abrahamic his-tory. He was plowing new ground and establishing a solid foundation upon which others could build. [^1]

The Latter-day Saint community was startled by an announcement in November 1967 that the Church had obtained from the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City eleven fragments of Egyptian papyri that had once been in the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This announcement piqued the interest of students, and soon the number of young people who registered for Pearl of Great Price classes skyrocketed. I, along with my colleagues, was unprepared to field the many questions that were forthcoming because of the find. We didn't know even the most basic things about the historical background of the Book of Abraham, as indicated by these typical questions and answers:

Answer: I don't know.

Answer: I don't know.

Answer: I don't know.

Answer: I don't know.

Answer: I don't know.

Answer: I don't know.

My lectures were filled with too many "I don't knows." The sudden fervor of student interest and questions stirred me to probe for answers to questions that previously had not even been asked. I was very uncomfortable with the void in our understanding, and because we were caught without facts, controversy flourished among various factions.

Jay M. Todd, then an editorial associate on the Improvement Era staff, wrote an excellent article that appeared in January 1968. It detailed Dr. Aziz Atiya's find of the eleven papyri fragments and the bill of sale between the buyer, A. Combs, and the owners—Emma Smith Bidamon, the prophet's widow; Lewis C. Bidamon; and Joseph Smith III. [^2]

Jay's article intrigued me, as did other events that year. During that summer, I attended a BYU Land of the Scriptures workshop led by Dr. Daniel H. Ludlow, during which we vis-ited Pit Tomb 33 on the west bank of the Nile near Luxor, Egypt. This tomb, Dr. Ross Christensen of Brigham Young University had hypothesized, was where Lebolo had exhumed the eleven mummies. [^3]

The tour concluded in Florence, Italy, so I stopped at the Latter-day Saint mission home there and visited with Elder R. Brent Bentley, a young friend of mine from BYU who had researched the Antonio Lebolo story. Jay Todd had written to the mission president, President Duns, to ascertain what information could be located about Antonio Lebolo. In response, President Duns, who was unable to go himself, sent Elder Bentley and two other elders to Lebolo's birthplace, Castellamonte. The elders had found Lebolo's birth recorded in the parish register of the local Catholic church, and they had also located Lebolo's large home. Although I was unable to leave the tour to go to Castellamonte myself, my interest was further stirred to follow up on the elders' findings.

Jay Todd published Elder Bentley's findings and photographs in the July 1968 Improvement Era. In 1969 Jay performed another great service by publishing his fascinating and insightful book, The Saga of the Book of Abraham.

I was hooked by the intrigue of this story and began to plan how I might untangle the details of this saga. I began by corresponding with anyone who might know something about Lebolo. Occasionally, as I directed travel study tours to Israel, Europe, and the Middle East, I would bid the homeward-bound participants farewell in Rome or Athens and then hurry to northern Italy, Paris, or Dublin to continue the research.

In 1982 I was appointed the Pearl of Great Price director in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University, which had funds for research. In the fall of 1984, I was granted a professional development leave. Having both time and funds, I traveled in company with a research assistant to Philadelphia, New York, Dublin, London, Paris, Turin, Castellamonte, Venice, Trieste, and, briefly, Egypt to continue research. In addition, Jay Todd, as a friend, generously shared his files on his Book of Abraham research. His book accompanied me on nearly every research journey, and it has greatly influenced my efforts.

Thanks to all the research carried out, the questions answered with "I don't know" are less numerous today than they were twenty-five years ago.

I hope that this work will aid some in acquiring a basic understanding of this topic and challenge others to set the record straight by producing facts that will fill in the missing pieces of the puzzle, or correcting errors where my exuberance rushed ahead of my judgment.

Overall, it's been a great adventure visiting the tombs and backroads of Egypt; many great libraries, archives, and museums of the United States, Europe, and Egypt; LDS Church history sites in New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois; and meeting many fascinating personalities along the way. My colleagues and research assistants have been and are some of the most intelligent and dedicated scholars in the Church and in the academic community.

How exciting it is to learn, to be challenged, to grasp a new concept, or to painfully release an old favorite! I hope that your exposure to this work provides many enjoyable hours for you. This quest was pursued not merely to piece a story together but to actually trace the whereabouts of some prophetic writings from their ancient origin nearly four millennia ago to their arrival in this final dispensation, referred to as the restoration—"the restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Since all the papyri did not burn in the Chicago fire, is it possible that more papyri may be in existence? 1. This paper was published under the title "Antonio Lebolo: Excavator of the Book of Abraham," in BYU Studies 31 (Summer 1991): 5-7.
[^2] Who was Sebolo or Lebolo or whatever his name was? Where was he from? Why was he in Egypt? 2. Jay M. Todd, "Egyptian Papyri Rediscovered," Improvement Era, January 1968, 12-16.
[^3] Where were the mummies and papyri exhumed in Egypt? 3. Jay M. Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1969), 63-70.
