H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

Foreword

The purpose of a foreword is to provide information that is likely to be of interest, but that is not absolutely essential for understanding the book itself. It is customary also that the foreword not be composed by the author of the book but by someone acquainted with the subject matter and also with the author. It is therefore with humility and a sense of honor that I record a few items concerning H. Donl Peterson's definitive and informative work: The Story of the Book of Abraham, which, although written by Professor Peterson, is being published posthumously.

This new book is the result of original research by Dr. Peterson, much of it never published before, that can be found nowhere else in collected and usable form. Such research was an on-going, magnificent obsession for Donl over a period of at least thirty years and took him to the eastern portions of the United States, to Europe, especially Italy, and to the archaeological remains in the Valley of the Kings in ancient Egypt.

Donl was untiring and meticulous. Because in his continuing investigation and careful searching of documents and records, many of which were previously untouched by LDS researchers, the Church and the world will have a clearer understanding of the history of the Pearl of Great Price, and particularly of the papyri associated with the Book of Abraham. Donl's studies have given us a clearer view of Antonio Lebolo, who was responsible for getting the papyri, along with some mummies, out of Egypt. Eventually they found their way to the United States and into the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The entire historical background of the Book of Abraham will be plainer to readers today because of Dr. Peterson's work.

The discovery by Dr. Aziz Atiya of fragments of the papyri in 1967 in New York's Metropolitan Museum generated a lively interest among Latter-day Saints. Often the Book of Abraham seems surrounded in an aura of mystery. As a consequence, Jay M. Todd, an editorial associate of the Improvement Era, responded to a need and published an informative book, The Saga of the Book of Abraham (Deseret Book, 1969). However, as Brother Todd explained, there were many unknowns about Antonio Lebolo and Michael Chandler, and also the historical background and journey of the papyri scrolls. Donl Peterson's research continues to draw back the curtain and allows the light to shine where previously there was darkness. Not all the facts are known even now, but because of The Story of the Book of Abraham, readers will gain a clearer and more complete comprehension of the story behind the Book of Abraham than has been possible heretofore.

H. Donl Peterson, a family man, was assisted often by his wife, Mary Lou, and she sometimes accompanied him in his travels. After his untimely passing in 1994, his six children (Terry, Diane, Jaqueline, Scott, James, and Michael), enabled Mary Lou to bring this work to publication. The book is rich in facts, photos, maps, and charts. It will be a boon to all who seek to know the fascinating history of the Pearl of Great Price, and especially the sacred writings of Abraham.

Because the Pearl of Great Price is one of the standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, this monumental work is of considerable significance.

Robert J. Matthews

Former Dean of Religious Instruction

Brigham Young University
