H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

1

Antiquities in Kirtland, Ohio

Near the end of June 1835, a large, creaking wagon with a mysterious cargo slowly wended its way down the rutted roads of Kirtland, Ohio. The curious freight was thousands of miles away from the cargo's distant point of origin. Michael H. Chandler, an Irish immigrant who had settled in Pennsylvania, was responsible for the wave of excitement that resulted when he registered at the Riggs Hotel and announced he would be in town for several days to display four Egyptian mummies and some ancient papyri. He also expressed interest in visiting with the Mormon prophet, Joseph Smith, concerning his collection.

Mr. Chandler had previously contacted several linguists at reputable academic institutions in the eastern states for their opinions on and possible interpretation of the writings on the papyrus. In 1822 the young French genius Jean Francois Champollion, with the aid of the trilingual Rosetta Stone, had first deciphered the ancient hieroglyphic writings in France, but his dictionary of Egyptian hieroglyphics would not be published in Europe until 1841. [^1] Hence, the American academicians whom Chandler consulted in 1833-35 were unable to read the papyrus records. At best, they could only speculate on the meaning of some of the symbols when they could reach consensus on them. [^2]

Mr. Chandler had heard of Joseph Smith's skill in translating from the Egyptian. However, most of the informers apparently made light of the Prophet's claim of having translated the Book of Mormon from a "reformed" Egyptian language.

When Chandler arrived in Kirtland, he probably placed copies of two different placards, or handbills, in conspicuous locations to promote his exhibit. One placard, referred to as the "certificate of the learned," was signed by seven prominent Philadelphia medical doctors who had visited the exhibit while in Philadelphia and who recommended the exhibit of mummies and papyri to the public. [^3] The other placard was printed after Chandler's original collection of eleven mummies had dwindled to four. It read:

EGYPTIAN ANTIQUITIES

These Mummies, with seven others, were taken from the Catacombs of Egypt, near where the ancient, and we may say, almost unparalleled city of Thebes once stood, by the celebrated French traveller Antonio Lebolo; at a great expense, under the protection of the French Consul, by consent of Mehemet Ali, the Viceroy of Egypt. It is to be noticed that several hundred Mummies, differently embalmed were found in the same catacomb, but only the eleven in a state to be removed. The seven have been sold to gentlemen for private museums, and in consequence are kept from the public.—They have been exhibited in Philadelphia and Baltimore, to crowded audiences; in the latter place, although only engaged for two weeks, the exhibition was prolonged to five weeks, with attraction. Of all the relics of the ancient world that time has left, the Mummy is the most interesting. It is a well known fact, recorded in both sacred and profane history that men were embalmed, which science has attracted the learned for ages. All other antiquities are but the work of man, but Mummies present us with the men themselves—they are the personages, preserved in human form, for the gaze and attraction of people who are occupying down the stream of time centuries from those—they have certainly been conspicuous actors in those mighty scenes of which the history of Egypt is full. An hundred generations have passed away, and new empires have began since this flesh was animated—since these eyes were bright, and this tongue was eloquent, and the heart beat within this breast. These strangers illustrious from their antiquity, may have lived in the days of Jacob, Moses, or David, and of course some thousand years have elapsed since these bodies were animated with the breath of life! History records the fact, that the higher class concealed their knowl edge from the lower, in figures and hieroglyphic characters—A few of those, upon papyrus, used by the Egyptians for writing, will be exhibited with the Mummies. [^4]

When Chandler registered at the Riggs Hotel, he requested that Gideon Riggs, the proprietor, send his son John to Joseph Smith's house to invite him and his family to attend the exhibition that evening. The Prophet informed John Riggs that he was unable to attend because of a previous commitment. John Riggs was sent a second time to Joseph's home with a note from Mr. Chandler requesting an interview with the Prophet. Joseph replied that he would come to the hotel at eight o'clock the following morning.

The young messenger was present when the Prophet first saw the papyrus the next morning. He later recalled that "Joseph was permitted to take the papyrus home with him, Father Riggs vouching for its return, and the following morning Joseph came with the leaves which he had translated, which Oliver Cowdery read, and Mr. Chandler then produced the translation of Professor Charles Anthon as far as the professor could translate it." Young Riggs, who was also present at the reading, stated that the translations of the Prophet and the professor agreed to a point, but "there was one language Professor Anthon could not translate which the Prophet did." [^5]

When Did Chandler Arrive in Kirtland?

There are slight discrepancies in the various accounts as to the exact day of Chandler's arrival in Kirtland.

Oliver Cowdery wrote that Chandler visited Kirtland "the last of June, or first of July, at which time he presented bro. Smith with his papyrus." [^6]

The History of the Church reads: "On the 3rd of July, Michael H. Chandler came to Kirtland to exhibit some Egyptian mummies. There were four human figures, together with some two or more rolls of papyrus covered with hieroglyphic figures and devices." [^7]

A letter from W. W. Phelps to his wife Sally favors Oliver Cowdery's earlier date concerning Chandler's initial visit to Kirtland. Phelps had left his wife and six of his seven children behind in Missouri in order to go to Kirtland to work on the temple, and had written the following letter to his wife:

Kirtland, Ohio

July 19 and 20, 1835

Beloved Sally:

Last evening we received your first letter after an absence of twelve weeks and twelve hours. Our tears of joy were the witness of its welcome reception. By these things we learn the value of each other's society and company, and friendship, and virtue. Taking the letter altogether, with all its candor and information and remembered names, it is, by all who have read it, called a very good one. Brother Joseph remarked that it was as easy to shed tears while reading that letter as it was when reading the History of Joseph in Egypt. . . .

The last of June four Egyptian mummies were brought here; there were two papyrus rolls, besides some other ancient Egyptian writings with them. As no one could translate these writings, they were presented to President Smith. He soon knew what they were and said they, the "rolls of papyrus," contained the sacred record kept of Joseph in Pharaoh's Court in Egypt, and the teachings of Father Abraham. God has so ordered it that these mummies and writings have been brought in the Church, and the sacred writing I had just locked up in Brother Joseph's house when your letter came, so I had two consolations of good things in one day. These records of old times, when we translate and print them in a book, will make a good witness for the Book of Mormon. There is nothing secret or hidden that shall not be revealed, and they come to the Saints. [^8]

In a letter written six months later to a man named William Frye, Oliver Cowdery explained that Joseph Smith showed Chandler, on the morning they met, a number of characters copied from the gold plates, and that there were some points of resemblance between the Nephite characters and the characters on the papyrus. [^9] Joseph Smith reported:

As Mr. Chandler had been told I could translate them, he brought me some of the characters, and I gave him the interpretation, and like a gentleman, he gave me the following certificate:

Kirtland, July 6, 1835.

This is to make known to all who may be desirous, concerning the knowledge of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., in deciphering the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic characters in my possession, which I have, in many eminent cities, showed to the most learned; and, from the information that I could ever learn, or meet with, I find that of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., to correspond in the most minute matters.

Michael H. Chandler

Traveling with, and proprietor of, Egyptian mummies [^10]

Oliver Cowdery, in the Frye letter, added the following explanation pertaining to Chandler's certificate: "The foregoing is verbatim as given by Mr. C. [Chandler] excepting the addition of punctuation, and speaks sufficiently plain without requiring comment from me. It was given previous to the purchase of the antiquities, by any person here." [^11]

Apparently Oliver wanted to make it clear to those inclined to censure that Chandler's certificate substantiating Joseph Smith's credentials as a translator was not induced by a promise to purchase the artifacts.

Additional light is shed on this story by Orson Pratt, a member of the newly organized Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The following sermon was given in Salt Lake City forty-three years later while Elder Pratt, then a senior member of the Twelve, was also serving as Church historian. Some may question his accuracy in recalling events that occurred so long before, but other accounts attest to its correctness.

After receiving the mummies he [Chandler] began to take off some of the ancient covering or wrapping, and to his astonishment he found upon the breast of one of these mummies a record written upon ancient papyrus in plain characters, written both in black and red inks, or stains, or colors. And the mummies and the records were exhibited by Mr. Chandler, in New York, Philadelphia, and many of the Eastern States of our Union; and thousands of people saw them, and among them many learned men; and these characters were presented to them, and not unfrequently was Mr. Chandler referred to "Joe" Smith as they used to term him, who, they said, pretended to have translated some records that he found in the western part of New York, and that if Mr. Chandler would go and see him perhaps he would translate those ancient characters. Many of these references were made with the intention of ridiculing Mr. Smith; but it so happened that in traveling through the country, he visited Kirtland, Ohio, where the Prophet Joseph Smith resided, bringing the mummies and the ancient papyrus writings with him. Mr. C. had also obtained from learned men the best translation he could of some few characters, which however, was not a translation, but more in the shape of their ideas with regard to it, their acquaintance with the language not being sufficient to enable them to translate it literally. [^12]

The Records and Mummies Are Purchased

While exhibiting the antiquities in Cleveland, Ohio, three months before he visited the Saints in Kirtland, Chandler had announced in a newspaper article that he was interested in selling the four remaining mummies and the ancient documents. [^13] After viewing the artifacts, Joseph Smith told Chandler that he had no interest in purchasing the mummies, only the papyrus. According to Orson Pratt, Chandler replied that "he would not sell the writings unless he could sell the mummies, for it would detract from the curiosity of his exhibition." [^14]

Accounts vary as to the amount paid for the artifacts and also how the money was raised. N. L. Nelson wrote in 1885 that the Prophet paid "about $2000." [^15] At the other extreme, Josiah Quincy, a prominent Bostonian, reported that the cost was $6,000. [^16] This last figure, which is far from accurate, is probably based upon a related story that will be explained later. In a letter to Joseph Smith that was dated January 1, 1844, Joseph Coe, the Prophet's former business agent who had by then apostatized, said that the four mummies cost the Church $2,400. [^17] The bill of sale, which came into the hands of the Church in 1967, confirms that $2,400 was the correct amount. [^18]

Twenty-four hundred dollars was a large sum of money to the impoverished Saints in Kirtland. In 1993 that sum would equate to about $35,000. [^19] Many financially destitute families had recently immigrated to Kirtland to unite with their "fellowcitizens" in the Church. Construction of the temple there demanded nearly all of the free time and resources the faithful could spare after acquiring their daily bread. Reports vary as to how the Church raised such a large sum of money to buy the mummies and manuscripts. Parley P. Pratt, a member of the Twelve Apostles, wrote: "An event, of a nature so extraordinary, was of course soon noised abroad, when a number of gentlemen in the neighborhood, not connected with the Saints, united together, and, purchasing the record altogether with some or all of the mummies, made MR. SMITH a present of them." [^20]

On the other hand, the History of the Church reports that "some of the Saints at Kirtland purchased the mummies and papyrus." [^21] In his 1844 letter to the Prophet, Joseph Coe mentioned the method used to finance the purchase, which par-tially explains how both members and nonmembers alike could have been involved:

I have for a long time been anxious to receive some communication from you in relation to my interest in the Mummies etc. but having failed hitherto of learning anything satisfactory on the subject I have thot proper to drop you a line as the most ready means of exchanging sentiments on this subject. Permit me here to sketch the history of the purchase etc. in order to bring the subject fresh to your recollection. When the subject of purchasing that concern came up I was somewhat involved and unable to sustain a heavier burthen any great length of time. but having all confidence in the utility of the collection, and being assured by yourself that the burthen would be but temporary; that the profits coming from the work when translated would be more than adequate to the defraying all the expense which might accrue by the purchase. I therefore managed the business in relation to the purchase with the same confidence that I had previously done business which I thought would result in the good of the church. Previous to closing the contract with Chandler, I made arrangements with S. Andrews for to take one third part and your self & Co. one third leaving one third to be borne by myself. [^22]

Joseph Coe and Simeon Andrews each raised $800, while Joseph Smith "and company" raised the balance of $800. Possibly many people, members and nonmembers alike, as-sisted in purchasing the mummies by contributing funds under Joseph Smith's name to raise his share of the amount.

It is not known when Joseph first realized what the contents of the papyrus were. If it was not while Chandler was in Kirtland, it was made known to the Prophet a few days later. One thing seems clear: Providence was directing his servant. Joseph's account in the History of the Church states:

Soon after this [between July 5 and July 9], some of the Saints at Kirtland purchased the mummies and papyrus, a description of which will appear hereafter, and with W. W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery as scribes, I commenced the translation of some of the characters or hieroglyphics, and much to our joy found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt, etc.,—a more full account of which will appear in its place, as I proceed to examine or unfold them. Truly we can say, the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth. [^23]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] HC 2:17; also Joseph Fielding Smith, comp., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 60-61.
[^2] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 13.
[^3] Flavius Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 1:7:2; see William Whiston, trans., Josephus: Complete Works (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1981), 32.
[^4] Josephus, Antiquities 1:8:1; see Whiston, 33.
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] "Grammar and Alphabet of the Egyptian Language," second part, 1 degree. Transcript and copies of the original available in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^7] See the entries "Abraham" and "Sarah" in the Bible Dictionary of the LDS edition (1979) of the Bible.
[^8] Oliver Cowdery, "Egyptian Mummies—Ancient Records," Messenger and Advocate 2, no. 3 (December 1835): 236.
[^9] William S. West, A Few Interesting Facts, Respecting the Rise, Progress and Pretensions of the Mormons (Warren, Ohio, 1837), 5.
[^10] 10. HC 2:235.
[^11] 11. Cowdery, op. cit.
[^12] 12. JD 20:64-65.
[^13] 13. Cleveland Advertiser, March 26, 1835.
[^14] 14. Cited in Jay M. Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham, 159.
[^15] 15. N. L. Nelson, "The Book of Abraham," BYU Academic Review, March 1885, 46.
[^16] 16. Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past from the Leaves of Old Journals (Boston, 1883), 386.
[^17] 17. Joseph Coe, letter to Joseph Smith, January 1, 1844, in the Joseph Smith Collection, Church Historical Department, Archives Division, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah. Microfilm copy available in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^18] 18. Jay M. Todd, "Egyptian Papyri Rediscovered," 16.
[^19] 19. Courtesy of Dr. Rulon Pope, Department of Economics, Brigham Young University, intercampus memo dated June 1993.
[^20] 20. "Editorial Remarks," Millennial Star 3, no. 3 (July 1842): 47.
[^21] 21. HC 2:236.
[^22] 22. Joseph Coe, letter to Joseph Smith, January 1, 1844.
[^23] 23. HC 2:236.
