H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

2

Abraham and Joseph in Egypt

Since Abraham and Joseph of Egypt are such prominent men of God in the scriptures and in this world's secular history, and some of their writings were obtained by the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1835, it seems important to include a brief synopsis of their lives early in this account.

Even though they lived nearly four thousand years ago, their heroics have been told and retold innumerable times to succeeding generations. These are the kind of men parents pray that their sons may emulate and their daughters might marry. These are true heroes, men of testimony, valor, nobility, and integrity.

When Joseph Smith announced he had acquired some writings of these two prophets of God, writings more ancient than any known biblical literature, the faithful wondered and anxiously waited while the skeptics scoffed. A brief review of the lives of these seers, the contributions they made, and the times in which they lived helps us in connecting the story. Some information from the writings of Abraham acquired by Joseph Smith in July 1835 is included in this chapter along with the biblical account.

Abraham: A Preacher of Righteousness

Abraham's early life is unrecorded in holy writ. The biblical account first mentions him living in Ur of Chaldea when he and his brother Nahor "took them wives." (Genesis 11:29.) Several apocryphal records are available relative to Abraham's early life, but the scriptures are silent. The Book of Abraham reports that his "fathers" had apostatized from the gospel, adopted the ways of their idolatrous neighbors, and consented to have Abraham killed upon an altar of sacrifice apparently as a public example. At the very moment he was to succumb in Ur to the sacrificial knife wielded by the priest of Egypt's pharaoh, the Lord interceded and saved his life. (Abraham 1:5-15.)

Abraham was told by the Lord to leave his apostate relatives and that he would be directed to a new home, a "strange land," a promised land, unfamiliar to Abraham (who was known at that time as Abram). The Lord also assured Abraham that he would be blessed with power in the priesthood "as it was with Noah," the great prophet and patriarch who was the presiding prophet of that dispensation. (Abraham 1:16-19.)

A famine prevailed throughout the land. Terah, Abraham's father, experienced great affliction and repented of his evil intent to kill Abraham. In company with his wife Sarah (or Sarai), his nephew Lot, and Lot's wife, Abraham left Ur and traveled to a land they named Haran; his father, he recorded, "followed after me." (Abraham 2:4.) While in Haran, Abraham anxiously taught the gospel of Jesus Christ to those who would listen. However, Terah was not spiritually prepared to benefit from his son's inspired words, for Abraham recorded that after the famine abated, his father "turned again unto his idolatry." (Abraham 2:5.)

Once again the heavenly veil parted and the Lord appeared to Abraham and commanded him to leave Haran, telling him that he would be directed to the land that the Lord would give to him and to his posterity "for an everlasting possession," conditional on the promise "when they hearken to my voice." (Abraham 2:6.) The Lord further covenanted with Abraham that he would make of him "a great nation," that Abraham's name would be honored among all nations, that his seed should bear this ministry and priesthood unto all nations, that those who accepted the gospel would be known as Abraham's seed, and that through Abraham's posterity "all the families of the earth [would] be blessed with the blessings of the Gospel . . . even [with] eternal life." (Abraham 2:9-11.)

Abraham Had the Gospel of Jesus Christ

The scriptures indicate that the gospel of Jesus Christ was taught to Abraham. Only one gospel, one inspired message of hope, has been revealed by the Lord; that is, the teachings and ordinances that were revealed to Adam in the beginning of time are those that have been taught to all the holy prophets since his day. Nephi, son of Helaman, explained:

"Abraham saw of his [Christ's] coming, and was filled with gladness and did rejoice. . . . Abraham not only knew of these things, but there were many before the days of Abraham who were called by the order of God; yea, even after the order of his Son; and this that it should be shown unto the people, a great many thousand years before his coming, that even redemption should come unto them. And now I would that ye should know, that even since the days of Abraham there have been many prophets that have testified these things." (Helaman 8:17-19.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith commented:

It will be noticed that, according to Paul, (see Gal. iii:8) the Gospel was preached to Abraham. We would like to be informed in what name the Gospel was then preached, whether it was in the name of Christ or some other name. If in any other name, was it the Gospel? And if it was the Gospel, and that preached in the name of Christ, had it any ordinances? If not, was it the Gospel? And if it had ordinances what were they? Our friends may say, perhaps, that there were never any ordinances except those of offering sacrifices before the coming of Christ, and that it could not be possible for the Gospel to have been administered while the law of sacrifices of blood was in force. But we will recollect that Abraham offered sacrifice, and notwithstanding this, had the Gospel preached to him. That the offering of sacrifice was only to point the mind forward to Christ, we infer from these remarkable words of Jesus to the Jews: "Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad" (John 8:56). So, then, because the ancients offered sacrifice it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but served, as we said before, to open their eyes, and enable them to look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior, and rejoice in His redemption. We find also, that when the Israelites came out of Egypt they had the Gospel preached to them, according to Paul in his letter to the Hebrews, which says: "For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it" (see Heb. iv:2). It is said again, in Gal. iii:19, that the law (of Moses, or the Levitical law) was "added" because of transgression. What, we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the Gospel? It must be plain that it was added to the Gospel, since we learn that they had the Gospel preached to them. From these few facts, we conclude that whenever the Lord revealed Himself to men in ancient days, and commanded them to offer sacrifice to Him, that it was done that they might look forward in faith to the time of His coming, and rely upon the power of that atonement for a remission of their sins. And this they have done, thousands who have gone before us, whose garments are spotless, and who are, like Job, waiting with an assurance like his, that they will see Him in the latter day upon the earth, even in their flesh. [^1]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie also wrote about Abraham and the covenant the Lord made with him:

Abraham first received the gospel by baptism (which is the covenant of salvation); then he had conferred upon him the higher priesthood, and he entered into celestial marriage (which is the covenant of exaltation), gaining assurance thereby that he would have eternal increase; finally he received a promise that all of these blessings would be offered to all of his mortal posterity. (Abra. 2:6-11; D. & C. 132:29-50.) Included in the divine promises to Abraham was the assurance that Christ would come through his lineage, and the assurance that Abraham's posterity would receive certain choice, promised lands as an eternal inheritance. (Abra. 2; Gen. 17; 22:15-18; Gal. 3.)

All of these promises lumped together are called the Abrahamic covenant. This covenant was renewed with Isaac (Gen. 24:60; 26:1-4, 24) and again with Jacob. (Gen. 28; 35:9-13; 48:3-4.) Those portions of it which pertain to personal exaltation and eternal increase are renewed with each member of the house of Israelwho enters the order of celestial marriage; through that order the participating parties become inheritors of all the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (D. & C. 132; Rom. 9:4; Gal. 3; 4.) [^2]

Thus, we see that the Abrahamic covenant is another term for the gospel covenant that is the gospel of Jesus Christ, with all its divine teachings and saving ordinances administered by the holy priesthood.

In company with Lot and his wife, along with the converts whom they had "won in Haran" (Abraham 2:15), and with all the substance they had acquired, Abraham and Sarai journeyed south to the land of Canaan. In the land of the idolatrous Canaanites, Abraham built an altar and offered sacrifice, then sought further instructions from the Lord. He recorded: "And the Lord appeared unto me in answer to my prayers, and said unto me: Unto thy seed will I give this land." (Abraham 2:19.)

Because of the severity of the famine in Canaan, Abraham left his land of promise and continued on to Egypt, where the conditions were considerably better.

Abraham in Egypt

As Abraham's caravan approached the borders of Egypt, the Lord reminded him of one of the customs of the Egyptians: "Behold, Sarai, thy wife, is a very fair woman to look upon; therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see her, they will say—She is his wife; and they will kill you, but they will save her alive; therefore see that you do on this wise: Let her say unto the Egyptians, she is thy sister, and thy soul shall live." (Abraham 2:22-24.)

To understand better the predicament Abraham faced, it is necessary to understand Egyptian marriage customs. If a beautiful woman were observed approaching the borders of Egypt, inquiry was made as to her status: Was she single, married, or widowed? If she was single or widowed, she was eligible to be married to the pharaoh or some other man of prominence, provided he selected her and arrangements could be worked out between him and her male family members.

The pharaoh, however, could not marry another man's wife because of the strict laws of the land—unless, of course, the beautiful woman's husband met with an untimely fatal accident as the caravan approached or entered the borders of Egypt. Then she, as a widow, would be free to marry. Besides, who would deny the proposal of the mighty pharaoh, king of Egypt, who would magnanimously provide security and royal status to a sorrowing widow? And who would dare question the particulars of the tragic events that caused her husband's untimely death?

As Abraham had been forewarned by the Lord, the men who earned their living watching female travelers coming to Egypt so they could recommend the desirable ones to the Pharaoh for his harem were impressed with Sarai's beauty. Therefore, she was commended to Pharaoh and taken to the royal palace. According to the biblical account, "the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram's wife." (Genesis 12:17.) When Pharaoh learned that Sarai was married, he was upset, reasoning that his problems came as a result of Sarai, a married woman, being detained in his palace. Reasoning further that Abraham's gods must be superior to his own gods because they had caused such consequences, Pharaoh sent for Abraham and asked: "What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife? Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way." (Genesis 12:18-19.)

Regrettably, the existing records are only fragmentary, but one cannot help but wonder when Pharaoh first learned that the brilliant scientist and holy prophet who stood before him in Egypt was once strapped to a lion-couch altar in Ur, many hundreds of miles away, prepared to be murdered by one of Pharaoh's own priests. Pharaoh's respect, or even fear, of Abraham must have been heightened when he recalled that at the moment Abraham was to have been murdered upon the altar in Ur "after the manner of the Egyptians," the Lord "broke down the altar of Elkenah, and of the gods of the land, and utterly destroyed them, and smote the priest that he died; and there was great mourning in Chaldea, and also in the court of Pharaoh; which Pharaoh signifies king by royal blood." (Abraham 1:11, 20.)

The Bible account has led some to believe that Abraham's visit to Egypt was rather brief, but the Book of Abraham furnishes additional insights. Facsimile 3 provides the explanation that Pharaoh invited Abraham to sit upon his throne and instruct his royal court "upon the principles of Astronomy." The Jewish historian Flavius Josephus, quoting Berosus, referred to Abraham as a man "righteous and great, and skilful in the celestial science." [^3]

Josephus recorded that the Pharaoh "gave him [Abraham] leave to enter into conversation with the most learned among the Egyptians; from which conversation, his virtue and his reputation became more conspicuous than they had been before." [^4] He continued:

For whereas the Egyptians were formerly addicted to different customs, and despised one another's sacred and accustomed rites, and were very angry one with another on that account, Abram conferred with each of them, and confuting the reasonings they made use of every one for their own practices, demonstrated that such reasonings were vain and void of truth; whereupon he was admired by them in those conferences as a very wise man, and one of great sagacity, when he discoursed on any subject he undertook; and this not only in understanding it, but in persuading other men also to assent to him. He communicated to them arithmetic, and delivered to them the science of astronomy, for before Abram came into Egypt, they were unacquainted with those parts of learning; for that science came from the Chaldeans into Egypt, and from thence to the Greeks also. [^5]

Abraham's own account explains that he was shown some of the marvels of the universe through the use of the "records of the fathers" (Abraham 1:28, 31); the use of the Urim and Thummim (Abraham 3:1); and a personal visitation from the Lord (Abraham 3:12), including Abraham's seeing the creation, the residence of God, Kolob, the star Oliblish, and considerably more.

Abraham came from the land of Ur, home of the wise men of the East, whose interests and expertise in astronomy were widely known and time honored. In the Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar it is recorded that Kolob "signifies the first great grand governing fixed star which is the fartherest that ever has been discovered by the fathers which was discovered by Methusela and also by Abraham." [^6]

While Abraham was traveling to Egypt, the Lord gave him the aforementioned visions, which, when told to Pharaoh's court, would help establish his academic and spiritual credentials. The Lord told Abraham, speaking in the visions of the "night time" of the planetary system, "I show these things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare all these words." (Abraham 3:14-15.) The episode of Abraham's having Sarai pose as his sister was the Lord's way of bringing all of this about. How long Abraham stayed in Egypt is unknown—perhaps months, perhaps years. The account in Genesis explains that when he and his followers left Egypt to return to Canaan, he had been entreated well for Sarai's sake; hence, he "had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maid-servants, and she asses, and camels." (Genesis 12:16.) This account adds that "Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold" as he returned to his land of promise. (Genesis 13:2.)

When Abraham was ninety-nine years old, the Lord again appeared to him in the land of Canaan and made further covenants with him. Circumcision was added as a sign of the covenant, so that Abraham's male posterity "may be known among all nations," and "that thou [Abraham] mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me [the Lord] until they are eight years old." All male babies were to be circumcised at eight days to remind their parents of the grace period all children were in until they were eight years old. (JST, Genesis 17:4, 11.)

The Lord changed Abraham's name from Abram to Abraham, explaining, "for, a father of many nations have I made thee." (Genesis 17:5.) Sarah's name was also changed from Sarai to Sarah. "I will bless her," the Lord explained, "and I will give thee a son of her; yea, I will bless her, and she shall be blessed, The mother of nations; kings and people shall be of her." (JST, Genesis 17:22; see also Genesis 17:16.) [^7]

Abraham, who was ordained to the holy priesthood by the great prophet Melchizedek either in Chaldea or Canaan (see D&C 84:14), had a long life of faithfulness and service. He was blessed with several wives and a large posterity. His great test of faith, when he was asked of the Lord to sacrifice his chosen son, Isaac, on the altar, is widely known and heralded. The greatest individual of all, Jesus Christ, came from his lineage. The Gospel of Matthew begins: "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David [the kingly line], the son of Abraham [the Patriarchal order]." (Matthew 1:1.) The faithful in Christ of every generation for the past four millennia have been known as Abraham's seed. The scriptures confirm that Abraham, because of his unwavering faith and devotion, is now a god. (See D&C 132:37.)

Joseph, Son of Jacob

Three great prophets of God—Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, a father, son, and grandson—are often linked together because of their continued obedience and faith under trying circumstances. Joseph, next in succession, was not one whit behind his three honored forebears. Although he was not literally Jacob's eldest son, Joseph was, in Jacob's mind, the firstborn son of his in-tended first wife, Rachel. Hence Joseph was entitled to, and prepared to receive, the birthright and family leadership.

For the privilege of marrying Rachel, Jacob, who had fled from Canaan, worked seven years in Haran for his father-in-law, Laban. However, through the trickery of Laban, Rachel's older sister, Leah, was substituted at the wedding. Fortunately Jacob was allowed to marry Rachel a week later, on condition that he serve an additional seven years. He worked for Laban for a total of twenty years, and when he left Haran, he had four wives—Leah, Rachel, Bilhah, and Zilpah—and eleven sons and some daughters. Rachel was unable to bear children for several years, and when Joseph, her firstborn son, was born, he was actually Jacob's eleventh son. Nevertheless, Jacob considered Rachel his first wife, and her firstborn son as the family's chosen heir through the right of primogeniture.

After twenty years in Haran, and at the command of God, Jacob led his large family back to Canaan. (See Genesis 31:3.) As the family caravan reached the outskirts of Bethlehem, Rachel bore another son but died in childbirth. Joseph's younger brother was named Benjamin.

Inasmuch as Joseph was obviously Jacob's favored son whom he loved "more than all his brethren," the Bible reports that his older brothers hated him. (Genesis 37:4.) Not only had Jacob given Joseph, when he was seventeen years old, a "coat of many colours," evidence of his favoritism, but Joseph had also related two dreams to his family that further alienated them from him.

House of Israel

Abraham (Sarah)

Isaac (Rebekah)

Jacob or Israel (Leah, Rachel, Bilhah, Zilpah)

Reuben

Simeon

Levi

Judah

Dan

Naphtali

Gad

Asher

Issachar

Zebulon

Joseph

Ephraim

Manasseh

Benjamin

In the first dream, according to Joseph, "We were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf." In the second dream, he told his brothers, "the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me." Even Jacob rebuked Joseph and inquired, "Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?" As Joseph's brothers further envied him, his father wondered what these dreams meant. (Genesis 37:7, 9-11.)

Soon after this, Jacob sent Joseph from their home in Hebron, south of Jerusalem, to Dothan, over seventy miles away, to check on his brothers and the flocks. When his brothers saw Joseph coming toward them, they "conspired . . . to slay him." (Genesis 37:18.) They stripped him of his splendorous coat, which represented to them unwarranted authority and favoritism, and cast him into a dry pit. Reuben, the eldest brother, persuaded the others not to kill Joseph.

Later that day a caravan of merchants traveling to Egypt passed by, and Judah proposed this idea: "What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood? Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh." (Genesis 37:26-27.) This pleased the brothers, and Joseph was taken to Egypt and sold to Potiphar, one of Pharaoh's officers and captain of the guard. (Genesis 37:36.)

After having dipped Joseph's coat in the blood of a young goat, his conspiring brothers reported to their father that they had found a coat similar to Joseph's that was bloodstained. Upon confirming that it was truly Joseph's coat, and assuming that Joseph had been killed by a wild beast, Jacob mourned for many days, and after considerable attempts by his family to comfort him, he said, "I will go down into the grave . . . mourning." (Genesis 37:35.)

As readers of the Bible know, Joseph prospered in Egypt, and before long Potiphar made him overseer of all his domestic affairs. But when Potiphar's sensuous wife made improper advances toward Joseph, he fled rather than compromise his virtue. In her rejection and humiliation, she reported to her husband that Joseph had attempted to seduce her. Consequently, Potiphar had Joseph incarcerated in the prison where those who had offended Pharaoh were detained.

In prison Joseph's abilities were recognized, and he was soon placed in jurisdiction over the other prisoners. While he was confined in prison, the Lord enabled Joseph to interpret two different dreams: a dream of the chief butler and a dream of Pharaoh's chief baker. Two years later Pharaoh himself had two dreams that troubled him. After his wise men were unable to interpret them, the chief baker volunteered that a young Hebrew prisoner had interpreted a dream of his two years before. Joseph was sent for, and he explained that God, not he, "shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace." (Genesis 41:16.) He explained that both of Pharaoh's dreams meant that there would be seven years of plenty followed by seven years of famine in Egypt. He then counseled Pharaoh to find a man in the kingdom who was "discreet and wise" to implement the necessary preparations for the seven lean years. Pharaoh, accepting the interpretation and impressed with Joseph's wisdom, selected Joseph, "in whom the Spirit of God is," to be second only to himself in his entire kingdom of the Nile. At thirty years of age, Joseph was made viceroy of Egypt. (Genesis 41:33, 38.)

Joseph wisely prepared for the seven years of famine that affected not only Egypt but also many adjacent countries. In neighboring Canaan, Jacob and his large family were severely afflicted. The touching story in the Bible tells how the family was reunited after many trials and tests. The dream Joseph had had at seventeen, of his brothers bowing before him, was fulfilled when his ten older brothers, not recognizing him, knelt before him and begged sustenance of him, the wise and powerful viceroy of Egypt.

Pharaoh then told Joseph to send for his father and his family so that they could enjoy the prosperity and blessings in Egypt, and they were given the land of Goshen, "the best of the land" (Genesis 47:6), in appreciation for Joseph's wisdom.

Jacob, or Israel, as the Lord had renamed him (Genesis 35:9-12), lived in Egypt seventeen years before his death at 147 years of age. After his death, a large cortege consisting of his children, the servants of Pharaoh, and all the elders of the land of Egypt made the trip to Hebron to the cave of Machpelah, where he was buried by the side of his wife Leah; his parents, Isaac and Rebekah; and his grandparents Abraham and Sarah.

Undoubtedly Joseph was ordained to the holy priesthood under the hands of his father, Jacob, during the time Jacob lived in Egypt. The Abrahamic covenant was renewed with Isaac and Jacob. (1 Nephi 17:40.) In the Book of Mormon, the prophet Lehi, after reading the writings of Joseph from the plates of brass and expounding them to his family, commented: "I am a descendant of Joseph who was carried captive into Egypt. And great were the covenants of the Lord which he made unto Joseph." (2 Nephi 3:4.)

The gospel covenant was continued on through Joseph (D&C 27:10), who prophesied to his brothers shortly before his death, "God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob" (Genesis 50:24). Joseph had his brothers swear by an oath that they would take his remains back to Canaan for burial when the Lord allowed them to return to their land of promise. (Genesis 50:25.) After serving as the honored viceroy of Egypt for eighty years, Joseph died at the age of 110.

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCNew Insights through Joseph Smith

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCThe biblical account is silent as to any records being written by Abraham and Joseph. Fortunately, considerable information is found in other authentic sources relative to their literary works. These sources include the writings that came into Joseph Smith's possession in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1835.

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCThe subtitle of the Book of Abraham as it appears in the Pearl of Great Price declare that it is "A Translation of some ancient Records, that have fallen into our hands from the catacombs of Egypt—The writings of Abraham while he was in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham, written by his own hand, upon papyrus."

In this book of ancient scripture, which was translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith, Abraham reports that the ancient records delineating the chronology of the patriarchs beginning with Father Adam were in his possession. He also stated, "I shall endeavor to write some of these things upon this record, for the benefit of my posterity that shall come after me." (Abraham 1:28, 31.) Note that Abraham wrote his account after his name was changed from Abram to Abraham when he was ninety-nine years old, after he had left Egypt to return to Canaan. (See Genesis 17:1-8.) At that time he was explaining things Egyptian to his family in Canaan, who were and would be generally unfamiliar with the customs of the Egyptians. (See Facsimile 1, figure 12, and Facsimile 2, figures 1, 4, and 5.)

The Lord has commanded his prophets since the days of Father Adam to record significant events. Joseph, the son of Jacob, was no exception. The plates of brass, which Lehi's son Nephi took from Laban, were used to enlighten the Nephite nation of the doctrines and prophecies as recorded by prophets of God of the tribe of Joseph. The large plates, first made by Nephi and then continuously kept by the Nephites, a remnant of the tribe of Joseph, were a continuation of the brass plates.

Who initially made and wrote on those is not presently known, but it is clear that they contain many of Joseph's prophecies. One wonders if Joseph himself was not the originator of that sacred text. Nephi, son of Lehi, recorded: "And now, I, Nephi, speak concerning the prophecies of which my father hath spoken, concerning Joseph, who was carried into Egypt. For behold, he truly prophesied concerning all his seed. And the prophecies which he wrote, there are not many greater. And he prophesied concerning us, and our future generations; and they are written upon the plates of brass." (2 Nephi 4:1-2.)

These plates introduce four prophets of the tribe of Joseph who are not mentioned in the Jewish biblical text: Zenos, Zenock, Neum, and Ezias. (See Helaman 8:20; 1 Nephi 19:10; 3 Nephi 10:15-17.)

Abraham and Joseph were men of faith and of learning. They were prophets and record keepers. Not only were they authorized caretakers of sacred texts, they were also prolific writers of sacred things they had witnessed.

Oliver Cowdery, speaking of the writings of Abraham and Joseph that Joseph Smith purchased, stated: "When the translation of these valuable documents will be completed, I am unable to say; neither can I gave you a probable idea how large volumes they will make; but judging from their size, and the comprehensiveness of the language, one might reasonably expect to see sufficient to develop much upon the mighty of the ancient men of God, and of his dealing with the children of men when they saw him face to face." [^8]

One visitor to Kirtland who viewed the mummies and papyrus, an individual who was not a member of the Church, wrote: "They say that the mummies were Egyptian, but the records are those of Abraham and Joseph . . . and a larger volume than the Bible will be required to contain them. [^9]

These reports are the only known accounts in which anyone has conjectured about the length of the published writings of Abraham and Joseph. It is safe to conclude, however, that early Church leaders thought that the sacred writings of the two great patriarchs were of considerable length.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] A jar in which the ancient Egyptians preserved the entrails of a deceased person for burial with the mummy. Figures 5 through 8 of Facsimile 1 are examples of canopic jars.
[^2] The Egypt of Herodotus Being the Second Book, Entitled Euterpe, of the History, in the English Version of the Late Professor George Rawlinson, with preface and note by E. H. Blakeney (London: Mailin Hopkinson and Co., Ltd., 1924), 45-46.
[^3] M. Broderick and A. A. Morton, A Concise Dictionary of Egyptian Archaeology (Chicago: Ares Publishers, 1924), 124.
[^4] Richard A. Parker, "The Joseph Smith Papyri: A Preliminary Report," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 3, no. 2 (Summer 1968): 86.
[^5] "A Translation," Times and Seasons 3 (March 1, 1842): 704.
[^6] "The Book of Abraham," Millennial Star 3, no. 3 (July 1842): 34.
[^7] Hugh Nibley, Abraham in Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), 4-7.
[^8] See Broderick and Morton, 75.
[^9] Nibley, 34.
