H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

6

Lebolo Returns to Europe

Once antiquities were exhumed in Thebes, if they were not soon sold near the excavation sites, the dealers frequently shipped them down the Nile to the more accessible marketplaces at Alexandria on the Mediterranean, where they were either sold or stored in warehouses pending future sales. In 1821 and 1822 Lebolo is frequently mentioned conducting business in Cairo and Alexandria. From the known documents he is not mentioned excavating anyplace after 1820; rather, he seems to have spent his time buying and selling artifacts and exotic animals. While Lebolo was excavating for Drovetti in upper Egypt he was also acquiring antiquities. Recall that Giovanni D'Athanasi, who worked for Henry Salt in the Theban digs, wrote in 1819 that he had purchased some antiquities "notwithstanding all the difficulties" he had experienced "through means of a certain Antonio Lebolo, a countryman of M. Drouetti, who had just been buying up all the antiquities the Arabs had to sell." [^1]

Lebolo left Egypt for Europe sometime in 1822. Whether this is the first time he left Egypt is uncertain, but it appears to be the first time he is mentioned arriving in Trieste. In the Trieste newspaper Dell' Osservatore Triestino dated October 12, 1822, his name appeared in a column listing recent arrivals and departures of prominent people. Two entries are relevant: "Ant. Lebolo pos. per Venezia," translated as "Antonio Lebolo, land owner, departing for Venice"; and "Bern. Drovetti neg. per Treviso," translated as "Bernardino Drovetti, merchant, departing for Treviso." This Bernardino Drovetti is almost certainly not the consul general, but his nephew by the same name. A Giuseppi (Joseph) Lebollo is listed as traveling to Treviso the same day as this Mr. Drovetti.

There appeared to be more on Lebolo's mind than antiquities when he left Egypt in 1822. For one thing, Maria, his wife of twenty-four years, had died in Castellamonte on November 7, 1821, at the age of forty-five. Particulars about her death are unknown. The only reference from Lebolo that may allude to her health or death—or perhaps only his prolonged isolation from his family—is in a letter dated November 25, 1821, that he wrote from Alexandria to a Mr. Segato in Cairo. He concluded with these words: "In the meantime please take care of my family." [^2] He had not been home to his native Piedmont for several years and probably felt that he couldn't return without facing possible incarceration.

Lebolo Remarries

The story takes a strange turn when we learn that on October 10, 1822, two days before the newspaper notice of Lebolo's departure from Trieste to Venice, an unmarried black woman about nineteen years of age named Anna Mora (which means Negress), who is referred to as Anna Mora Darfour and also as "Donna Affricana" (African lady), and her two young daughters were accepted at the Institute of the Catecumena at Venice, to be indoctrinated in Christian teachings. Apparently Lebolo accompanied Anna and her two daughters on the ship from Egypt to Trieste. At the Catecumena, Anna Mora Darfour was given the Christian name of Anna Maria.

On June 12, 1824, Anna Maria and her older daughter, Rosina, who was about four at the time, were baptized, and Rosina was renamed Rosa Maria. The younger daughter, who was about two, had been baptized previously in Trieste and given the name Maria Catherina. It appears that she was ill when she arrived in Trieste, and as a precaution she had been baptized because of her illness. On her mother's baptism day, this child was given the full church baptismal rites. According to the church records, the godmothers and witnesses at the June 1824 baptisms and confirmations were there at the request of Bernardino Drovetti. [^3]

Following the baptisms that day, Antonio married Anna Maria Darfour. One historian, A. Bertolotti, explained that Lebolo "married a black woman, whom Drovetti gave him as a gift, after he provided her with civil and religious education." [^4] The parish entry reads:

Venice

Parish of St. Mary of the Rosary, commonly called St. Dominic alle Zattere.

Year 1824, 12 June, Sig. Antonio, the son of Pietro Lebolo, married first to the late Maria Marchetti born in Castellamonte (Diocesis of Ivrea) in Piedmont, presently domiciled in Alexandria, Egypt and Anna Maria Darfour, daughter [guest] of this reverend house of future christians, having acted in accordance with the three canonical laws and applied for marriage, were united in matrimony by Rev. Agostino Kvijungich the Prior of the above Institute and in the presence of those attending the ceremony at the Church of St. Giobatta of Catecumena at the altar of the Blessed Virgin. [^5]

It is assumed that Anna Maria was a former slave taken from Darfour in western Sudan, south of Egypt, where blacks were frequently captured, marched in chains to Egypt, and sold there on the auction block. Slavery, both black and white, was still practiced by both Europeans and Americans at that time, and many prominent Europeans living in Egypt had black mistresses. It is not known if Anna Maria's two young daughters were Lebolo's children born to him in Egypt, or if she had been Lebolo's mistress in the land of the pharoahs, or if the children were hers by another man.

The day after Antonio married Anna Maria, another interesting account appeared in the Catecumeni church records:

Venice at the Catecumen

June 13, 1824

Giovanni Antonio Lebolo, formerly Said moro Affricano [black African], was accepted into this pious house of the Catecumena on the 27th of March 1823, at about 11 years of age, to become a Christian.

He was baptized today in the church of this pious institution of the Catecumen by me, Prior Agostino Kvijungich.

Godfather at the sacred baptismal font was Sig. Antonio Lebolo, a merchant and landowner and son of Pietro from Castellamonte, in Piedmont, and Marianna Meuta.

Who was this black African boy to whom Lebolo gave his Christian name and for whom Lebolo was listed as godfather? Because he was baptized the day after the marriage, he may have been Anna Maria's relative, such as a younger brother, or a personal acquaintance.

We have no evidence that the young boy ever lived with Antonio and Anna Maria, and he is never mentioned in the family parish records in Castellamonte. This brief account is included here because someday his name may appear in some newly discovered records, and this information may assist some historians who are otherwise baffled.

Between Trieste and Egypt

Notice that Lebolo's place of residence in June 1824 was recorded on the marriage record as Alexandria, Egypt. There are several documents in which Lebolo was mentioned as doing business in Europe and Egypt between 1822 and 1825. He was not only recognized as Drovetti's agent in Egypt, but he was also called upon to do favors for various people even after he left the Theban digs. This record is meager, but the records that we have found are listed here.

On April 22, 1823, Antonio Lebolo and Bernardino Drovetti, the consul general's nephew, arrived in Trieste from Venice. [^6] At that time Venice was about eleven hours by sailing vessel from Trieste, the Austrian port where much international trade was carried out.

On June 16, 1823, Antonio Lebolo, "a merchant from Venice," arrived in Trieste. [^7]

On January 28, 1824, J. Rifaud wrote to Baron Drovetti from Du Fayoum about a grievance he had with Lebolo:

Since Mr. Lebolo has returned to Egypt, he should think of the amount of 1,000 piastres he owes me. I have documents and notes of the goods that I gave him. I hope that you, being the General Consul of the nation, would like to take in consideration this fact and do justice to me.

I took the liberty to write to you many times during his absence and also before Mr. Lebolo's departure; now that he's back I hope he won't rob me of what I have the lawful right to possess. [^8]

At one time Rifaud and Lebolo were co-agents under Drovetti. Rifaud correctly refers to Drovetti as France's consul general again in 1824; Drovetti served as France's consul gen-eral in Egypt between 1803 and 1814 and was reinstated under the restoration there between 1820 and 1829.

The Trieste newspaper dated June 12, 1824, indicated that Antonio Lebolo had departed from Trieste to Venice on June 10, just two days before his wedding to Anna Maria.

On August 16, 1824, Lebolo departed from Trieste inland to Udine, according to the August 28 newspaper listing.

The general aide-de-camp and great-master of horses of the king of Wurttenberg wrote to Drovetti from Stuttgart in October 1824 and thanked him for the successful arrival of some horses from Nubia. He also requested another shipment of horses, sheep, and livestock. In the letter he states: "Mr. Lebolo, who will have the honor of handing you this letter, is interested to present one [a letter] from me to His Royal Highness Le Bassa." [^9]

A man named Filiberto Maruchi wrote to Drovetti from Cairo on February 8, 1825, about some financial misfortunes he was having in Egypt and added this statement: "Mr. Lebolo saw the white horse and he says that it's beautiful; he says that another, the black one, is for him, a gift from Abdin Bey of Gondola, and they say it is very beautiful." [^10] Several Europeans who had moved to Egypt in the Lebolo years were also involved in the exotic-animals trade along with the buying and selling of antiquities.

A traveler named G. B. Brocchi sent a letter, dated February 25, 1825, to his brother, concerning which the editor of his published journal wrote: "The above-mentioned Mr. Lebolo coming from Cairo, was passing through Bassano toward the end of 1824, and then went to Monaco, commissioned by the viceroy of Egypt to present to the sovereign two ostriches of extraordinary beauty." [^11]

Several major European archeological collections are beholden to Lebolo for his excavations and sales. The Kunsthistoriches Museum in Vienna is indebted in part to Lebolo's efforts. In a book by Egon Komorzynski, written in 1965, we read:

In every instance, the further additions of that collection are considered old Egyptian memorials that the Austrian doctor, Ernst August Burghart, under the director of the emperor, king, court and state council, collected in Egypt during 1821. The largest share was bought by Burghart from a collector by the name of Antonio Lebolo in Alexandria, and the remainder was probably purchased from art dealers. He did not undertake to do his own archaeological digging. Sad to say, it was not then nor later undertaken to make up an exact listing of his acquisitions. From several summary listings it is known only that the amount consisted of 9696 pieces of money, 30 knightly antiquities that were meant for the Emperor's collection, 60 small statues, 27 papyri, statues out of bronze or glazed pottery, amulets (13 of which were of gold), canopies and other assembled vessels, which came from three mummies that were in double enclosed coffins. [^12]

The Vatican museum in Rome is the beneficiary of some of Lebolo's efforts. Dr. Giovanni Marro, in summarizing a letter from French architect Francois Gau, dated May 10, 1820, said that "Lebolo has sold for 10,000 Roman Scudi to the pontifical government a rich collection of Egyptian antiquities displayed in Rome in the Vatican Museum." [^13] Included in this collection were ten large granite statues.

The Soter collection, divided among several prominent museums in Europe and Egypt, was unearthed by Lebolo's men in Thebes. Of a late period, the collection contained Greek inscriptions that were warmly received by Western scholars, who could personalize the mummies, coffins, and artifacts because the language could be read. The Soters were prominent Greeks in upper Egypt who adopted some Egyptian ways, and Cornelius Soter was archon (mayor) of Thebes. B. H. Stricker lists portions of the Soter collection in Turin, the British Museum in London, the Biblioth`eque Nationale and the Louvre in Paris, the Berlin Museum, and museums in Leipzig, Florence, Leyden, and Cairo. [^14]

Home to Castellamonte

After being away from home for about nine years, Antonio Lebolo returned to Castellamonte in late 1825 or early 1826. When he left, he was in exile and facing an uncertain future in Egypt, having had to leave behind his wife Maria and their young son, Pietro, his extended family, friends, and career. When he returned to the Piedmont, Lebolo was fairly prosperous. His new family consisted of his wife Anna Maria, her two daughters, and Joseph, a son born to Antonio and Anna probably in Trieste. A second son, Joannes, was born in Castellamonte February 4, 1826, and a third son and their last child, Joannes Thomas, was born in Castellamonte November 24, 1827. Pietro, Antonio's sixteen-year-old white son by his first wife, suddenly had his father back, a new stepmother about seven years older than he, and several new siblings.

One biography referred to Lebolo's lifestyle in Cas-tellamonte as "oriental pomp." [^15] A recent historian wrote that the small, isolated community never forgave Antonio for bringing a black wife and his somewhat eccentric lifestyle into that cloistered alpine setting. [^16]

In Castellamonte, Lebolo became involved in sundry business transactions between 1826 and 1829, including the grocery business and the purchasing and selling of a considerable amount of real estate. He was generous, perhaps to a fault, in lending money to many borrowers. One biographer stated that because of his flamboyant lifestyle, he was soon reduced to

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] HC 2:328-49.
[^2] It is interesting to note that both Lebolo and Maria Catherina, Anna Maria's two-year-old daughter, are mentioned as being ill when they arrived in Trieste in early October 1822. It appears that Marie Catherina was baptized because of her illness. I have wondered if Lebolo was sufficiently ill on the same ship that the final rites of the Catholic church were bestowed upon him. He may have made out a will before or at that time but destroyed it upon his recovery.
[^3] The last will and testament of Antonio Lebolo is located in the State Archives in Turin, Italy. It was prepared by Giacomo Buffa, notary, from Parella. I was fortunate to be involved in finding the will in 1984. I photographed the will and the lengthy inventory and had the documents translated into English. Copies are found in the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University and the LDS Church Historical Department in Salt Lake City. The discovery is discussed in chapter 8.
[^4] H. Donl Peterson, comp., "Lebolo's Will and Inventory Book," 3.
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] Ibid., 4.
[^7] Ibid., 6.
[^8] Ibid., 5-6.
[^9] Ibid., 5.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Ibid., 7.
[^12] Ibid., 33.
[^13] Ibid., 35-42.
[^14] Ibid., 42-44.
[^15] Ibid., 52.
[^16] Dan C. Jorgensen, "Research on Antonio Lebolo: 1977." Copies of this work are found in both the Harold B. Lee Library at BYU and the Church Historical Department in Salt Lake City.
