H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

7

The Will and Death of Antonio Lebolo

When Michael H. Chandler sold the mummies and the accompanying papyri to the Latter-day Saints at Kirtland, he gave the Church leaders a somewhat detailed account about the discovery of the mummies and the illness, death, and will of Antonio Lebolo. According to Oliver Cowdery's record of Chandler's statement, "on his way from Alexandria to Paris, [Lebolo] put in at Trieste, and, after ten days' illness, expired. This was in the year 1832. Previous to his decease, he made a will of the whole, to Mr. Michael H. Chandler, (then in Philadelphia, Pa.,) his nephew, whom he supposed to be in Ireland. Accordingly, the whole were sent to Dublin, and Mr. Chandler's friends ordered them to New York, where they were received at the Custom House, in the winter or spring of 1833." [^1]

Once again there are several statements in Chandler's account that are inaccurate. He said that Lebolo entered the cata-combs in 1831. However, Lebolo was probably not involved in digging after 1822, and he died in 1830. The account also mentioned that in 1832 Lebolo was in Trieste, on his way to Paris, when he became ill; and that after a ten-day illness, during which time he made out his will, [^2] he died in Trieste, leaving the eleven mummies to his Irish nephew, Michael H. Chandler, who he supposed was living in Dublin, Ireland. There appears to have been no will legally recorded by Lebolo in Trieste. The state archives do not list such a document. The date when Lebolo supposedly willed the antiquities could not have been 1832, since he died in Castellamonte, not Trieste, in 1830.

Antonio did draw up a will in Castellamonte, Piedmont, three months before his death. [^3] In the will, dated November 17, 1829, he explained:

I have decided, while I am able to and am sound of mind, and in perfect control of my senses, although ill in my body, to take care of my temporal possessions by means of this present will and testament.

I give and I leave to my wife Anna, because of her chaste and honest condition of a widow, the usufruct of my goods and real estates, but in such usufruct living together with my universal heirs and with my parents Pietro and Marianna Lebolo. [^4]

The will indicated that there was an estrangement in the family, for Lebolo continued:

And if my aforementioned wife would not or could not live with them [her in-laws and her children], in such a circumstance, I give and leave to her for her alimony and clothing, the yearly amount of 240 lire, which will be paid by my heirs or for them by their guardian, otherwise in advance, and I want that my mentioned wife be satisfied and content for such yearly amount, without requiring anything else from my heirs, under the law of the "quarta uxoria" [fourth wife], that she might want to claim. [^5]

After providing for his faithful nurse, Luigia, who cared for him during his illness, and giving a generous contribution to the Catholic church, Lebolo continued:

And as for the remainder of my possessions, real estates, credits, personal properties, interests in shops, bonds and stocks, wherever they are and can be found, I proclaim and nominate as universal heirs Pietro, my only child from my first wife, and also Giuseppe, Giovanni, and Tomaso, other legitimate and natural children of mine from my aforementioned second wife, all four in equal part and portion; and in the case that one or more of them might die in their youth, in this case I substitute for the dead one the other living children, always in equal parts. [^6]

No Irish nephew is mentioned in Lebolo's will.

Lebolo nominated his cousin Giovanni Meuta to serve as guardian for his three youngest sons, who were "still of tender age to be assisted by Antonio's younger brother Giuseppe." [^7]

Apparently Lebolo's oldest son, Pietro, was having a difficult time accepting either his younger half-brothers on equal terms or the circumstances under which he anticipated that he would have to live with them in the future. Lebolo specifically stipulated in his will that he was "particularly forbidding my said first born son Pietro to divide my possessions which I want to remain undivided until my youngest son reaches his legal age." He also made provision for Pietro to be independent of the remaining family in Castellamonte if he chose to leave, by promising him title to seven parcels of land amounting to over 615 tavole (38.1039 square acres). [^8] This provision was allowed "not to force him [Pietro] against his will to live with his other brothers, my universal coheirs, and with the already aforementioned usufructuaries, already since now to keep in place of the interest of my inheritance, that could belong to him in his adulthood." [^9]

Lebolo gave to his father all the dowry of his first wife, Maria (Pietro's mother). [^10] However, shortly after the ink had dried, he had second thoughts about the restrictions he had placed upon Pietro. Eighteen days later he recalled the notary, Giacomo Buffa, and the witnesses and issued the following addendum relative to Pietro's inheritance:

Said Mr. Lebolo, who writes the addendum has revocated and revocates the prohibition and obligation to his first born son both for the division of his possessions and for the dowry of his late mother Maria Pollino Marchetto; he [Mr. Lebolo] wants that his mentioned son Pietro Lebolo can, as he pleases, determine the division of the inheritance, even without his brothers and coheirs having yet reached their legal age, provided that said first born son will take care of all the expenses that will be necessary to such division, and if the division will be postponed until the legal age of the aforementioned heirs, the expenses will be equally divided among the coheirs. And as for the said dowry of his mother, said Mr. Lebolo, who is writing this addendum, wants that his aforementioned son Pietro can dispose of it as he pleases, and use as he will see fit. [^11]

Events Following Lebolo's Death

During the night of February 18-19, 1830, Antonio Lebolo died at the age of forty-nine at his home in Castellamonte. In his will, he requested that after his death, the following men would assist in taking an inventory of his possessions: his cousin, Giovanni Meuta; the three younger boys' guardian, Lebolo's brother Giuseppe; the notary Giacomo Buffa; and Lebolo's friend Francesco Bertola.

Surely the eleven mummies germane to our story were listed among Lebolo's personal belongings—or were they? To inventory all of his effects took several men nine days to complete, since his grocery business contained a large inventory that prolonged the procedure.

On February 27, 1830, in the room where Lebolo died, the designated auditors found some promissory notes. [^12] On March 3, a book with a blue cover was located, containing 104 sheets listing the names and amounts owed by those who were apparently extended credit at Lebolo's store. [^13] On March 4, a book of ninety-two pages was found, listing some names of others who were indebted to Lebolo. [^14] On March 5, Lebolo's considerable real estate holdings were catalogued. He had previously listed the names of those to whom he was indebted and had given to the auditors their names and the amounts he owed.

Toward the end of the eighty-eight-page inventory is this statement: "Finally it has been verified by the heirs that nothing more is possessed by the dead Mr. Antonio Lebolo." [^15]

Are we off on a tangent, or do we have the right Lebolo? If a picture of Drovetti had not been listed among Lebolo's personal possessions in the room where he died, one might wonder if we had traced the wrong man. Where were the eleven mummies that he exhumed in Egypt and that he reportedly willed at his death? No mummies were listed in the inventory nor mentioned in the will, an amazing fact when the market value of antiquities was so very high. No Irish relatives were mentioned in the will. Anna Maria and his four sons were Antonio's sole heirs.

Mr. and Mrs. Francesco Morozzo have lived in the Antonio Lebolo house in Castellamonte for many years. It has changed but little since Lebolo lived there more than 160 years ago except for the addition of water and electricity.

In an interview conducted by Dan C. Jorgensen, who was serving in Italy as an LDS mission president, Mr. Morozzo remembered playing as a little boy in the attic of Lebolo's house, "an attic filled with boxes of old letters, keepsakes, etc." He also remembered "much foreign correspondence with strange non-Italian stamps." Unfortunately, as time passed and he inherited the home, the attics were cleaned out and all of the "junk was burned."16

The Lost Mummies Are Found

An explanation is necessary to clarify how Lebolo's will was located.

In the fall of 1984, I was in Italy on a professional development leave from Brigham Young University to pursue this research. Several predecessors had searched unsuccessfully for Lebolo's will in various Piedmont archives, and I too had pre-viously spent time at the county courthouses in Ivrea, Castel-lamonte, and Turin, also without success.

One Sunday that October I attended a branch meeting of the LDS church in Turin, where I met a sister who might be able to assist me and my research assistant as an interpreter and translator in the local libraries, museums, and archives. Patrizia Pianea, a convert to the Church of one year, was very proficient in English, French, and her native Italian. As we were discussing my project, a little boy about two years of age, closely pursued by his watchful mother, walked into the empty classroom where Patrizia and I were visiting. The mother, Jerrilyn Comollo, was formerly from Arizona. She heard me mention to Patrizia the name Antonio Lebolo and told me that her husband, Adriano, had at one time looked in vain for any documents about Lebolo. Needless to say I was anxious to meet Adriano, a district high councilor who would be speaking in the branch sacrament meeting that morning.

At the conclusion of the services, we visited for a time and Jerrilyn and Adriano invited my assistant and me to dinner later that week. During the dinner, Adriano mentioned that he had seen a legal document with Antonio Lebolo's signature on it in the state archives in Turin. I was scheduled to fly to Egypt within a day or two, so I asked Adriano to send me a photocopy. I also asked if he would check other documents issued by the same notary to see if he had worked with Lebolo on any other legal matters, and emphasized how important it was to this research to locate Lebolo's will.

In Cairo a week later I received a phone call at four in the morning from my wife, Mary Lou. The Comollos had phoned my home in Orem, Utah, and excitedly announced that they had found Lebolo's will, a lengthy inventory, and another document that mentioned eleven mummies. Even though I had hopes of finding some excellent material in Egypt relative to Lebolo's sojourn there, this breakthrough took precedence, so I canceled my commitments in Egypt and arranged to return to Italy.

We spent the next week in the state archives in Turin, photographing the will and inventory and looking for any new information that may be found there. One document that pointed our attention in a new direction was the legal paper that mentioned the eleven mummies. It too had been prepared by Giacomo Buffa, the notary who had drawn up Lebolo's will and who had helped to inventory his holdings. The paper, dated July 30, 1831, read as follows:

Special power of attorney from Mr. Giovanni Meuta, guardian of the children Giuseppe, Giovanni and Tomaso Lebolo to the head of Mr. Pietro Lebolo from Castellamonte.

[Giovanni Meuta] desiring to award, as it depends on him, all the interests of his said administered children Lebolo, and procured for them the liquidation of the following belongings left them by the said late Antonio Lebolo, their common father, that is 1) Eleven mummies given by him to Mr. Albano Oblassa, so that he [Mr. Oblassa] would arrange to sell them. [Emphasis added.] 2) As of Mr. Gustavo Bourlet, debtor of 1800 fiorini, to be exchanged with said Mr. Lebolo, with also a woman's large scarf, referred to as the Turkish scarf, worth 300 fiorini also given to said Mr. Bourlet, so that he [Mr. Bourlet] would arrange to sell it. 3) And finally as of Mr. Giovan Batista Gauttier and Rosa Gauttier, without a fixed residence, owners of a menagerie of foreign animals, both debtors to said Mr. Lebolo for 2,150 fiorini [recorded] in six promissory notes written in favor of [Mr. Lebolo] himself, in order to take care of the accounts concerning the above mentioned matters and credits and to obtain the cash from them, [Mr. Meuta] has decided and has been nominated as guardian of said Lebolo children, as he determines and nominates in this present document, Mr. Pietro Lebolo, first born son of said Antonio, born and residing in Castellamonte, and presently living in the aforementioned city of Trieste, here I, the under signing notary, am accepting for him, as functioning "ex officio publico," so that said Mr. Meuta, according to his position, has given and gives to Mr. Pietro Lebolo all and complete power to summon to any court or Magistrate said Oblassa, Bourlet and Gauttier, and propose against them all the reasons he might believe as necessary, in order to receive said credits, to deal with them and receive any amount of which they might be in debt, either [if they pay] spontaneously or by verdict, in favor of the [people] mentioned for any amount until final and general satisfaction is reached. Also with authority given to said Mr. Lebolo to delegate, in the name of the principal and for the interest of said Lebolo children in relation to the above specified credits, one or more proxies to whom he would also give all necessary and opportune authority, with maximum power to said Mr. Pietro Lebolo to do, for the above specified credits, all that the principal could do, with the clause cum libera et ut alter ego.17

It would appear that the family located a ledger book of Lebolo's business transactions in Trieste of which they were unaware when the will was initially read and the inventory was concluded nearly a year and a half before. The newly found documents not only listed four people still indebted to Lebolo, possibly with the accompanying contracts, but it also contained six promissory notes.

Some writers have questioned if Lebolo had more than eleven mummies in this collection. This legal document should finally answer the question. Eleven mummies were mentioned in this particular collection—no more, no less. The twelve or thirteen mummies with Greek inscriptions, referred to as the Soter collection, were from another dig and another collection organized by Lebolo. [^16] Some writers have confused the Soter mummies, which were divided among several European mu-seums, with the eleven sent to New York City. This collection of Lebolo's mummies in Trieste totaled eleven in 1831, and eleven mummies were acquired by Michael H. Chandler in New York City in 1833.

Since Antonio Lebolo was in Trieste in October 1822 and perhaps earlier, and subsequently made several more trips to Egypt, it is uncertain when these particular mummies arrived in Trieste from Egypt. They could have been stored in Egypt and/or Trieste for several years. The Albano Oblasser Shipping Company, which transported goods between the two areas and other parts of the world, had been in business for several years prior to 1822 and remained in business several years after 1831.

It is difficult, if not impossible, to trace the mummies aboard the ships that freighted them from Egypt to Trieste and from Trieste to New York City. Since antiquities were in demand and brought a high price, the shippers, leery of the unscrupulous, were not anxious or willing to broadcast the nature of their merchandise aboard ship. Consequently, shipping manifests nearly always had such generic listings as "25 boxes" or "40 crates" or "merchandise" and did not specify the particular contents.

It is regrettable that we do not know if Pietro Lebolo was successful in his legal endeavors in Trieste, but he apparently had some personal obstacles to overcome. In the court docket in Trieste dated September 12, 1831, Pietro Lebolo was charged with "truffa" (fraud). The case was dismissed, and the existing documents do not tell us who pressed the charges. The actual proceedings of the court cases are missing from the state archives in Trieste and are reportedly unavailable elsewhere. No 1831 court cases have been located in Trieste with the names mentioned either as plaintiffs or defendants. Gustavo Bourlet was found guilty of fraud, a felony, in a Trieste court case in 1828, and he was found guilty of several infractions. But none of his fraudulent acts in 1828 appear to be tied with any dealings he had with Lebolo. [^17]

Postscript from Castellamonte and the Lebolos

We are about to leave Italy and focus our attention on the mummies in the United States; but before we do this, a short note on the Lebolo family seems appropriate to partially complete the story. On October 10, 1831, over a year and a half after Lebolo's death, his widow, Anna Maria, returned to Castel-lamonte in company with Giuseppe Brogliatti to try to claim some personal property she had left behind. According to a legal document, she was then living in Turin, about thirty miles away. Her children were not living with their mother but still resided in Castellamonte. The document states:

He [Antonio Lebolo] has given the usufruct of all his goods, real estate, and personal property, to his wife Anna and to all sole heirs who are: Pietro, Giuseppe, Tommaso and Giovanni, all brothers and all his sons. If by chance, his wife Anna cannot or will not live with them he has provided for her for food and clothes 240 lire per year without claiming anything more.

Since that Anna, Lebolo's widow, does not want to live with her sons and having already a new residence in Torino, after having made known her decision to Mr. Giovanni late Bernardino Meuta attorney and guardian of Lebolo's heirs, she asks of the same guardian to give her some personal property to be determined and systematically pay the sum due. [^18]

Those entrusted to judge such matters granted to Anna the following personal belongings: "The gold ring with the inscription "amour" listed as number 211 valued at seven lire; the "gold collier" valued at 70 lire listed as number 213 and also the cornel trimmed in gold listed as number 216." [Number 216 in the inventory reads "a broken gold and a gold cornel all valued at 19 lire.] . . . " [^19]

The assets and the liabilities of the inheritance were explained to Anna, as well as the fact that there were many financial uncertainties because of the many debtors. Arrangements were made for her to be paid quarterly. Since she was illiterate, she consented to the agreement by signing a cross on the document. [^20] One might wonder if she was living in a Catholic convent in Turin as she had done in Venice, since her whereabouts are not known thereafter. Convents were required only to provide the numbers of residents and not to disclose their names.

Lebolo's children died relatively young.

Â Maria Lebolo, Anna Maria's youngest daughter, passed away on April 29, 1832, at age twelve "from an unexpected disease." She was buried in Castellamonte. [^21]

Â Rosa Lebolo died less than three months later, on July 18, 1832, at age sixteen and was buried in Castellamonte. [^22]

Â Joseph Lebolo, Antonio and Anna's oldest son, died at age nine on March 17, 1835. [^23]

Â Pietro Lebolo, Lebolo's oldest and only white son, died November 21, 1843, at thirty-three. (His death notice lists his age at death as thirty-five.) He had been a wax dealer. [^24]

Â Tomaso Lebolo, Antonio and Anna's youngest son, a steward on the bark Mimosa, fell overboard and drowned in Boston harbor December 26, 1857, when he was thirty. [^25] His death certificate lists both of his parents, Antonio and Anna, as deceased.

The fate of Antonio and Anna's second son, Giovanni, is unknown. He probably left Castellamonte; otherwise his death certificate should have been located in the local parish records, which have been fairly well scrutinized by several researchers.

Are These Mummies the Right Mummies?

I returned home from Italy in late November 1984 with photocopies of the will, the inventory, and the legal authorization for Pietro to check on the eleven mummies in Trieste that had been entrusted to Albano Oblasser and were to be sold in behalf of Lebolo's four sons. One link was missing in the story. How could we know that these mummies were the eleven that Michael Chandler received, the ones with which the writings of Abraham and Joseph were found? In early March 1985, frus-trated about this missing piece of the puzzle, I wrote to the Comollos. Adriano reported what happened:

At the beginning of March '85 we received a letter from Professor Peterson: ". . . we need to find . . ." It struck me as a divine order, so back to work.

At first Jerri and I conjectured that any other news concerning the destiny of those mummies could only be found in Trieste. However, just for thoroughness, we decided to cast one last glance in the Archives of Torino. I felt an inspiration, after I had expressly prayed for that problem, to seek among the notaries of Torino, not among those of Ivrea, and there we found the line connecting Italy with America.

All this has been a wonderful experience and we have felt to be in some way connected with Joseph Smith and have felt nearer to him. [^26]

The document they found, which proved that the eleven Lebolo mummies that Albano Oblasser was authorized to sell were indeed the mummies sent to New York City, was a no-tarial document issued by F. Clemente Cleonzo in Turin on October 5, 1833, in behalf of Pietro Lebolo. It states:

Special Power of Attorney from Pietro Lebolo in favor of Francesco Bertola, Professor of Veterinary Medicine.

Year of the Lord 1833, Oct. 5, in Torino in my office on the 3rd floor of S. Albano's House, No. 18 S. Tomaso Street, in front of me, Royal Notary Clemente Cleonzo. In the presence of Mr. Antonio Bruno of Bra and Mr. Vincenzo Cuire of Vigone, him too living in this capital, witnesses requested and found fit, known by me and by my constituent Mr. Pietro Lebolo.

Here assembled in front of me Royal Notary and in the presence of the above mentioned witnesses, Mr. Pietro Lebolo of the late Antonio, born in Castellamonte and living in this capital (Torino) who acts in his own behalf and acts in his capacity as special and general procurator with the ability to designate other special power of attorney for Giuseppe, Giovanni and Tomaso, Lebolo brothers dependent upon their tutor Sig. Meuta Giovanni, as instilled with the act of July 30, 1831 received Buffa, instilled in Castellamonte on the same day, paid 3.87 lire as from receipt Buffa properly stamped by the Department of Foreign Affairs, all of the universal heirs of their late father. Pietro Lebolo has called and calls as his special procurator Francesco Bertola son of the living Francesco also born in Castellamonte—Piedmont and living in Philadelphia, Professor of Veterinary Medicine who accepts me here, myself Notary undersigned, acting as public official accepting for him, therefore he receives the authority to claim the 11 mummies and other antique objects located in various boxes belonging to the deceased Antonio Lebolo who sent them to Albano Oblasser of Trieste. Albano Oblasser sent them to New York to the house of Mr. M'Led and Quellerspie of Meetland and Kennedy. Mr. Bertola has authority to sell them to whoever he thinks will fulfill the conditions, pay the amount that the procurator will decide and he will send the same through quittance, and in case of dispute he will protect the interests of the Misters constituents and he will take care of all of the problems that might come up in order to obtain a quick liquidation of such objects. In other words he will do whatever the constituents would do if they were to conduct the transaction themselves.

Mr. Bertola will do everything under the cum libera ut alter ego stipulation with promise to ratify everything he will do as it is ratified at once and will account for his actions. Of this request I have received public witness and I have read and pronounced the present act and pronounced the content of the present act for the clear understanding of the parties involved and the witnesses undersigned. [^27]

The veterinarian who had left Castellemante and moved to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, was Francesco Bertola Jr. His father, the senior Francesco Bertola, was the man to whom Lebolo referred in his will as "my friend" and whom he asked to assist in inventorying his personal holdings. Young Francesco was authorized to legally pursue the combined shipping firms of Maitland & Kennedy and McLeod & Gillespie in New York City in behalf of the Lebolos to receive their money for the sale of the eleven mummies and some other boxes of antiquities.

It is probable that Albano Oblasser still had the mummies stored in Trieste when Pietro Lebolo checked on them in the summer of 1831. Why they were sent to New York City and not to Rome, Vienna, London, Paris, or some other European city is not known; possibly mummies were a greater curiosity in the United States than in Europe in 1833 and would bring a higher return.

There are some unsolved problems as to why the Lebolo family had not received the quittance from the sale of the mummies, since Michael H. Chandler had them in his possession at least six months before the Lebolos sent the letter authorizing Francesco Bertola Jr. to follow through on the shipping costs, customs, and other charges relative to the eleven mummies arriving in the United States, and paying the Lebolos for their sale.

How does Michael H. Chandler, an Irish immigrant, figure into the story as Lebolo's heir when all of Lebolo's possessions were willed to his wife Anna and his four sons?

How do we reconcile Chandler's story that he inherited the eleven mummies with the legal document that clearly states that two New York maritime companies were authorized to sell them for the Lebolos for the highest price, and no heir is mentioned?

How do we explain that Bertola was not informed of any Irish nephew by the Lebolo family, but only to contact the New York maritime merchants to acquire the funds from the sale of the mummies?

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] In the National Archives in Washington, D.C., a shipping record from Trieste, dated October 15, 1831, reads: "List of Goods shipped on board the American Brig Mary Capt. Foster of New York." In the column entitled "Numbers" are the figures "1" and "2"; under the column "Packages," the figure "2"; in the column entitled "Shippers," "A. Oblasser" and "2 Casks Cross Berries." The shipment was consigned to "R. Gillespie and W. McLeod."
[^2] Letter is in the personal file of H. Donl Peterson.
[^3] Letter dated June 7, 1976, from the Civil Archives Division; in the personal file of H. Donl Peterson.
[^4] Genealogical records in the files of H. Donl Peterson.
[^5] An account quoted in Jay M. Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham, pp. 145-48, indicates that this stranger, a non-Mormon in New York City, was a man named Benjamin Bullock. Bullock volunteered to drive Chandler and his mummies and papyri to Kirtland, Ohio, to meet Joseph Smith. According to the account, Chandler agreed, and the two men traveled to Kirtland together to seek Joseph Smith's translation of the papyri. The account also indicates that as a result of this experience, many Bullocks joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Daily Intelligencer, April 9, 1833, p. 2. The announcement states that "several rolls of papyrus" were exhibited along with the mummies. Several is generally defined in dictionaries as more than two and less than ten. The importance of this information will be discussed later.
[^8] "Egyptian Antiquities," Times and Seasons 3 (May 2, 1842): 774. The Philadelphia Arcade was the property of a joint stock company. The idea of its erection was borrowed from London's Burlington Arcade, a collection of small retail shops in one building. For the building, the Philadelphia Arcade Company purchased the mansion and grounds of Chief Justice Tilghman, on the north side of Chestnut Street, between Sixth and Seventh. The property extended through to Carpenter (now Jayne) Street.
[^9] This Baltimore Museum ad ran simultaneously in the Baltimore Gazette and Daily Advertiser and the Baltimore American and Commercial Daily Advertiser from July 20 to August 16, 1833.
[^10] Times and Seasons 3:774.
[^11] Diary of David Hudson Jr., son of David Hudson Sr., the founder of Hudson, Ohio. Hudson Library and Historical Society.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] Messenger and Advocate 2:236.
[^14] Samuel George Morton, Catalogue of Skulls of Man and the Inferior Animals in the Collection of Samuel George Morton, M.D., Penn. and Edinb., 3rd ed. (Philadelphia: Merrihew & Thompson, 1849), Entries 48 and 60.
[^15] Samuel Morton, "Observations on Egyptian Ethnography, Derived from Anatomy, History, and the Monuments," American Philosophical Society Transactions 9 (Philadelphia, 1846): 124.
[^16] For additional information, see the Provo, Utah, Daily Herald for Sunday, November 23, 1980, p. 59.
[^17] Correspondence between the government of Sardinia and the Sardinian Consulate in New York City, State Archives, Torino.
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] Ibid.
[^20] Death certificate of Francesco Bertola Sr., State Archives of Turin; copy in the author's possession.
[^21] Testamento 14 Luglio 1841, Notary Signoretti—Torino.
[^22] Ibid., 5:22.
[^23] Peterson, "Lebolo's Will and Inventory Book," 27.
[^24] Ibid., 31.
[^25] Ibid., 40.
[^26] Ibid., 53.
[^27] Ibid., 60-61.
