H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

8

Michael H. Chandler and the Mummies

The eleven mummies were shipped from Trieste to New York to the combined maritime firms of Maitland & Kennedy and McLeod & Gillespie, prominent businesses that dealt in international trade. These companies were commissioned by Pietro Lebolo through the Oblasser Shipping Company to sell the antiquities and then send the proceeds to Antonio Lebolo's heirs in Castellamonte. Unfortunately some important details are missing in this part of the story. If the merchants were offering the antiquities for the best possible price, they would probably publicize them for auction in the New York newspapers. However, no notices have been found that mention the arrival of the mummies or advertise an auction for their sale.

The newspapers were checked for the period of January 1830 to March 1833, since it is not known when the mummies arrived in New York City. Did Pietro Lebolo insist that Oblasser ship the mummies to the maritime merchants in New York in an attempt to sell them after July 30, 1831, or had Oblasser previously shipped them? If they were sent to New York before July 30, 1831, and if the merchants' lists in the newspapers are complete and our research has been thorough, the receivers made no attempt to advertise their availability. I found shipping records that indicated Oblasser previously worked with the four New York merchants mentioned, but no evidence of the shipment of the mummies. [^1]

I wrote to the National Archives in Washington, D.C., relative to the shipment of the mummies from Trieste to New York City and received the following reply, dated June 20, 1988:

I have made a careful survey of dispatches from the U.S. Consul in Trieste, 1831-1833, and of miscellaneous correspondence received by that consul during this period. I found no reference to the shipment of Egyptian mummies from Trieste to New York in these years. It is possible that no reference was made to the mummies because the shippers were afraid some obscure law or regulation might forbid the importation of human remains into the United States. [^2]

I had previously written to the National Archives and Records Service relative to my research and had been reminded that "most records of the Treasury Department were destroyed by a fire in 1833." [^3]

Michael H. Chandler had the eleven mummies in his possession in Philadelphia and was displaying them by April 3, 1833. To make arrangements to ship them from New York to Philadelphia and to pay the custom fees and shipping costs could have been accomplished in less than a week, since a ship sailed from New York to Philadelphia in less than a day in the early 1830s. In addition to allowing sufficient time for shipping and port arrangements, it would also have taken one to three weeks to schedule a hall in Philadelphia, have the owners prepare any props necessary for the exhibition, and correlate the displays with newspaper and handbill advertising. This, of course, is conjecture, but it seems logical to assume that the mummies arrived in New York no later than March 1833.

Who Was Michael H. Chandler?

Several genealogists and historians have attempted to resolve whether or not Lebolo and Chandler were related, but without success. Lebolo's ancestry has been traced for several generations prior to his birth, since the family was primarily centered in Castellamonte. But genealogists have not been able to locate Chandler or his wife in any Irish records. We know only that the couple both called themselves Irish in several legal documents and census records in the United States. Therefore the research is at a stalemate until Chandler's roots can be traced to finally affirm or deny any family relationships with Lebolo. There were some Lebolos living in England in the mid-1800s, including one named Antonio, but the records are insufficient to correlate the families. [^4]

Relying on public records from Ohio, we find that Michael H. Chandler was born in Ireland around 1797. His wife, Frances F. Ludlow, also of Irish descent, was born about 1798. They were married in Ireland, and four children were born to them between 1820 and 1827 while they were living there: Thomas, Ann, William H., and George W. A fifth child, Catherine, was listed in various censuses as being born in either Ohio, Pennsylvania, or Canada in 1829. The last seven of the Chandlers' twelve children were born in Pennsylvania or Ohio.

How Chandler first learned of the existence of the Lebolo mummies is also unknown. The account in the Messenger and Advocate continues:

On opening the coffins he discovered that in connection with two of the bodies, were something rolled up with the same kind of linen, saturated with the same bitumen, which, when examined, proved to be two rolls of papyrus, pre-viously mentioned. I may add that two or three other small pieces of papyrus, with astronomical calculations, epitaphs, &c. were found with others of the Mummies.

When Mr. Chandler discovered that there was something with the Mummies, he supposed, or hoped it might be some diamonds or other valuable metal, and was no little chagrined when he saw his disappointment. He was immediately told, while yet in the Custom House, that there was no man in that city, who could translate his roll; but was referred by the same gentleman, (a stranger,) to Mr. Joseph Smith, jr. who, continued he, possesses some kind of power or gifts by which he had previously translated similar characters. [^5] Bro. Smith was then unknown to Mr. Chandler, neither did he know that such a book or work as the record of the Nephites had been brought before the public. >From New York [Chandler] took his collection to Philadelphia, where he exhibited them for a compensation.

While Mr. Chandler was in Philadelphia, he used every exertion to find some one who could give him the translation of his papyrus, but could not, satisfactorily, though from some few men of the first eminence, he obtained in a small degree, the translation of a few characters. Here he was referred to bro. Smith. From Philadelphia he visited Harrisburgh, and other places east of the mountains, and was frequently referred to bro. Smith for a translation of his Egyptian Relic. It would be beyond my purpose to follow this gentleman in his different circuits to the time he visited this place the last of June, or first of July, at which time he presented bro. Smith with his papyrus. [^6]

Chandler or his wife apparently had close ties with one or more of the New York merchants or another contact, either through blood ties or close friendship. Someone who purchased the mummies was willing to pay the customs fees and freight expenses and help Chandler leave his job and go about the country displaying the mummies and papyri for profit. Through the occasional sale of a mummy and profits made by charging entrance fees, Chandler hoped to make a living and also repay his underwriters. More evidence will be presented in chapter 13 to support this theory.

Mummies Are Displayed in Philadelphia

In April 1833 several Philadelphia newspapers and other publications announced in advertisements and articles news about a new exhibit at the Masonic Hall. An ad in the U.S. Gazette appeared fifteen times between April 3 and 23 and read:

The largest collection of EGYPTIAN MUMMIES ever exhibited in this city, is now to be seen at the Masonic Hall, in the Chesnut Street above Seventh.

They were found in the vicinity of Thebes, by the cele-brated traveler Antonio Lebolo and Chevalier Drovetti, General Consul of France in Egypt.

Some writings on Papirus found with the Mummies, can also be seen, and will afford, no doubt, much satisfaction to Amateurs of Antiquities.

Admittance 25 cents, children half price. Open from 9 A.M. till 2 p.m., and from 3 p.m. to 6.

Readers of the Philadelphia Daily Chronicle would have seen the following ad, which was published on April 3, 6, 9, 11, 13, 16, 18, and 22:

Now Exhibiting at the

MASONIC HALL

Chesnut Street above Seventh,

A large collection of Egyptian Mummies and

other Antiquities, found in the vicinity

of Thebes, by the celebrated traveller

Antonio Lebalo, under the protection

of Mahomet Ali, Viceroy of Egypt

Brief articles appeared in several publications, including the following.

U.S. Gazette for the Country (April 8 and 10): "We must ask attention to the exhibition of Mummies at the Masonic Hall. These old folks who flourished perhaps when Moses and Aaron were little boys, deserve some public attention. The rolls of papyrus, the hieroglyphics, the wrappers and other appliances, are all exceedingly interesting."

Daily Intelligencer (April 9): "A collection of nine bodies, said to have been found in the vicinity of Thebes, by the celebrated traveller Antonio Lebolo, and the Chevalier Drovetti, the General Consul of France in Egypt, is now to be seen at the Masonic Hall, in Chestnut Street, above Seventh. Besides these, several rolls of Papyrus, obtained at the same time, are also exhibited. From the appearance of the mummies they must be of considerable antiquity." [^7]

Atkinson's Saturday Evening Post (April 13), under the heading "Epitome of the Times": "We must ask attention to the exhibition of Mummies at the Masonic Hall. These old folks who flourished pdrhaps [sic] when Moses and Aaron were little boys, deserve public attention. The rolls of papyrus, the hieroglyphics, the wrappers, and other appliances, are all exceedingly interesting."

The Pennsylvanian (April 16, 1833): "The Mummies, now exhibiting at the Masonic Hall, are said by competent critics, to be veritable. They are well worth a visit. One of them was, while in New York, stripped of its envelopes, it being supposed that valuable ornaments might be upon it. The search ended in disappointment of course."

Note that this article confirms that one mummy had been unwrapped while it was still in New York. The Messenger and Advocate account stated that Chandler found two rolls of papyrus with two of the bodies, and that the coffins had not been opened before they arrived in New York City.

The Philadelphia Saturday Courier dated Saturday, April 20, 1833, reported: "The ten Egyptian Mummies now exhibited at the Masonic Hall, have been inspected by several gentlemen competent to judge them; and are pronounced to be genuine specimens of the relics of those who, 'walked about in Thebes' streets, three thousand years ago.'"

Within the next few weeks Chandler had a placard made of the unsolicited endorsement of the seven doctors. The placard, called "The Certificate of the Learned," reads as follows:

Having examined with considerable attention and deep interest, a number of Mummies from the catacombs, near Thebes, in Egypt, and now exhibited in the Arcade, we beg leave to recommend them to the observation of the curious inquirer on subjects of a period so long elapsed; probably not less than three thousand years ago. The features of some of these Mummies are in perfect expression.—The papyrus, covered with black or red ink, or paint, in excellent preservation, are very interesting. The undersigned, unsolicited by any per son connected by interest with this exhibition, have voluntarily set their names hereunto, for the simple purpose of calling the attention of the public to an interesting collection, not sufficiently known in this city.

JOHN REDMAN COXE, M.D. RICHARD HARLAN, M.D. J. PANCOAST, M.D. WILLIAM P.C. BARTON, M.D. E.F. RIVINUS, M.D. SAMUEL G. MORGAN [Morton], M.D.

I concur in the above sentiments, concerning the collection of Mummies in the Philadelphia Arcade, and consider them highly deserving the attention of the curious.

W.E. HORNER, M.D.8

This same placard was used more than two years later when it was circulated in Kirtland at the time Chandler first met the Prophet Joseph Smith.

An advertisement that appeared daily in the Philadelphia Gazette between May 10 and June 3 explained that the collection of antiquities had been moved to the Arcade, a new location, "at No. 9, east avenue, downstairs, opposite Mr. Ker's china store." The U.S. Gazette ran the same ad between May 11 and May 31.

The following article appeared in both the Daily Chronicle (May 20) and the Saturday Courier (May 25): "Nine mummies, found not long since in the vicinity of Thebes in Egypt, are being exhibited in Philadelphia. The reservoirs of this species of curiosity seem to grow more abundant the more they are drawn upon. Seven years ago, Mr. Peale of the New York Museum gave $1800 for one of these specimens, which may now be obtained for less than a fourth part of the sum. A strange market, indeed, for the proud land of the pyramids to come to! Its mummies would seem to be more worth than its men."

The Mummies Diminish in Numbers

Michael Chandler told leaders of the Church in Kirtland that eleven mummies of the first order of burial had been unearthed by Lebolo in the Theban tomb. Pietro Lebolo went to Trieste to check on the eleven mummies that were entrusted to Oblasser, the shipping company owner. Chandler had a placard printed to announce his exhibit, and the placard confirmed that the original shipment consisted of eleven mummies. Over the months either some of the Philadelphia newspaper reporters were careless mummy counters or Chandler's collection began to diminish in number. I have concluded that both possibilities were plausible: some reporters occasionally were careless in counting the number of mummies on display, and at the same time the collection was diminishing in number.

After Chandler concluded his display at the Philadelphia Arcade, he began touring. The next exhibit of the mummies of which we are aware was in Baltimore in July and August 1833. By then the number of mummies had dwindled to six.

The exhibit was very popular in Baltimore. The mummies were displayed at the Baltimore Museum, which had recently been remodeled for a Fourth of July reopening less than three weeks before. A newspaper advertisement placed by J. E. Walker, manager of the museum, was published July 20 and read as follows:

The citizens are respectfully informed that the Manager has received from the vicinity of Thebes, that celebrated city of Ancient Egypt, six strangers, illustrious from their antiquity, count, probably an existence of at least one thousand years anterior to the advent of our blessed Saviour, and contemporaries; if so, of the first Sovereigns of Israel, viz: Saul and David. They are by no means insignificant aspirants to public patronage. In the present day, in a country unknown, and where transatlantic ancestors, at that period wrapt in the gloom of Idolatry and Paganism, what singular and interesting points of history could they not unfold, connected with those early periods of the world, were the vital spark, so long at rest, permitted to resuscitate their slumbering remains. But surely none could view these truly singular remnants of Auld Lang Syne, without being carried retrospectively to these far distant periods of Antiquity. [^8]

Admission to the exhibit was twenty-five cents.

A lengthy article in the Baltimore American and Commercial Daily Advertiser on July 22 had been copied from the Philadelphia Daily Chronicle. It was sober and reflective in tone. The writer, writing under the pseudonym "Pythagorus," began, "I had yesterday, a solemn, silent intercourse with eight or ten foreigners from the vicinity of Thebes." He concluded:

I cannot but hope that curiosity may lead all who can spare 25 cents to see these fragments of mortality. How far, 3,000 years hence, any remnant of those, who may look upon these Egyptian Mummies, may exist to call into notice the curious speculations of the living, it may be well to think of. The pouting lip, the bright and scornful eye, the panting bosom of the present beauty, will probably be more fleeting than the actual remains I now exhort my fellow citizens to contemplate and think upon.

A Baltimore Museum ad in the Gazette announced on August 10, 1833, "The exhibition of the Egyptian Mummies will close on Wednesday Evening, the 14th instant." Apparently the exhibit was extended, for the same newspaper bade the mummies a final farewell two days later by announcing, "The Egyptian Mummies will positively close on Friday Evening, 16th inst."

The placard Michael Chandler distributed as he continued to exhibit his mummies referred to this success in Baltimore: "They [the mummies] have been exhibited in Philadelphia and Baltimore, to crowded audiences; in the latter place, although only engaged for two weeks, the exhibition was prolonged to five weeks, with attraction." [^9]

Whether the six mummies Chandler exhibited in Baltimore were displayed elsewhere after he left that city is not known. The next documented exhibition was in Harrisburg, Penn-sylvania, where a duplicate of the Baltimore ad was printed in the weekly Harrisburg Chronicle on September 9, 1833.

Apparently five of the original eleven mummies were sold in the Philadelphia and Baltimore areas within the first four months after Chandler obtained them. Between September 1833, when he left Harrisburg, and February 1835, he sold two others, for that is the number he had when we next pick up his trail in Hudson, Ohio. Those four remaining mummies were the ones the Saints in Kirtland purchased in early July 1835.

The Search for the Missing Mummies

My search for clues on Chandler's whereabouts between September 9, 1833, and February 16, 1835, was unsuccessful. If he displayed the mummies in small communities during that time, his arrivals and departures could have gone unrecorded in local newspapers, which were usually published either weekly or biweekly. This means he could have arrived in a town, circulated some handbills advertising his exhibit, displayed them for a few days, and then gone on his way with no newspaper account of his visit if he arrived and left between editions.

In our search in communities between Baltimore and Kirtland, particularly those along the Erie Canal, Dr. Brian L. Smith and I happened to stumble across the following account in Hudson, Ohio. There was no newspaper mention of a visit by Chandler there, but we did locate a journal of events of interest in Hudson that the city founder's son, David Hudson Jr., had kept. Entry number 124, dated February 1835, stated: "Mr. Edgerly's Sign.—At Baldwin's Store today, I saw a handbill, giving notice that there was to be an exhibition of mummies at the Mansion House of L. Edgerly. I went out, looked on the sign, and saw the words 'Mansion House' on it. It was not in my mind that that was on the sign." [^10]

In an entry dated Thursday, February 19, Hudson wrote: "Exhibition of Mummies.—There was an exhibition of four Mummies at Mr. Edgerly's tavern on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday. I went in to see them yesterday. [T]hey were ghastly looking objects, and the sight of them was not desirable." [^11]

No doubt these were the four remaining mummies ex-hibited by Michael Chandler, who in early 1835 listed his hometown as Stow, Ohio, a town just a few miles from Hudson.

Oliver Cowdery's report in the Messenger and Advocate indicated that according to Chandler, the seven missing mummies had been "purchased by gentlemen for private museums," making it next to impossible to trace their whereabouts. [^12] Two mummies had been bought on behalf of Philadelphia's Academy of Natural Sciences by Dr. Samuel George Morton, one of the medical doctors who signed the "Certificate of the Learned" encouraging the public to see Chandler's exhibit at the Arcade in Philadelphia. (Dr. Morton's name was incorrectly given as "Morgan" on the certificate.)

The minutes of the academy for May 21, 1833, read: "Dr. Morton called the attention of the members to some mummies now in the city—the remarkable development of the cranium in one." The minutes for June 4 state that the "head of a Mummy from Thebes" was deposited at the academy by Dr. Morton. This was followed by another cranium on June 18.

On December 10 and 17, 1833, Dr. Morton, who was vice president of the academy, dissected the two Egyptian mummies before academy members. It can be determined that these two were originally from the Chandler collection, for in a work en-titled Catalogue of Skulls of Man and the Inferior Animals in theCollection of Samuel George Morton M.D., Penn. and Edinb., Dr. Morton gave the following information:

[Entry Number 48] Embalmed head of an EGYPTIAN girl eight years of age, from the Theban catacombs. Egyptian form, with a single lock of long fine hair. Dissected by me before the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, December 10, 1833.

[Entry Number 60] Embalmed head of an EGYPTIAN lady about 16 years of age, brought from the Catacombs of El Gourna, near Thebes, by the late Antonio Lebolo, of whose heirs I purchased it, together with the entire body: the latter I dissected before the Academy of Natural Sciences, on the 10th and 17th of December, 1833, in presence of eighty members and others. Egyptian form, with long, fine hair. Crania Aegyptiaca, plate 10, fig. 6. [^13]

Note that Dr. Morton said he purchased the mummy from Lebolo's heirs—the story that Chandler maintained two years later when he claimed to be Lebolo's nephew.

Note also that Dr. Morton was apparently more interested in the mummies' skulls than their bodies. He was testing the popular theory of that day that a larger cranial cavity indicated that a person had superior intelligence. Dr. Morton would fill with buckshot the skulls he procured and then weigh them to determine the respective size of the cavity. The skulls in such experiments were separated from the bodies.

In a paper entitled "Observations on Egyptian Ethnography, Derived from Anatomy, History, and the Monuments," delivered nearly ten years after he purchased the two mummies from Chandler, Dr. Morton reported: "In the year 1833, I purchased of the heirs of the late Senior Le'Bolo, a dilapidated mummy from Thebes, of which I prepared the skeleton, now preserved in the Anatomical Museum of the University of Pennsylvania. It measures about five feet ten inches, and is in every respect beautifully developed excepting the cranium, which is small in proportion and of indifferent conformation." In a footnote Dr. Morton explained: "I have reason to believe that this cranium, which I obtained separate from the rest of the mummy, belonged to another Egyptian skeleton subsequently procured from the same source." [^14]

Thus, we learn that Dr. Morton bought two Theban skulls, numbered 48 and 60, at approximately the same time, and that he identified number 60 as coming from Antonio Lebolo's heirs. He dissected both bodies in December 1833. The next Egyptian mummies, whose numbering begins with 759, were presented to Dr. Morton by "G. R. Gliddon, Esq., later United States Consul for the City of Cairo" seven years later, in 1840. There is little doubt that number 48, as well as number 60, was purchased by Dr. Morton from Michael H. Chandler.

Dr. Morton's crania collection is now located in the University of Pennsylvania. The cranium of the sixteen-year- old girl was displayed at Brigham Young University between 1979 and 1983 through the courtesy of the University of Pennsylvania [^15] and has since been returned to the university's Egyptian Museum. The location of the five mummies that were in Michael Chandler's possession before he sold the last four to Joseph Smith is unknown.

Francesco Bertola Jr. in America

In chapter 7, I cited a letter written in behalf of the Lebolo family in which Pietro Lebolo commissioned Francesco Bertola Jr., who had moved from Castellamonte to Philadelphia, to see why the New York City merchants to whom the mummies had been sent had not sent to the family the money from their sale. Since Michael H. Chandler had the mummies in his possession by early April 1833, it seems logical to assume that financial arrangements had already been concluded with the purchaser and the New York shipping companies of Maitland & Kennedy and McLeod & Gillespie. In an attempt to learn about the sale, I tried to trace the activities of Bertola, Lebolo's former Castel-lamonte neighbor, in the United States.

There is no listing of a Francesco Bertola Jr. in the Philadelphia city directory for the years 1833, 1834, 1835, 1836, or 1837. The closest name is Frank Bertole, who is listed as a baker. This could be the anglicized spelling of Francesco Bertola, but the different occupation is puzzling.

An exchange of letters between the Sardinian consul in New York City and the Sardinian government in northern Italy sheds a little light on the story. The Province of Ivrea (near Cas-tellamonte) sent a brief inquiry to the Sardinian consulate in New York on February 1, 1837, which was received on February 11, 1837. Referring to "Francesco Bertola, Master of Horses," the message stated: "He left New York sometime ago to go to Buffalo. We desire to hear from him, since he has not written to his family resident in Castellamonte for about a year." [^16]

In a return letter dated June 28, 1837, to his "Excellency" in Sardinia, the Sardinian consul in New York City explained: "Mr. Francesco Bertola left Philadelphia towards the beginning of last November [1836] and he established his residence in this city. But last March he found the opportunity to give lessons in the Italian language in a pensione in nearby New York, and he told some of his friends that he wanted to go there. However, he did not want to tell them, by any means, neither the name nor the location of the above mentioned boarding-house. It will be my duty to make further inquiries about him. Then, I'll be solicitous to inform you of my findings." [^17]

In a final letter to Sardinia, dated December 23, 1837, the consul in New York City gave the following update on the matter: "Mr. Francesco Bertola whose case has been registered under #26 on June 28, after the ministerial record #8 last February 11, now lives in Bloomingdale, a village three miles distance from this city. He gives Physical Science lessons in a little college [boarding-school]. He receives from what he told me and from what I heard from other people a salary of $300.00 plus room and board." [^18]

The Lebolos did not continue to pursue the matter of seeking closure on the sale of the mummies after October 1833, as far as has been determined, so the payment may have arrived shortly after Francesco Bertola Jr. was granted power of attorney to bring matters to a conclusion. Since correspondence ceased, unless a new notary was hired, Bertola probably had no dealings with the sale of the mummies; or if he did, it was only to find that the transaction had been completed.

When Bertola told the representative from the Sardinian Consulate that he did not want his friends to know the name or the location "by any means" of the boardinghouse where he was living and teaching, one has to wonder why the secrecy. Either he had severed ties with his family in the Piedmont or he was a very poor letter writer, since he had not written home for about a year. It is assumed that his detachment from his friends and family is unrelated to the sale of the mummies.

Nothing more is known about Francesco Bertola Jr. in the United States. His father, Francesco Bertola Sr., the confidant of Antonio Lebolo who assisted in inventorying Lebolo's possessions after his death, died December 27, 1842, in Castellamonte. [^19] He did not mention his son in his will. [^20]

Notes

The story as it is recorded appears to be inaccurate for the following reasons: Surely Joseph Smith would have mentioned that the writings of Abraham and Joseph were in the United States after such a meeting. The Messenger and Advocate account by Oliver Cowdery said that after leaving New York City, Mr. Chandler next displayed his antiquities in Philadelphia. It also said that "seven of the said eleven [mummies] were purchased by gentlemen for private museums, previous to Mr. Chandler's visit to this place, with a small quantity of papyrus." And finally, the article declared that after Chandler exhibited his antiquities in Philadelphia, he showed them in "Harrisburgh an other places east of the mountains, and was frequently referred to Bro. Smith for a translation of the Egyptian Relic. . . . He visited this place [Kirtland] the last of June, or first of July at which time he presented Bro. Smith with his papyrus. Till then neither myself nor brother Smith knew of such relics in America." (Cowdery, Messenger and Advocate 2:235; emphasis added.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Mr. Chandler states that the mummies were exhumed at Thebes "in June 1832," as he reported to Oliver Cowdery a little over three months later. Perhaps he was referring to a document that so stated the date even though it is incorrect. Nonetheless, his story is consistent. Palmyra Herald 2, no. 19 (July 24, 1822).
[^2] The Theban tomb had niches in the wall, as was later mentioned to Church leaders. The reporter said, "This statement of the owner is accompanied by good authority." This report may indicate a document or documents from which Chandler received his information. Massachusetts General Hospital News 29, no. 10 (December 1970): 8.
[^3] This last article, which describes the four "Mormon" mummies better than any other known to us, mentioned that there were three females and one male. The quotation previ-ously cited reversed the number and stated that there were three males and one female mummy. This confusion persists throughout the entire story of the mummies. Ibid.
[^4] Three of the four mummies had an accompanying "roll or book" buried with them. No such record is mentioned in connection with the fourth mummy. Ibid. The mummy is still the property of the hospital as of this writing. The hospital occasionally allows various institutions to borrow it for display purposes.
[^5] The reporter was a strong believer in phrenology, which is "the study of the conformation of the skull based on the belief that it is indicative of mental faculties and character." [^19] Phrenology was popular and widely accepted in the 1830s, a belief that has since gone the way of other such theories of men. New York Public Library, *C. p.v. 329 #13.
[^6] "PADIHERSHEF, Boston newspapers in 1823," in the files of City Life Museums, Baltimore.
[^7] Leslie L. Luther, Moravia and Its Past and Adjoining Townships (Indianapolis: The Frederic Luther Co., 1966), 439-40.
[^8] HC 1:20.
[^9] William B. Dinsmoor, "Early American Studies of Mediterranean Archaeology," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 87, no. 1 (1943): 95.
[^10] John A. Wilson, Signs & Wonders Upon Pharaoh: A History of American Egyptology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964), 37.
[^11] New York Commercial Advertiser, January 26, 1832.
[^12] Ibid., February 24, 1832.
[^13] Ibid., March 2, 1832.
[^14] Ibid., March 12, 1832.
[^15] Ibid., March 21, 1833.
[^16] J. F. Watson, "Annals of Philadephia," Manuscripts Department, Historical Society of Pennsylvania.
[^17] "Egyptian Mummies," Cleveland Daily Advertiser, March 26, 1835.
[^18] "A Rare Exhibition," Cleveland Whig, March 25, 1835.
[^19] "Mummies," Painesville Telegraph, March 27, 1835.
[^20] Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, 887.
