H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

9

Egyptian Mummies in America, 1823-1833

As we have seen, Michael H. Chandler's Egyptian antiquities displays attracted large crowds wherever he exhibited them. To appreciate better the novelty of Egyptian mummies being exhibited in the United States, it might be well to review the uniqueness of such displays at that time.

Though a few Egyptian mummies were being shipped to the major cities of Europe for exhibit in the early 1820s, they were nonetheless still a source of great curiosity. A London news-paper article quoted in the Palmyra, New York, Herald on Wednesday, July 24, 1822, reported:

Thousands of persons have been within the last few days at the Custom House at Plymouth [England], to see an Egyptian Mummy which has lately been brought there, and must be sold for payment of the duties. It was announced to be seen three days before the sale, which took place on Friday last, and ever since Tuesday morning, the customhouse had been crowded by persons of all ranks, from the highest to the lowest, all eager to get a view of so great a curiosity. The exterior coffin is very highly decorated and very beautiful; it is supposed to be made of shittim wood, and is in high preservation.

The exterior of the coffin has several figures painted round the sides, the colours of which are exceedingly bright. The body, which is that of a female, is placed in a shell, and wrapped up in an immense quantity of coarse linen cloth, a great part of which is in a perfect state. The body is in some parts much decayed, and had altered exceedingly since it was exposed to the air, but even now the skin and nails are to be seen perfect on the hand, and the bones are quite entire, even to the toes and finger joints. The head appears to have been sawed open for the purpose of taking out the brain.

It is said to be upwards of 2000 years old, and is supposed to have been a person of quality. [^1]

The First Egyptian Mummies in America

Egyptian mummies were rare indeed in the United States in the 1820s and early 1830s, and more especially on the sparsely settled frontier such as the Western Reserve. The first Egyptian mummy to be shipped to the United States, as far as is known, arrived in Boston harbor in 1823. Jacob Van Lennep of Smyrna, a Dutch merchant who served as the consul general of the Netherlands, sent a mummy to Boston "to be given to some public establishment as a mark of respect to that city." [^2]

It is not known why Boston was held in such esteem, but Mr. Van Lennep went to considerable trouble to acquire this rare gift. When he asked Mr. Lee, the British consul in Alexandria, Egypt, to procure a mummy, the official replied that "having found no good ones, opened, in [Alexandria] or Cairo, [he had] commissioned a person going to Thebes to select one, and he succeeded in procuring the best that had been seen in a long time." [^3] Unfortunately, the antiquities dealer from whom the mummy was purchased is not mentioned by name in the report.

Mr. Tilden and Captain Edes, who took charge of the mummy upon its arrival in this country, presented it, in Van Lennep's behalf, to the Massachusetts General Hospital, to be used in raising funds for that institution. The mummy arrived April 25, 1823, and was delivered on May 4 to the hospital. [^4]

An article about the mummy stated: "Several of these Mummies are deposited in the British and French Museums, and other celebrated Cabinets in Europe, which some among us have seen. This Specimen, which was taken from a recently discovered Catacomb, at Thebes, is in the finest state of preservation, and is the only one ever brought to America." [^5]

While confirming data about the Massachusetts General Hospital's acquisition of the first Egyptian mummy in 1823, I learned that it was found to be a man named Padihershef, now affectionately called "Paddy." An entry on a paper sent to me from the City Life Museums in Baltimore was labeled "Padihershef—Documentation, Boston newspaper in 1823." The article, headlined "More Mummies" and dated June 17, 1824, described the arrival of two additional mummies: "The brig Peregrine, Clark, from Gilbraltar, arrived on Tuesday, brought TWO MUMMIES, fresh from Thebes, and of un-doubted antiquity. At this rate the flesh of mummy will be as cheap as that of dogs. The market is already glutted; a few more of the Egyptian carcasses, with a mermaid or two, and the stock for our museums will be as cheap as the candidates for our presidency." [^6]

As of this writing, nothing else is known about this second arrival of mummies. Unless the reporter knew something that we don't know, it hardly seems justified to conclude that the one mummy that arrived over a year before would have glutted the market.

In his book Moravia and Its Past, author Leslie L. Luther included an entry dated September 23, 1823, from Moravia, a village in central New York State:

Walked up in the market square . . . and saw written over the door "A Live Ostrich" . . . went in and saw it. . . . Curious looking tent there went in and saw the Egyptian mummy, a young lady three thousand years old, lately to arrive from the City of Thebes, the city with its hundred gates. She was found enclosed in two coffins made of sycamore, and on top of each coffin her profile is carved out of the wood. The coffins smell very disagreeable indeed. She is said to be a real woman by the doctors who have examined her in Boston and no deception. She makes a ghastly and unlovely appearance. Has turned black. Said to be when alive, red, just the color of the likeness on the coffin. [^7]

This "young lady three thousand years old" was probably one of the two mummies that arrived in Boston about three months before.

The third documented shipment of an Egyptian mummy to the United States was mentioned in the New York Evening Post on August 10, 1824. The newspaper article does not document where in Egypt it was exhumed, nor does it mention the excavator's name or the receivers in the United States. A detailed picture of the sarcophagus accompanies the article, and above the picture is this announcement: "Now exhibiting from 8 in the morning until 9 in the evening, at 328 12 Broadway, nearly opposite the Hospital, a MUMMY, just arrived from Egypt. Admittance, 25 cents; children, half price."

Under the picture is this text:

New-York, August 1, 1824

SIR,—When you first announced to me the arrival of a human Mummy, from Egypt, I made an overture immediately for its particular and careful examination. At that time, the body was entirely covered by the cloth and bandages of embalming. These were opened in the presence of the most respectable witnesses, at the College of Physicians; and the disclosures afforded satisfactory evidence of genuineness.—My attending friends, and myself, were highly gratified by the fair opportunity we enjoyed of inspecting such a curious piece of antiquity;—and if I was to express an opinion to my fellow- citizens, it would be in the form of an exhortation, for them to view this rare and real production, without delay. Accept my thanks for the addition you have made to our stock of rational information.

SAMUEL L. MITCHILL,

Captain Larkin Lee.

We, the subscribers, think the Mummy, a real and interesting preparation, and worthy of being viewed as a fair specimen of Egyptian embalming.

VALENTINE MOTT,

J. D. JAQUES,

N. H. DERING,

WM. JS. MACNEVEN.

The Dr. Samuel L. Mitchill who examined the mummy and further exhorted the public to visit the mummy "without delay" appeared in LDS Church history five years later when Martin Harris took a transcript of some Book of Mormon Egyptian writings to him and to Dr. Charles Anthon hoping to have them authenticated. [^8]

Other Shipments of Mummies

In 1826 two mummies were displayed at Peale's Museum and Gallery of the Fine Arts in New York. One writer explained:

Rubens Peale had two mummies exported directly from Cairo to New York by an Egyptian agent; these were placed on exhibition in Peale's Museum in 1826; and after sixteen days a special attraction announced for the edification of "the scientific and curious" was the partial unwrapping of the mummies "by several of the most respectable physicians of this city . . . in the Lecture Room of Peale's Museum," admission fee 25 cents; "N.B. On this occasion, children cannot be admitted." One of these mummies seems to have suffered from too much handling, but the other, still on exhibition in 1827, might "be viewed by the most delicate female without exciting the smallest disagreeable feeling." [^9]

The article listed several Egyptian antiquities displayed with the mummy, including "an Egyptian Papyrus, well preserved."

Peale's two mummies were probably the fourth shipment of mummies from Egypt. Sixteen years later they were listed in the collection of the great American showman P. T. Barnum. Ac-cording to Dr. John Wilson of the Oriental Institute in Chicago, they were destroyed in an 1865 fire. [^10]

The next known Egyptian mummy in the United States, the fifth shipment documented, was reported in American Museum advertisements that ran in New York's Commercial Advertiser between January 26, 1832, and February 13, 1832:

AMERICAN MUSEUM, Broadway, opposite St. Paul's Church, and near the point of the Park. The public are respectfully informed, that This Evening, and every evening this week, the Grand Cosmorama will present the same pieces embraced in Sacred History, as exhibited on Christmas.

Bones of the Mammoth.—These extraordinary remains will be removed shortly. Those who desire to see them must call instantly.

This Museum is the largest in America—occupies four spacious halls, 100 feet each, besides the largest Cosmorama in the world. Admittance 25 cents.

THIS DAY ADDED:

The Egyptian Mummy, recently received from Thebes, in Egypt. It is a great curiosity and well worthy the attention of every man of science and discernment. This Mummy was taken from one of the most remarkable Catacombs, and is considered to be very old. It is enclosed in its Sarcophagus or Coffin, ornamented with numerous hieroglyphics.11

In the same column beginning February 24, 1832, under the heading "Amusements," the ad for Peale's Museum and Gallery of the Fine Arts also mentioned the mummy:

PEALE'S MUSEUM-And Gallery of the Fine Arts, Broadway, opposite the Park.-This Museum is one of the largest and most extensive in the union, containing the most valuable gallery of portraits of distinguished Americans, besides other valuable paintings by eminent artists. The collections in the departments of Natural History and Miscellaneous Curiosities, including rare works of art and ingenuity, is unrivalled. The Egyptian Mummy is decidedly the finest ever brought to this country, direct from Egypt, with its double coffin, and, without doubt, at least 3000 years old. [^11]

Notice that only one mummy was mentioned in this 1832 advertisement, whereas two were mentioned in 1826.

To match Peale's ad, some five weeks later the Ameri-can Museum enhanced its continuing ad and stated that its Egyptian mummy was "decidedly the most remarkable relic of the art of embalming ever brought to America":

CONTINUATION OF ATTRACTION.—AMERICAN MUSEUM, Broadway, opposite St. Paul's Church. The Egyptian Mummy, recently received from Thebes in Egypt, and upwards of three thousand years old, is decidedly the most remarkable relic of the art of embalming ever brought to America. It is enclosed in its sarcophagus or coffin, and nightly attracts crowds of visitors. The American Museum is by far the largest in America—occupies four large salons, each one hundred feet in length, besides the largest Cosmorama in the world, comprising 100 glasses. Among the wonders exhibiting at this Museum, are the Bones of the Mammoth, and numerous fossil remains recently received in Kentucky. [^12]

As these creative showmen competed for bragging rights and additional revenue, the American Museum seems to have won the competition by announcing on March 12, 1832, a public dissection of its Egyptian mummy:

Public Dissection of the Egyptian Mummy

American Museum, opposite St. Paul's Church

Order and Rules to be observed.

1st. Every gentleman to procure tickets of the lower door keeper.

2d. No gentleman will be allowed to leave his seat on any account.

3d. All questions to be directed to the superintending operator.

4th. No ladies admitted.

After the dissection, the body will remain in state, for the gratification of the curious. Ample arrangements have been made. [^13]

The American Museum had the dissected body "lying in state" for at least ten days, no doubt attracting many to see it. Meanwhile, Peale's Museum continued to advertise its mummy, with its double coffin, as "decidedly the finest ever brought to this country." [^14]

Some who may accept the invitation to challenge the accuracy of this research (and I hope there will be some) will note that because of interest in Egyptian mummies, papyri, and other antiquities in the United States in the 1820s and 1830s, mummies were displayed frequently and in various cities. Initially, it is confusing, when we read of a mummy on display, to know whether it is part of a new collection of antiquities or ones previously mentioned. For example, "Paddy," the first Egyptian mummy in the U.S., was displayed in Boston in May 1823, and in Philadelphia as early as April 1824. [^15]

A mummy was displayed in Springfield, Ohio, on May 1, 1830, according to a report in the Western Pioneer newspaper: "The Mummy which has attracted so much attention throughout the U.S. for many months past is about to be exhibited in this town. From what we have heard, it is well worth the attention of the curious and scientific." Under a picture of the female's sarcophagus, the report explained that "this mummy was brought to this country by captain Turner of Charlestown, Mass. from Trieste at which place it had been received from Thebes." This female is probably one of the two mummies shipped to Boston in the second shipment.

Michael Chandler's Mummy Collection

The eleven mummies in the Chandler collection were, as far as is known, the largest number shipped to the United States up until that time and comprised the sixth shipment of Egyptian mummies arriving in the country.

When Chandler displayed his Egyptian exhibit in Cleveland prior to his arrival in Kirtland, it received considerable publicity in area newspapers. The Cleveland Daily Advertiser published the following news release on March 26, 1835:

EGYPTIAN MUMMIES.—Our limited room will not at present permit an extended description of these remarkable posthumous travellers who are now in this village; but we cannot forbear calling upon those of our citizens who have not seen these ancient specimens of humanity, to visit them before they are removed, which we understand will be in 3 or 4 days. The exhibitor permits as free an examination of them as is consistent with their preservation. Specimens of the ancient method of writing on papyrus, found with the mummies, are also shown by Mr. Chandler, whose intelligent conversation adds much to the interest of the exhibition. The collection is offered for sale by the proprietor. [^16]

These points are significant to note: (1) the mummies and papyrus were freely examined by the patrons, which probably caused some damage to both the mummies and the papyrus; (2) Mr. Chandler seemed informed enough about his exhibit to have the reporter call his narrative "intelligent conversation"; and (3) he was anxious to sell the last four mummies and terminate the transient lifestyle he had been engaged in for the past two years.

A Cleveland Whig reporter who visited the exhibition at Chandler's request reported:

We accepted the invitation of Mr. Chandler to visit last evening his exhibition, just opened at the Cleveland House, of Four Egyptian Mummies, purporting to have been obtained from Thebes, by the celebrated traveller Lobelo [sic]. The announcement of such an exhibition, is very apt to bring with it the suspicion of imposition; as much probably from its rarity in this "back-woods country," as from the state of advancement which has been attained in the arts of humbugery and deception. But we have no hesitation in saying, that a very slight examination of these relics, will convince any one that there is no deception about them, and that there are in truth before him, the bones and sinews, if not the flesh and blood, of four ancient beings of his own race, whose frames have survived the decay of some two thousand years. The relic forms are those of three males and one female [emphasis added]—of mature age, and two of them at least, evidently far advanced in life at the period of their deaths. The first sight of them produces sensations by no means pleasant—but those feelings soon give way to others of a different character, and the more you contemplate them the more interested you become. Curiosity immediately becomes excited; a variety of queries rapidly passes through the mind—which are by no means solved by contemplation. What nation were they of? At what age and where did they live? What were their names? their circumstances? their occupation? Were they slain in battle—or died they a natural death by the "visitation of God?" What was the leading trait in the character of that old man, whose arms repose in a cross over his breast? Has he not truly what the phrenologists call an "intellectual head?" Imagination perhaps is better than science to solve the question. And that female too—the mother of Agamemnon, for aught that appears—her aged head still retains the hair that graced it in youth.—The peculiar features that distinguish the sex in our day, are distinctly preserved in this withered form. This train of thought becomes richer as it advances; and the visitor before he is aware of it, will become absorbed in meditation and awe. There will be no mirth in that hall—or if there is, it will be forced and unnatural. An involuntary feeling of solemnity and awe will reign in its stead. We speak from experience.

The exhibitor will relate and illustrate incidents which add much to the interest of the exhibition. There was found deposited in the arms of the old man referred to above, a book of ancient form and construction, which, to us, was by far the most interesting part of the exhibition. Its leaves were of bark, in length some 10 or 12 inches, and 3 or 4 in width. The ends are somewhat decayed, but at the centre the leaves are in a state of perfect preservation. It is the writing of no ordinary penman, probably of the old man near whose heart it was deposited at the embalming. The characters are the Egyptian hyeroglyphics; but of what it discourses none can tell. That probably, like the name of the author, and of the figure before you, will never be unfolded. There is also another book, more decayed, and much less neatly written—its character and import involved in like mystery. [Emphasis added]

There is no concealment about this exhibition; the spectator is allowed to examine as critically as he pleases; and in this respect it is much more satisfactory than any similar exhibition we ever witnessed. We are not apt to speak favorably of the thousand and one performances and exhibitions with which we are annually afflicted—which have a tendency to excite the worst passions of youth, and lead many into habits of profligacy. But that of which we have been speaking, we consider an exception to their usual character, and tendency. Mr. Chandler will remain at the Cleveland House a few days; and visitors to his interesting exhibition are taxed the moderate fee of 25 cents.

The following lines, ascribed to the poet Campbell, though not new to all our readers, contain some fine points of poetry and sentiment, and are apposite in this connexion:

ADDRESS TO THE MUMMY

In Belzoni's Exhibition, London.

And thou hast walked about, (how strange a story!) In Thebes' streets, three thousand years ago, When the Memnonium was in all its glory, And time had not begun to overthrow Those temples, palaces and piles stupendous Of which the very ruins are tremendous.

Speak! for thou long enough hast acted Dummy. Thou hast a tongue? come let us hear its tune. Thou'rt standing on thy legs above ground, Mummy! Revisiting the glimpses of the moon, Not like thin ghosts or disembodied creatures, But with thy bones and flesh, and limbs and features.

Tell us! for doubtless thou canst recollect, To whom shall we assign the Sphinx's fame? Was Cheops or Cephrenes architect Of either pyramid that bear his name? Is Pompey's pillar really a misnomer? Had Thebes a hundred gates, as sung by Homer?

Perhaps thou art a Mason, and forbidden By oath to tell the mysteries of thy trade: Then say what secret melody was hidden In Memnon's statue, which at sunrise played? Perhaps thou were a Priest. If so, my struggles Are vain—Egyptian priests ne'er owned their juggles.

Perchance that very hand now pinioned flat, Has hob-a-nobbed with Pharaoh, glass for glass, Or dropped a half-penny into Homer's hat, Or doffed thine own to let Queen Dido pass, Or held, by Solomon's own invitation, A torch, at the great Temple's dedication.

I need not ask thee if that hand, when armed, Has any Roman hero mauled and knuckled: For thou wast dead and buried and embalmed, Ere Romulus and Remus had been suckled. Antiquity appears to have begun Long after thy primeval race was run.

Since first thy form was in this box extended, We above ground have seen some strange mutations: The Roman empire has begun and ended; New worlds have risen; we have lost old nations; And countless kings have into dust been humbled, While not a fragment of thy dust has crumbled.

Didst thou not hear the pother o'er thy head, When the great Persian conqueror, Cambyses, Marched armies o'er thy tomb with thundering tread; O'erthrew Osiris, Osus, Apis, Isis, And shook the Pyramids with fear and wonder, When the gigantic Memnon fell asunder?

If the Tomb's secrets may not be confessed, The nature of thy private life unfold. A heart has throbbed beneath that leathern breast, And tears adown that dusky cheek have rolled. Have children climbed those knees, and kissed that face? What was thy name and station, age and race?

Statue of flesh! Immortal of the dead! Imperishable type of evanescence! Posthumous man, who quittest thy native bed, And standest undecayed within our presence, Thou wilt hear nothing, till the judgment morning, When the great trump shall thrill thee with its warning!

Why should this useless tegument endure, If its undying guest be lost forever? Oh let us keep the soul embalmed and pure In living virtue, that when both must sever, Although corruption may our frame consume, The immortal spirit in the skies may bloom. [^17]

Notice that the first record mentioned by the reporter was "a book of ancient form and construction," buried with the old man, and was "the most interesting part of the exhibition." The leaves were of "bark," a reasonable description of papyri, "in length some 10 or 12 inches, and 3 or 4 in width." It sounds as if the reporter were describing some unbound papyri approximately half the width of ordinary 8 1/2" x 11" paper that was stacked. A second book, also identified with the old man, is described as "more decayed" and less "neatly written" than the first. These records were in addition to the rolls that will be discussed later.

The best description known of the four mummies that the Church purchased about three months later comes from the March 27, 1835, edition of the Telegraph in Painesville, a town about thirty miles east of Cleveland. It reads:

Mr. Editor,—The history of the ancients is replete with grandeur & curiosity, and who is there so callous, as not to be excited with sufficient curiosity to traverse with interest, all the dark labyrinths of pagan lore and long gone by usages. History, indeed, calls to mind spirits which have long since been traversing the golden works of the celestial world; but, how much more are we reared to them, when we can commingle with bodies spiritless, who traversed this earth, thousands of years ago, as we now do, possessing passions and wants, ambition, avarice and superstition like ourselves. Could we but look forward beyond the dark curtain of time and see the mighty changes, which will transpire for thousands of years to come, we should be lost in amazement. The past is wonderful although very incomplete; yet we are daily obtaining new light from the researches of scientific antiquarians. The discoveries in the long buried cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii which have been hidden from the world about 1800 years are truly interesting. The habits, manners and customs of those once inhabited cities are plainly inferred from the appearances of the charred dwellings and other edifices for public purposes—their amphitheaters and temples of Isis, holy utensils and baths &c. &c.

But the most interesting of all antique subjects, is the opening of the catacombs of Egypt where human bodies are found in a complete state of preservation or nearly so. How, or by what agency these bodies were preserved, or for what object is wholly an enigma. Many have conjectured that the doctrine of the resurrection was embodied in the Egyptian religious faith, and others again suppose that the practice of embalming their dead originated in their abhorrence to decay—but all is speculation. Curiosity has frequently prompted us to visit and critically examine mummies which were found in the catacombs near Thebes; and to realize that I was viewing one of my own species who had lived like myself and been a member of a community three or four thousand years ago, produced a sensation like that of associating with people of another world.

I received a short description from a friend in Cleveland of four mummies that are now exhibiting in that place which may not be uninteresting to some of your readers. [signed] A Gardner

The reader apparently enclosed the following newspaper article, which his friend had sent him:

Dear Sir: I send you a description of four Mummies, now exhibiting in this place. They were found in June, 1832—three miles from Thebes, 236 feet deep in a catacomb or vault 94 by 18 feet in the clear. Some stone described by the finder 32 ft. long, 8 high and 5 feet wide, evidently belonging to Mount Lebyen, to which there are strong indications of a rail-road. The stone were put together with a cement and exhibited superior workmanship.

Some of the bodies stood in nitches of the wall; a row of bodies, however, laid on the bottom 8 feet deep (reversed,) more or less decayed. This statement of the owner is accompanied by good authority.

No. 1—4 feet 11 inches, female—supposed age 60; arms extended, hands side by side in front; the head indicating motherly goodness. There was found with this person a roll or book, having a little resemblance to birch bark; language unknown. Some linguists however say they can decipher 13-36, in what they term an epitaph; ink black and red; many female figures. [Emphasis added]

No. 2—Height 5 ft. 1 1-2 inch; female; supposed age 40. Arms suspended by the side; hands brought in contact; head damaged by accident; found with roll as No. 1, filled with hieroglyphics, rudely executed. [Emphasis added]

No. 3.—Heighth 4 ft. 4 1-2.—Male, very old, say 80; arms crossing on the breast, each hand on its opposite shoulder; had a roll of writing as No. 1 & 2; superior head, it will compare in the region of the sentiments with any in our land; passions mild. [Emphasis added]

No. 4.—Height 4 ft. 9; female. I am inclined to put her age at about 20 or 25, others call her an old woman; arms extended, hands by her side; auburn hair, short as girls at present in their new fashion. Found with her a braid of hair, three stran[d]s of the color of that on her head and 18 inches long. The head approximates to the form of the Orang Outang. The occipital and bazillar region very large; the head indicating a person of the lowest grade of human beings. Slander, fight, and devotion to the passions were undoubtedly peculiar traits in her character. They were enveloped in linnen saturated with gum, the qualities of which are not well understood. A thousand yards are supposed to be used on each body; 186 thicknesses have been counted on one of them. They are covered so as to preserve the exact form of the body and limbs. No. 3 and 4; the envelope is mostly stripped off; on 1 and 2 it is some broken. No. 1, fine linnen; No. 2, coarse; No. 3, very coarse; No. 4, very fine. The bodies evidently were reduced before winding. The man, No. 3, whose cerebral organization indicates a mind able to guide the destinies of a nation, is enveloped in the poorest and coarsest linnen, while the woman, No. 4, whose head indicates a disposition which may well be represented as the demon of society, was in the most careful manner enveloped in the finest of linnen and with a much greater proportion of gum. Is not this circumstance an intimation to us that rank was not according to merit—that superiority in station did not follow from superiority of mind, but from extraneous circumstances.

It is interesting to observe in these individuals the external indications of disposition which at this day build up and pull down society; that these relics of another and unknown age were once animated with life, and actuated by passions, hopes and fears, as we now are. How pleasing to contemplate that aged man, by rules that will not deceive, in the active exercise of those sentimental powers of the mind from which the hope of immortality springs. In such minds there is light—in such minds a nation will find prosperity, and society an anchor. But how sad to contemplate the history of that young female (No. 4)—revenge and hate indignant frown upon her brow.

The love of property is not indicated on either of their heads as being in any proportion as strong as with us. Did they not hold property in common? and is not this remark applicable to Indians? [signed] FARMER. [^18]

Several points are significant in this long article.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Deity—three persons, yet in one HC 2:236.
[^2] The Creation HC 2:238.
[^3] Satan's influence in the Garden of Eden HC 2:286.
[^4] The fall of man "Grammar and Alphabet of the Egyptian Language," second part, 1 degree. Transcript and copies of the original available in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^5] Enoch's pillar (specifically the planetary system) HC 5:63.
[^6] Virtuous descendants of Seth HC 2:287.
[^7] Mighty acts of the ancient men of God HC 2:289.
[^8] Final judgment under Christ HC 2:311.
[^9] Michael the archangel holding the key of the bottomless pit HC 2:321.
[^10] The devil at judgment confined to the bottomless pit HC 2:334.
[^11] HC 2:396.
[^12] HC 2:347.
[^13] HC 2:520-21.
[^14] Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 53.
[^15] "Another Humbug," Cleveland Whig, July 31, 1835.
[^16] Cincinnati Journal and Western Luminary, August 25, 1836, 4.
[^17] Leah Y. Phelps, "Letters of Faith from Kirtland," Improvement Era 45 (1942): 529.
[^18] Benjamin Johnson Journal, 2, in Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
