H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

10

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCJoseph Smith and the Sacred Papyri

Shortly after the Latter-day Saints in Kirtland, Ohio, purchased the mummies and papyri the first week of July 1835 from Michael H. Chandler, Joseph Smith, assisted by scribes W. W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery, "commenced the translation of some of the characters or hieroglyphics." He wrote: "Much to our joy found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt, etc.,—a more full account of which will appear in its place, as I proceed to examine or unfold them. Truly we can say, the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth." [^1]

The Egyptian records occupied much of Joseph's time during the rest of July 1835. His history states: "The remainder of this month, I was continually engaged in translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the ancients." [^2]

Pressing Church matters, including a three-week visit to Michigan, prevented him from returning to the papyri for the next two months. His next journal entry relative to the translation reads: "October 1.—This afternoon I labored on the Egyptian alphabet, in company with Brothers Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps, and during the research, the principles of astronomy as understood by Father Abraham and the ancients unfolded to our understanding, the particulars of which will appear hereafter." [^3]

How much the Lord revealed to these brethren is, of course, unknown, but we can draw some tentative conclusions from this journal entry. From the text of the Book of Abraham we see that the principles of astronomy as understood by Abraham and some of his predecessors is alluded to in chapters three through five. Joseph and his scribes were being introduced to a new "Egyptian grammar." It appears that new words and meanings were being revealed that were not in the Egyptian writings comprising the text of the Book of Mormon, such as Kolob, Shinehah, Kokob, Olea, Kokaubeam, Oliblish, Enish-go-on-dosh, Kae-e-vanrash, Kli-flos-is-es, and Hah Ko-kau-beam.

The Prophet wrote during this study that two prophets, Methuselah and Abraham, had been invited by the Lord to see things relative to the planetary system that no other prophets had been allowed to know. An entry in the Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar under "Kolob in the first degree" reads: "It signifies the first great governing fixed star which is the fartherest that ever has been discovered by the fathers which was discovered by Methusela and also by Abraham." [^4]

In the text of the Book of Abraham, Abraham recorded that "the records of the fathers, even the patriarchs" had come into his possession. Therefore he had "a knowledge of the beginning of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars, as they were made known unto the fathers," and he would write about some of these things "for the benefit of my posterity that shall come after me." (Abraham 1:31.)

The source of Abraham's profound knowledge of astron-omy was not solely confined to the records he inherited from previous prophets. In Abraham 3:1-2 he explained: "And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; and I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it." Abraham's knowledge of the endless creations of God was broadened even more when the great Creator of heaven and earth himself appeared to him and personally showed and explained to him some of His magnificent handiwork. (See Abraham 3:11-5:21.)

That vision of October 1, 1835, had a great influence on Joseph Smith's understanding. Like Abraham, who said that he would share some of the truths that he knew of the creation (Abraham 1:31), Joseph referred to these Egyptian writings seven years later as he taught the Saints in Nauvoo: "The learning of the Egyptians, and their knowledge of astronomy was no doubt taught them by Abraham and Joseph, as their records testify, who received it from the Lord." [^5] He did not share full particulars of what he learned of the planetary system from the papyri.

A question remains: Joseph Smith was the first prophet of this dispensation and foreordained to restore all the significant truths of the past. (See Acts 3:19-21.) Did he, like Abraham, also have a vision of the principles of astronomy?

On October 3, 1835, most of the Twelve Apostles were at Joseph's house when he "exhibited to them the ancient records, and gave explanations." "This day," he added, "passed off with the blessing of the Lord." [^6] His scribe at the time, W. W. Phelps, a gifted poet and writer, was inflamed with these new truths that expanded his understanding of the planetary system and man's eternal nature, and wrote his powerful poem "If You Could Hie to Kolob" (Hymns, no. 284):

If you could hie to Kolob In the twinkling of an eye, And then continue onward With that same speed to fly, Do you think that you could ever, Through all eternity, Find out the generation Where Gods began to be?

Or see the grand beginning, Where space did not extend? Or view the last creation, Where Gods and matter end? Methinks the Spirit whispers, "No man has found 'pure space,' Nor seen the outside curtains, Where nothing has a place."

The works of God continue, And worlds and lives abound; Improvement and progression Have one eternal round. There is no end to matter; There is no end to space; There is no end to spirit; There is no end to race.

There is no end to virtue; There is no end to might; There is no end to wisdom; There is no end to light. There is no end to union; There is no end to youth; There is no end to priesthood; There is no end to truth.

There is no end to glory; There is no end to love; There is no end to being; There is no death above. There is no end to glory; There is no end to love; There is no end to being; There is no death above.

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCThe Prophet Continues Translating

On the afternoon of October 7, 1835, Joseph Smith "re-commenced translating the ancient records." [^7] The next journal entry that refers to the papyri is on October 29, 1835, when he hired Warren Parrish to serve as his secretary. In a revelation through Joseph to Warren Parrish, the Lord declared: "Inasmuch as he [Warren] will continue to hearken unto my voice, he shall be blessed with wisdom, and with a sound mind, even above his fellows. . . . He shall see great things show forth themselves unto my people; he shall see much of my ancient records, and shall know of hidden things, and shall be endowed with a knowledge of hidden languages; and if he desire and shall seek it at my hands, he shall be privileged with writing much of my word, as a scribe unto me for the benefit of my people." [^8]

Joseph recorded in his journal many days spent in translating the records that fall and winter, [^9]including November 19, 20, 24, and 25. On November 26, he and his scribe continued working, though they were both "severely afflicted with a cold." The next day, they administered to each other and, according to the Prophet's journal, "we were both relieved." [^10]

Three brethren—William E. McLellin, Brigham Young, and Jared Carter—called on the Prophet on December 16. "I exhibited and explained the Egyptian records to them," he wrote, "and explained many things concerning the dealing of God with the ancients, and the formation of the planetary system." [^11]

All of these events transpired within the first six months that Joseph Smith had possession of the Egyptian records. Greater demands on his time apparently kept him from returning to the translation for more than six years.

The care of the mummies and papyri were turned over on February 17, 1836, to Joseph Coe, who made arrangements to hire a room at John Johnson's inn where they might be exhib-ited for a fee so that "some benefit may be derived from them." The Prophet admonished him, however, to manage them "with prudence and care, especially the manuscripts."11

By August 1836 the papyri had been moved to the Kirtland Temple, where the west room on the top floor was designated by the Prophet as a room he intended to occupy for a translation room. [^12] About fifteen months later, on November 2, 1837, "the Church in Kirtland voted to sanction the appointment of Brother Phinehas Richards and Reuben Hedlock, by the Presidency, to translate business for the Church in procuring means to translate and print the records taken from the Catacombs of Egypt, then in the Temple." [^13] Joseph Smith at that time was in Far West, Missouri, on Church business. This is the last entry in the History of the Church about the writings of Abraham and Joseph while the Church was headquartered at Kirtland.

The Church Displays the Mummies

After Michael H. Chandler sold the mummies and papyri to the Church, both members and nonmembers alike continued to be attracted to this most unusual exhibit in the isolated frontier setting of Kirtland, Ohio.

The mummies and papyri were not always kept together. On October 24, 1835, a Mr. Goodrich and his wife called on Joseph Smith to see the "antient [sic] [Egyptian] Records also called at Doct. F. G. Williams to see the mummies." [^14]

The Cleveland Whig confirmed that President Frederick G. Williams of the First Presidency had jurisdiction over the mummies:

CLEVELAND. July 31.—Another Humbug.—We are credibly informed that the Mormons have purchased of Mr. Chandler, three of the mummies which he recently exhibited in this village; and that the prophet Joe has ascertained, by examining the papyrus through his spectacles, that they are the bodies of Joseph, (the son of Abraham,) and king Abimelech and his daughter. With this shallow and contemptible story, Williams has commenced travelling about the country, and will, no doubt, gull multitudes into a belief of its truth. Surely one half of the world are fools.—Whig.15

A Cincinnati paper also spoke of the exhibition of the mummies by "one of their apostles":

Last summer a man came to Kirtland and brought [among] the Mormons four Egyptian mummies. The exhibition exactly struck their fancy. All the Mormons flocked to see the wonderful sight; and Joseph deciphered some of the hieroglyphics, and made known in writing the name and character and antiquity of some of the mummies;—this was an additional proof of his divine inspiration. The man continued with them a week; and then a command was given them to purchase the whole, which they did for $2400. The mummies were soon sent out for exhibition by one of their apostles, but being unsuccessful, he brought them back to Kirtland, and threw them aside. There is reason to believe, that many who come here with high expectations, have met with sore disappointment. [^15]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCSome Reactions to the Antiquities

A number of Latter-day Saints wrote about the Chandler collection in letters and diaries. Among them were the following.

W. W. Phelps, writing to his wife, stated that Joseph Smith said the rolls of papyrus "contained the sacred record kept of Joseph in Pharaoh's court in Egypt and the teachings of Father Abraham. God has so ordered it that these mummies and writings have been brought into the Church. . . . These records of old times . . . will make a good witness for the Book of Mormon. There is nothing secret or hidden that shall not be revealed, and they come to the Saints." [^16]

Benjamin Johnson wrote in his life story: "And when the writings of Abraham upon papyrus, which accompanied them were taken from its ancient casket, it seemed marvelous indeed. And all rejoiced when the Prophet told us these writings would be translated." [^17]

Stephen Post reported in his journal: "Mon 4. This A.M. I saw the writings of Abraham & Joseph that came with the mummies." [^18]

Caroline Crosby reported that her brother Horace Barnes visited Kirtland and saw "Father [Joseph] Smith, [Sr.] and Emma [Smith], who showed him the records of Abraham, that were found with the mummies." [^19]

John Whitmer, one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon, wrote in his journal: "After this [Chandler's] exhibition Joseph the Seer saw these records and by the revelations of Jesus Christ could translate these words which gave an account of our forefathers. Much of which was written by Joseph of Egypt who was sold by his brethren, which when all translated will be a pleasing history and of great value to the Saints." [^20]

John Corrill, who published a history of the Church in 1839, wrote: "In the summer of 1835, they purchased three or four Egyptian Mummies, with an ancient Egyptian record, written on papyrus, a part of which Smith professed to translate, making it out to be the writing of Abraham." [^21]

Wilford Woodruff, who had been away from Kirtland for several months, wrote about a visit to the temple: "We then visited the upper rooms & there viewed four Egyptian mummies & also the Book of Abram [Abraham] written by his own hand & not only the hieroglyphics but also many figures that this precious treasure contains are calculated to make a lasting impression upon the mind which is not to be erased. Many other important views I was privileged with in the upper story the school rooms, belfry &c. all indicating great architecture & wisdom." [^22]

Other sources could be cited, but these quotations are sufficient to indicate that according to teachings of early Church leaders, the ancient Egyptian records contained the writings of the patriarchs Abraham and Joseph.

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCWhat Did the Papyrus Records Contain?

Within three months after the scrolls were purchased, Joseph Smith had translated, or at least was aware of, the contents of chapters 3, 4, and 5 of the Book of Abraham, which chapters contain information on the planetary system. The first two chapters contained an account of highlights of Abraham's life story in Ur of the Chaldees and in Haran and the beginning of his journey from Haran to Egypt. This is the entire Book of Abraham presently printed in our scriptures.

But the Book of Abraham contained much more material than is presently in the Pearl of Great Price, and the Book of Joseph was never published. Oliver Cowdery wrote about the Egyptian records in an 1835 letter to William Frye. In this letter, which was printed in the Messenger and Advocate in December 1835, we have Oliver's impression of some of the unpublished contents of the books of Joseph and Abraham:

The language in which this record is written is very comprehensive, and many of the hieroglyphics exceedingly striking. The evidence is apparent upon the face, that they were written by persons acquainted with the history of the creation, the fall of man, and more or less of the correct ideas of notions of the Deity. The representation of the god-head—three, yet in one, is curiously drawn to give simply, though impressively, the writers views of that exalted personage. The serpent, represented as walking, or formed in a manner to be able to walk, standing in front of, and near a female figure, is to me, one of the greatest representations I have ever seen upon paper, or a writing substance; and must go so far towards convincing the rational mind of the correctness and divine authority of the holy scriptures, and especially that part which has ever been assailed by the infidel community, as being a fiction, as to carry away, with one mighty sweep, the whole atheistical fabric, without leaving a vestage sufficient for a foundation stone.

Enoch's Pillar, as mentioned by Josephus, is upon the same roll.—True, our present version of the bible does not mention this fact, though it speaks of the righteousness of Abel and the holiness of Enoch,—one slain because his offering was ac-cepted of the Lord, and the other taken to the regions of everlasting day without being confined to the narrow limits of the tomb, or tasting death; but Josephus says that the descendants of Seth were virtuous, and possessed a great knowledge of the heavenly bodies, and, that, in consequence of the prophecy of Adam, that the world should be destroyed once by water and again by fire, Enoch wrote a history or an account of the same, and put into two pillars one of brick and the other of stone; and that the same were in being at his (Josephus') day.

The inner end of the same roll, (Joseph's record,) presents a representation of the judgment: At one view you behold the Savior seated upon his throne, crowned, and holding the sceptres of righteousness and power, before whom also, are assembled the twelve tribes of Israel, the nations, languages and tongues of the earth, the kingdoms of the world over which satan is represented as reigning. Michael the archangel, holding the key of the bottomless pit, and at the same time the devil as being chained and shut up in the bottomless pit. But upon this last scene, I am able only to give you a shadow, to the real picture. I am certain it cannot be viewed without filling the mind with awe, unless the mind is far estranged from God: and I sincerely hope, that mine may never go so far estray, nor wander from those rational principles of the doctrine of our Savior, so much, as to become darkened in the least, and thereby fail to have that, to us, the greatest of all days, and the most sublime of all transactions, so impressively fixed upon the heart, that I become not like the beast, not knowing whither I am going, nor what shall be my final end!

I might continue my communication to a great length upon the different figures and characters represented upon the two rolls, but I have no doubt my subject has already become sufficiently prolix for your patience: I will therefore soon cease for the present.—When the translation of these valuable documents will be completed, I am unable to say; neither can I give you a probable idea how large volumes they will make; but judging from their size, and the comprehensiveness of the language, one might reasonably expect to see a sufficient to develop much upon the mighty acts of the ancient men of God, and of his dealing with the children of men when they saw him face to face. Be there little or much, it must be an in-estimable acquisition to our present scriptures, fulfilling, in a small degree, the word of the prophet: For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. [^23]

From this report on the unpublished content of the ancient writings, several doctrinal themes emerge:

The Egyptian Scrolls and the Temple Ceremony

Facsimile 2 in the Book of Abraham, together with Oliver Cowdery's explanation of the contents of the book of Joseph, seem to have relevance with regard to the temple ceremony, about which Elder James E. Talmage wrote as follows:

The Temple Endowment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the period of the great apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements.

As will be shown, the temples erected by the Latter-day Saints provide for the giving of these instructions in separate rooms, each devoted to a particular part of the course; and by this provision it is possible to have several classes under instruction at one time.

The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity, to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation that the earth may be made ready to receive her King,—the Lord Jesus Christ. With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions.

No jot, iota, or tittle of the temple rites is otherwise than uplifting and sanctifying. In every detail the endowment ceremony contributes to covenants of morality of life, consecration of person to high ideals, devotion to truth, patriotism to nation, and allegiance to God. The blessings of the House of the Lord are restricted to no privileged class; every member of the Church may have admission to the temple with the right to participate in the ordinances thereof, if he comes duly accredited as of worthy life and conduct. [^24]

The writings of Abraham and Joseph were purchased by the Church in July 1835 and the partial endowment was introduced to the brethren by the Prophet Joseph Smith in January 1836. Is this merely coincidental? Elder Bruce R. McConkie, referring to temple ordinances, wrote, "They were given in modern times to the prophet Joseph Smith by revelation, many things connected with them being translated by the Prophet from the papyrus on which the Book of Abraham was recorded." [^25]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Milton V. Backman, The Heavens Resound (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), 310-11.
[^2] Ibid., 328.
[^3] Oliver Huntington Autobiography, electronic version of journal in Milton V. Backman and Keith W. Perkins, comp., Writings of Early Latter-day Saints and Their Contemporaries (Orem, Utah: Infobases, Inc., 1992).
[^4] Journal History, Church Historical Department.
[^5] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), 247.
[^6] Hepzibah L. Richards, 1838 Letters in Godfrey and Derr, Women's Voices, 72.
[^7] Jay M. Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham, 203.
[^8] Personal letter from Hazel B. Roese of the Royal Oak Ward, Detroit Stake, to Jay M. Todd. Undated (about 1970).
[^9] A History of William Huntington written by Himself—January 1855, BYU Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library.
[^10] "Prominent Mormon Women," Deseret News, Church Section, November 30, 1963, as quoted by David Henry Jacobs, Utah State Historical Society Seminar, Weber State College, Winter 1977.
[^11] Lucy Mack Smith, 217-18.
[^12] Samuel A. Woolley Autobiography, p. 3, in Backman and Perkins, Writings of Early Latter-day Saints.
[^13] William I. Appleby journal in Backman and Perkins, Writings of Early Latter-day Saints.
[^14] Duane D. Call, "Anson Call and His Contributions Toward Latter-Day Saint Colonization" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1956), 32-33.
[^15] See James R. Clark, "Joseph Smith and the Lebolo Egyptian Papyri," BYU Studies 8 (Winter 1968): 200.
[^16] William Swartzell, Mormonism Exposed, Being a Journal of a Residence in Missouri (Pekin, Ohio, 1840), 9.
[^17] Ibid., 25.
[^18] Benjamin Johnson Journal, 2, in Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
[^19] Stephen Post Journal, in Archives Division, Church Historical Department. 1304 Box 6, Folder 1, April 4, 1836.
[^20] Caroline Crosby Journal in Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, ed. Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), 52.
[^21] F. Mark McKiernan and Roger D. Launius, eds., An Early Latter Day Saint History: The Book of John Whitmer (Independence, Mo.: Herald Publishing House, 1980), 147-48.
[^22] John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ Latter-Day Saints (Commonly Called Mormons) (St. Louis, 1839), 3.
[^23] Dean C. Jessee, "The Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," BYU Studies 12, no. 4 (Summer 1972): 371.
[^24] Oliver Cowdery, "Egyptian Mummies—Ancient Records," Messenger and Advocate 2 (December 1835): 236.
[^25] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1962), 99-101.
