H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

11

Chaos in Kirtland

It appears that the Lord smiled upon the Saints in Kirtland in their early years as they struggled and sacrificed to expand their growing city, establish a holy people, and build a temple unto the Most High. They were led by a prophet, to whom the Lord had frequently spoken to guide him in this new gospel dispensation. Sacred writings, older than any previously known, had been brought to the Church for their guidance and confirmed to them that the Lord was continuously mindful of his children.

The temple was dedicated March 27, 1836, and during that week the Savior himself appeared within its sacred walls, along with the ancient prophets Moses, Elias, and Elijah, to ratify its divine acceptance. Many faithful Latter-day Saints saw and heard glorious heavenly manifestations during that season of rejoicing. Temple ordinances were introduced to the leaders for the edification and learning of the faithful. The members must have identified with the Nephites during the first years of their mini-millennium when their prophet Nephi wrote: "They were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God. And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings." (4 Nephi 1:17-18.)

Sadly, the jubilation was but momentary. Historian Milton V. Backman explained the dilemma:

The year following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple saw a spirit of pride, selfishness, disaffection, and apostasy sweep through the quorums of the Church. In the summer of Their apostate actions, he declared, would destroy their authority, cut the thread that bound them to the Prophet and to God, and lead them to destruction. Many of the disgruntled members, enraged at Elder Young's efforts to thwart their recommendations, threatened to resolve the conflict with physical blows. The meeting finally ended without agreement on a course of action. According to Elder Young, "The knees of many of the strongest men in the Church faltered."

On another occasion during this turbulent period, Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, and other dissidents entered the temple on a Sabbath morning armed with pistols and bowie knives and sat in the Aaronic Priesthood pulpits at the east end. Shortly after the morning service began, the men interrupted the meeting in what Eliza R. Snow, who witnessed the interruption, called a "fearful scene." Drawing their pistols and knives, the dissidents rushed from the stand into the congregation and attempted to gain control of the building. Amid great confusion and with screams of alarm, some persons tried to escape by jumping out the windows. Local officials were summoned, and finally, with the assistance of the police, members of the congregation succeeded in removing the belligerents from the temple. Though no one was injured, the incident was another in a disrupting chain of events leading to the expulsion of the Saints from Kirtland just a few months later. [^1]

Space does not permit a detailed account of all the problems facing the Kirtland Saints, as it takes us away from the central theme of this work, but it does appear to have been the "worst of times" for those leaders who had dared to hope and dream of what might have been.

Dr. Backman named some of the prominent leaders who stumbled and fell and the great impact that had on the few thousand Kirtland Saints. To keep things in perspective, one is reminded that today there are many stakes in the Church that are numerically larger than the entire membership of the Church in Kirtland in 1837 and 1838. Dr. Backman reported:

Between November 1837 and June 1838, possibly two or three hundred Kirtland Saints withdrew from the Church, representing from 10 to 15 percent of the membership there. Many of the apostates had served in major positions of responsibility. During a nine-month period, almost one-third of the General Authorities were excommunicated, disfellowshipped, or removed from their Church callings. Among those who left the Church during this stormy period were the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon (Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris), four apostles (John F. Boynton, Lyman E. Johnson, Luke S. Johnson, and William E. McLellin), three of the original presidents of the First Quorum of Seventies (Hazen Aldrich, Leonard Rich, and Sylvester Smith), and two of the presidents of the seventies who were serving in 1837 (John Gould and John Gaylord). One president of the seventies (Salmon Gee) was disfellowshipped, and one member of the First Presidency (Frederick G. Williams) was released from his calling. Although some of these leaders were not excommunicated until after they had moved to Missouri, the roots of their apostasy stem back to transgressions that occurred in Kirtland. (Almost half of those who were excommunicated, disfellowshipped, or dropped from their positions of responsibility in 1837 or 1838 later repented and returned to the Church.) [^2]

The Mummies Are in Danger

Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, and Sidney Rigdon fled from Kirtland the night of January 12, 1838, and moved to Missouri to escape the violence of the apostates. A faithful member reported that "immediately upon their departure persecution commenced with an iron hand. It was the life and glory of the apostates to hatch up vexatious lawsuits and strip the brethren of their property and means of removing. It seemed as though all power was given them to torment the saints." [^3]

On January 15, 1838, John Smith wrote to his son George A. Smith about the fanatacism of some of the apostates: "I mentioned to you in my last [letter] that many had deserted from the Church and they are striving to destroy with a great deal more zeal than they did ever to build up."4

Nearly two millennia earlier, the prophet Mormon had observed the same degree of intensity of hatred among some apostates once they had forfeited the Spirit of the Lord: "And thus we can plainly discern that after a people have been once enlightened by the Spirit of God, and have had great knowledge of things pertaining to righteousness, and then have fallen away into sin and transgression, they become more hardened, and thus their state becomes worse than though they had never known these things." (Alma 24:30.)

Once apostates have forsaken the fountain of truth that brought peace and understanding to their souls, they seem to be unable to find solace and peace in any man-made organization. As a result, they can either repent and return to God or they remain embittered and openly rebel against the Lord, his gospel, and his people.

The Prophet's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, reported: "Their first movement was to sue Joseph for debt, and, with this pretense, seize upon every piece of property belonging to any of the family. Joseph then had in his possession four Egyptian mummies, with some ancient records that accompanied them. These the mob swore they would take, and then burn every one of them. Accordingly, they obtained an execution upon them for an unjust debt of fifty dollars; but, by various stratagems, we succeeded in keeping them out of their hands." [^4]

The enemies of the Church had the antiquities in their possession for a short time. Hepzibah Richards, writing from Kirtland on January 18, 1838, to her brother Willard, serving his second mission for the Church in England, confirmed that "the mummies and records have been attacked. Mummies sold—Records missing." [^5]

Warren Parrish, formerly the Prophet's personal secretary, was one of the apostate instigators who seized the mummies and the papyrus. The Western Reserve Chronicle reported on January 30, 1838, the following:

TROUBLE AMONG THE MORMONS.—We learn from a source to be relied on, that the Mormon Society at Kirtland is breaking up. Smith and Rigdon, after prophecying the destruction of the town, left with their families in the night, and others of the faithful are following. The Reformers' are in possession of the Temple, and have excluded the Smith and Rigdon party. An exposure of the proceedings of the Society is in course of preparation by one [Warren] Parish, the former confidential secretary of the prophet Smith. He has the records, &c., in his possession.—Cleveland Herald and Gazette.

Jay Todd mentioned in his book The Saga of the Book of Abraham that a legal "execution" had been made upon the papyri. Part of the document that was missing was discovered in 1968 by the Reverend Wesley P. Walters in Marissa, Illinois. It reads: "I convey the two undivided thirds of records of and box Exclusive of the mummies." The document, dated January 4, 1838, was signed by Joseph Smith Jr. and attested to by John P. Markele and Nicholas Markele.

The next page of the document states: "I do hereby relinquish on the box and records which James Markell has Levied in my favor as the property of J. Smith Jr. and my claim on the same. Kirtland Jan. 4th 1838." It was signed Nicholas Markele and attested to by John P. Markele. [^6]

On the front of the document are the words "Article of Agreement Between Joseph Smith Jun. and Joseph Smith Sr."

Todd's book prompted a reader to write and clarify how the Church leaders, as Lucy Mack Smith said, "by various stratagems . . . succeeded in keeping them out of [the apostates'] hands." Mrs. Hazel B. Roese, writing from Ferndale, Michigan, explained that there "were three brothers, John P. Markell was my g. grandfather, [and] Nicholas and James were his younger brothers. My beloved g. grandfather was 'Judge John Phillip Markell.' The Markell family including their father Peter Markell were very close friends of Joseph Smith. Knowing the story as I have read it and remember my grandfather P. Henry Booth relating it to me. Some one, if I remember correctly, related to Joseph Coe got the Records (Papyrus) and these Markells of mine were foxey enough to conn this fellow out of them. It seems he owed Judge Markell some money and Uncle James was deputized to help retrieve the records. It was quite a joke in the family." [^7]

Removing the Mummies and Manuscripts from Kirtland

Though the antiquities had been wrested from the hands of the apostates, they obviously were not safe in Kirtland. William Huntington wrote of those perilous times:

Many of the leading Elders apostatized and turned against the Prophet seeking to take his life, but God warned him to rise up by night and depart for Missouri which he did and as fast as possible all the faithful followed, and those who could not do so but were forced to stay another winter were hunted, harassed, robbed and mobbed by apostates and among that number I was one although at the same time my house was a hiding place for old father Joseph Smith his sons Carlos and Samuel and many others. In my house the mummies and Egyptian Records were hid to keep from sworn destruction by apostates." [^8]

The Huntington family found a unique hiding place for the four mummies. Zina, William Huntington's teenage daughter, had some very unusual roommates:

Candle in hand, Zina opened the door of her dark bedroom. In the dim light, she could see the four black shapes protruding from under the big, hand-carved wooden bed. They were the sarcophagi, each containing the mummified body of an ancient Egyptian—enough to frighten the sleep out of any teenage youngster.

But Zina was not to be frightened by a few mummies, Egyptian or otherwise. She set her candlestick down on the chest of drawers, matter-of-factly dressed for bed and went to sleep wondering if the permanent sleepers beneath her had been nobles or kings or just ordinary folk like herself.

The four sarcophagi had been placed in the Huntington home for safekeeping. Apostates and other enemies of the Church in Kirtland, Ohio were attempting to attach all Church property.

To protect the mummies from seizure, they were removed from the temple and stored under Zina's bed. These were the mummies purchased by the Church along with the hieroglyphic manuscript of the Book of Abraham. [^9]

William Huntington soon found that he could neither live in his home nor sell his farm "because of the dishonesty of Mr. Bump who was one of the dissenters." Through the loan of a yoke of cattle from one friend and another loan of thirty-two dollars, the family fled Kirtland to go to Missouri. The father, William, walked and drove the ox team the distance of nearly one thousand miles. Before the Huntingtons left Kirtland, the mummies and the papyrus scrolls were turned over to another family.

Members of the Edwin Woolley family, who lived in Rochester, Ohio, had heard missionaries preach, and several were persuaded of the truthfulness of their message. In late 1837, in order to satisfy himself about Mormonism, Edwin traveled to Kirtland, eighty-five miles from Rochester, to meet Joseph Smith. At the time Kirtland was in chaos, and for his safety, the Prophet had left town. However, Edwin did learn the whereabouts of the Prophet's father, Joseph Smith Sr., who was then staying with the Huntingtons in New Portage, Ohio. Lucy Mack Smith recalled what happened:

A man by the name of Edward [sic] Woolley came to Kirtland to see Mr. Smith; not finding him there, he went to New Portage, and persuaded my husband to accompany him home.

After Mr. Smith had been at this gentleman's residence about two weeks, we became very uneasy about him; and, as we did not know at that time whither he had gone, William [Lucy's son] set out in pursuit of him, in order to learn, if possible, whether he had met with friends, and was well pro-vided for, or had fallen into the hands of his enemies, and been murdered, for we had as much reason to apprehend the latter calamity, as to hope for the former good fortune.

It was some time after William arrived at New Portage, before he could ascertain where my husband had gone. But as soon as he did receive the desired information he proceeded to Edward Woolley's, where he found his father in good health, but extremely anxious about the family. [^10]

When Joseph Smith Sr. left for Edwin Woolley's home in Rochester, Edwin's brother recorded, he "hired a wagon to bring the mummies and the Record of Abraham, etc." [^11] He stayed with the Woolleys for part of the winter before returning home.

Were the Mummies and Records Taken to Missouri?

The location of the Egyptian antiquities for the next year or two is uncertain. William I. Appleby stated in his journal that the mummies and papyrus were purchased in Kirtland for $2,400, and then "from Kirtland they were removed to Nauvoo." [^12] However, all other references located contradict this statement, including the following experience told about Anson Call:

After settling his family on his farm at Three Forks and prior to September, 1838, Anson made a business trip to Far West, Missouri, where he had an opportunity to visit with the Prophet Joseph Smith and receive information concerning the translations of the Book of Abraham and the work the Prophet was doing in revising the Bible. Anson writes:

"While at Far West I happened in John Corl's [Corrill's] or the church store and my attention was called by Vincent Knights who was opening some boxes of goods. Says he, 'Joseph will be much pleased with these. ['] He had been very uneasy about the translation of the Bible and the Egyptian Records. Here they are, placing them on the table. Said he to me, 'If you will take one of these, I will the other and we will carry them over to Joseph's office.' There we found Joseph and six or seven other brethren. Joseph was much pleased with the arrival of the books, and said to us 'Sit down and we will read to you from the translations of the Book of Abraham.' Oliver Cowdery then read until he was tired when Thomas Marsh read making altogether about two hours. I was much interested in the work." [^13]

This entry contains several valuable insights except for one problem: Oliver Cowdery was not in good standing in the Church in 1838 and would not have been in such a gathering by September 1838. Apparently Anson Call confused Oliver Cowdery's name with that of another person when he recorded this episode.

Samuel Woolley, in a diary entry in 1838, claims the distinction of helping to transport the mummies and papyrus from Kirtland to Far West, Missouri, when the Church's headquarters were moved there. [^14] He was the last person to care for the an-tiquities while they remained in Ohio.

William Swartzell, the author of an anti-Mormon pamphlet, made the following entry on May 24, 1838, as he traveled about the state of Missouri: "Stayed at Richmond Landing this evening. This is the place where the Mormons land their goods for transportation across the country. I saw there Joseph Smith's box of mummys." [^15]

Exactly what he meant is unknown. Was there only one box? And did it contain one mummy or all four mummies? And/or did it contain the papyrus and other antiquities?

On July 26, 1838, the same critic wrote: "Doing nothing to-day, except looking at the hands employed in getting out logs for brother Joseph Smith's house, in which he intends translating the hieroglyphics of the Egyptian mummies." [^16]

142The Missouri period in Church history was not a time to meditate and ponder the scriptures and translate the words of the prophets. Sadly, it was a time of combating corrupt politicians, irate neighbors, rapine, murder, a governmental "extermination order," false arrests and imprisonments, and general unrest. Whether all four mummies and the entire papyrus collection were in Missouri or not is difficult to determine, since very few records exist that mention them at all. The Nauvoo period would provide that necessary but temporary respite to allow the Prophet to return to the scrolls and prepare some for publication.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] William Edwin Berrett, The Restored Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961), 149.
[^2] Ibid., 150.
[^3] "Kirtland Council Minute Book," November 5, 1837, typescript, 259, in Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
[^4] [Nauvoo High Council Minute Book], 60-62, Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] HC 4:184-87.
[^7] HC 4:402-3.
[^8] HC 4:503.
[^9] Ebenezer Robinson, "Valedictory," Times and Seasons 3 (February 15, 1842): 695-96.
[^10] Joseph Smith, "To Subscribers," Times and Seasons 3 (February 15, 1842): 696.
[^11] Wilford Woodruff's Journal: 1833-1898, typescript, ed. Scott G. Kenney (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1983), entry dated February 19, 1842.
[^12] HC 4:517-18.
[^13] Joseph Smith Collection, "Letters of 1842," Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
[^14] Times and Seasons 3:710.
[^15] HC 4:519.
[^16] HC 4:542.
