H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

12

The Book of Abraham Is Published

When the penniless Latter-day Saints were forced to leave Missouri during the winter of 1838-39, they found sanctuary in Commerce, Illinois, which William E. Berrett described as "a swampy terrain . . . covered with underbrush and scattered trees." He continued: "The land was practically deserted. Save for a half dozen stone and log houses squatting near the river bank and mockingly designated as 'Commerce' one might have counted the dwellings for miles around upon the fingers of his two hands. Swarms of mosquitoes, the then-unknown carriers of malaria fever, were everywhere. The place was unhealthy, shunned by settler and wayfarer." [^1]

The Saints, living in squalid temporary encampments on both sides of the Mississippi River, were waiting to build their new homes. There were many places to live that were more inviting, but the impoverished Saints could not pay the price. Commerce was purchased through the Church leaders' signing long-term promissory notes totaling fourteen thousand dollars.

The Prophet renamed the swampy site Nauvoo, a Hebrew word meaning beautiful. With renewed hope and with great effort, the Saints went to work and transformed their marshy inheritance into "the City Beautiful."

Dr. Berrett described the transformation that took place in Nauvoo on the shores of the Mississippi between 1839 and 1844:

Those people on the banks of the Mississippi, who like Jesus of Nazareth had nowhere to lay their heads, were nearer to Zion than they had ever been before. Their heartrending troubles had swept them clean of all sordid desires. Those who were not pure in heart unconsciously remained behind. For the first time it began to dawn upon the Church that a "Zion People" was infinitely more important than a "Zion Place," for without a "Zion People" no spot in all the world could remain holy.

While the Church seemed at its lowest ebb to the casual observer, the strength within was greater than before. The faith of these people, their loyalty to the Prophet, and the missionary zeal which swept over them has never been paralleled in history. That deep and abiding strength was to change a swamp into a great city; miserable shelters into splendid houses; penniless people into the most prosperous citizens of Illinois. That missionary zeal was to carry the gospel into many lands and double the membership of the Church. . . . A people stripped of all earthly possessions, money, homes, factories, lands, rebuilt in five short years a city-state which was the envy of long-settled communities. [^2]

The leaders in Nauvoo once again felt it was time to turn their attention to those sacred records they had been forced to shelve in Kirtland. In one of the last meetings of the Kirtland high council, held on November 5, 1837, the brethren considered soliciting funds to assist in the publication and further translation of the Abrahamic text: "The Church was called upon to know if they would sanction the appointment of the Presidents in authorizing Brother Richards and Brother Hadlock, to transact the business of the Church in procuring means to translate and print those records taken from the chatocombs [sic] of Egypt, now in the temple, the vote was full and prompt to confirm the same." [^3]

Because Joseph Smith was absent from their midst, having gone to Missouri to conduct Church business, further printing and translating of the papyri was not possible at that time.

After an interruption of two and a half years, the Prophet had a statement prepared to be read to the high council in Nauvoo. At a council in his office on June 20, 1840, his clerk, Robert B. Thompson, presented the proposition that the Prophet be freed from all temporal duties to enable him to concentrate on the spiritual needs of the Church. A portion of the document read: ". . . he felt it his duty to engage more particularly in the spiritual welfare of the saints and also, to the translation of the Egyptian Records—the Bible—and wait upon the Lord for such revelations as may be suited to the condition and circumstances of the Church." [^4]

On July 3, 1840, members the high council sustained the Prophet's request and entered the following statement in their minute book: "We feel perfectly satisfied with the course taken by Joseph Smith Jr. and feel a disposition as far as it is in our power to assist him so as to relieve him from the temporalities of the church in order that he may devote his time more particularly to the spiritualities of the same, believing by so doing we shall promote the good of the whole Church." [^5]

To emphasize that they were in earnest about publishing, the First Presidency released a statement dated August 31, 1840, and addressed "To the Saints Scattered Abroad." The message included these passages:

Having through the kindness of our God been delivered from destruction, and having secured a location upon which we have again commenced operations for the good of His people, we feel disposed to go forward and unite our energies for the upbuilding of the Kingdom, and establishing the Priesthood in their fullness and glory. The work which has to be accomplished in the last days is one of vast importance, and will call into action the energy, skill, talent, and ability of the Saints, so that it may roll forth with that glory and majesty described by the prophet; and will consequently require the concentration of the Saints, to accomplish works of such magnitude and grandeur. . . .

Dear brethren, feeling desirous to carry out the purposes of God to which work we have been called; and to be co-workers with Him in this last dispensation; we feel the necessity of having the hearty cooperation of the Saints throughout this land, and upon the islands of the sea. It will be necessary for the Saints to hearken to counsel and turn their attention to the Church, the establishment of the Kingdom, and lay aside every selfish principle, everything low and groveling; and stand forward in the cause of truth, and assist to the utmost of their power, those to whom has been given the pattern and design. . . .

Believing the time has now come, when it is necessary to erect a house of prayer, a house of order, a house for the worship of our God, where the ordinances can be attended to agreeably to His divine will, in this region of country—to accomplish which, considerable exertion must be made, and means will be required—and as the work must be hastened in righteousness, it behooves the Saints to weigh the importance of these things, in their minds, in all their bearings, and then take such steps as are necessary to carry them into operation; and arming themselves with courage, resolve to do all they can, and feel themselves as much interested as though the whole labor depended on themselves alone. . . .

Connected with the building up of the Kingdom, is the printing and circulation of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, hymnbook, and the new translation of the Scriptures. It is unnecessary to say anything respecting these works; those who have read them, and who have drunk of the stream of knowledge which they convey, know how to appreciate them; and although fools may have them in derision, yet they are calculated to make men wise unto salvation, and sweep away the cobwebs of superstition of ages, throw a light on the proceedings of Jehovah which have already been accomplished, and mark out the future in all its dreadful and glorious realities. Those who have tasted the benefit derived from a study of those works, will undoubtedly vie with each other in their zeal for sending them abroad throughout the world, that every son of Adam may enjoy the same privileges, and rejoice in the same truths. [^6]

Some may wonder if this statement includes the Book of Abraham, since it is not specifically mentioned. There should be no question that it does, since the original subheading for the statement read "Printing the New Translation and Abraham's Record."

Approximately a year later, on August 16, 1841, Brigham Young presided over a special conference of the Church in the absence of Joseph Smith, who was at home "on account of the death of his child." The Prophet arrived at the afternoon session and explained the purpose of the conference, stating that "the time had come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the stakes, and assist to bear off the Kingdom victoriously to the nations, . . . and at the same time relieve him, so that he might attend to the business of translating." The motion was "moved, seconded and carried, that the conference approve of the instructions of President Smith in relation to the Twelve, and that they proceed accordingly to attend to the duties of their office." [^7]

The Times and Seasons

On January 28, 1842, the Lord gave to Joseph Smith the following revelation for the Twelve concerning the Times and Seasons, the Church's bimonthly newspaper: "Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, go and say unto the Twelve, that it is my will to have them take in hand the edi-torial department of the Times and Seasons, according to that manifestation which shall be given unto them by the power of my Holy Spirit in the midst of their counsel." [^8]

Six days later Wilford Woodruff was named business manager of the printing office, and John Taylor was called to work alongside Joseph Smith in the editorial department. Apparently the Lord had important matters at hand, with two of the Twelve assigned to directly oversee the affairs of the Church newspaper under the Prophet's direction.

In the issue of the Times and Seasons dated February 15, 1842, the retiring editor, Ebenezer Robinson, wrote his last editorial. After reviewing the difficulties he had had in protecting the printing press in Missouri—by burying it in the earth—and relating other personal privations he had endured, he announced an exciting new era in printing in the Church:

The Times and Seasons is now placed on a permanent basis, with a liberal patronage, and its circulation daily increasing. The building in which it is published was erected expressly for a printing establishment; with spacious rooms, where each branch can be carried on in its own department, without interfering with the other. The church, also, is in a flourishing and prosperous condition—more so than at any previous period since its rise; naught but joy and gladness seems to pervade the bosoms of the saints, and peace and happiness attend all their footsteps.

Under these circumstances I now take leave of the editorial department of the Times and Seasons, having disposed of my entire interest in the printing establishment, book-bindery, and stereotype foundery, and they are transferred into other hands. The Editorial chair will be filled by our esteemed brother, President Joseph Smith, assisted by Elder John Taylor, of the Quorum of the Twelve, under whose able and talented guidance, this will become the most interesting and useful religious journal of the day.

With these considerations, I feel confident that the agents and friends of the Times and Seasons will exert themselves to support the press; knowing that while it is under the supervi sion of him whom God has chosen to lead his people in the last days, all things will go right. [^9]

In the same edition, Joseph Smith explained why he had undertaken this new role as editor of the Church newspaper:

As it regards ourselves we have very little to say, but shall leave it for the future to unfold; and for a discerning public to judge. The important events that are daily transpiring around us; the rapid advance of truth; the many communications that we are receiving, daily, from elders abroad; both in this country, in England, from the continent of Europe, and other parts of the world; the convulsed state of the nations; the epistles and teachings of the Twelve; and the revelations which we are receiving from the most High, will [no] doubt furnish us with material to make this paper interesting to all who read it, and whilst we solicit the patronage, and support of our friends, we pray that the God of Israel may inspire our hearts with understanding and direct our pen in truth. [^10]

At that time, Joseph Smith was preparing the Abrahamic translation for publication in the paper. Elder Woodruff re-corded in his journal:

Truly the Lord has raised up Joseph the Seer of the seed of Abraham out of the loins of ancient Joseph, & is now clothing him with mighty power & wisdom & knowledge which is more clearly manifest & felt in the midst of his intimate friends than any other class of mankind. The Lord is Blessing Joseph with power to reveal the mysteries of the kingdom of God; to translate through the Urim & Thummim Ancient records & Hieroglyphics as old as Abraham or Adam which causes our hearts to burn within us while we behold their glorious truths opened unto us. Joseph the Seer has presented us some of the Book of Abraham which was written by his own hand but hid from the knowledge of many for the last four thousand years but has now come to light through the mercy of God. Joseph has had those records in his possession for several years but has never presented them before the world in the english language untill now. But he is now about to publish it to the world or parts of it by publishing it in the Times & Seasons for Joseph the Seer is now the Editor of that paper & Elder Taylor assists him in writing while it has fallen to my lot to take charge of the Business part of the establishment. I have had the privilege this day of assisting in setting the [type] for printing the first [piece] of the BOOK OF ABRAHAM that is to be presented to the inhabitants of the EARTH in the LAST DAYS. My soul has been much edifyed of late from time to time in hearing Joseph the Seer converse about the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, truly God is with him & is making him mighty in wisdom & knowledge & I am convinced for myself that none of the Prophets Seers or Revelators of the Earth have ever accomplished a greater work than will be accomplished in the Last days through the mercy of God by JOSEPH THE SEER. [^11]

On February 20, Elder Woodruff recorded in his diary that during the week the newspaper staff had "prepared a plate for making a cut at the commencement of the Book of Abraham which is to be published in the 9 No of the 3 vol of the Times & Seasons which will be interesting to many of the inhabitants of the earth."

The next day Joseph Smith sent an announcement to the Saints relative to the building of the temple in Nauvoo. At the conclusion of this announcement was an addendum that read in part:

We would also say to all the churches, that inasmuch as they want the blessings of God and angels, as also of the Church of Jesus Christ, and wish to see it spread and prosper through the world, and Zion built up and truth and righ-teousness prevail,—let all the different branches of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in all the world, call meetings in their respective places and tithe themselves and send up to this place to the Trustee in Trust, so that his hands may be loosed, and the Temple go on, and other works be done, such as the new translation of the Bible, and the record of Father Abraham published to the world. [^12]

The Prophet dictated a statement to Willard Richards to be included in the March 1, 1842, edition of the Times and Seasons, outlining his objectives as editor. He planned to publish various documents in serial form, including the Book of Abraham, for the benefit of the Church. This is his statement:

A considerable quantity of the matter in the last paper was in type before the establishment came into my hands.—Some of which went to press without my review or knowledge and a multiplicitty of business while entering on the additional care of the editorial department of the Times and Seasons must be my apology for what is past.—

In future I design to furnish much original matter which will be found of inestimable advantage to the saints,—& all who desire a knowledge of the kingdom of God,—and as it is not practicable to bring forth the new translation of the Scriptures & various records of ancient date & great worth to this generation in the usual form by books I shall permit specimens of the same in the Times & Seasons as fast as time and space will admit,—so that the honest in heart may be cheered and comforted and go on their way rejoicing,—as their souls become expossed.—& their understanding enlightened by a knowledge of God's work through the fathers in former days as well as what He is about to do in latter days to fulfill the words of the fathers.—

In the present no. will be found the commencement of the Records discovered in Egypt some time since as penned by the hand of Father Abraham which I shall outline to translate & publish as fast as possible till the whole is completed and as the saints have long been anxious to obtain a copy of these records those [who] are now taking this Times & Seasons will confer a special favor on their brethren who do not take the paper by informing them that they can now obtain their hearts. [^13]

However, that statement was not published. Rather, the following brief statement addressed "to Subscribers" and signed by Joseph Smith appeared in the March 1 edition of the paper: "This paper commences my editorial career, I alone stand responsible for it, and shall do for all papers having my signature henceforward. I am not responsible for the publication, or arrangement of the former paper: the matter did not come under my supervision." [^14]

Only that disclaimer for any previous responsibility for the editor's chair was printed. One may conjecture that the demands on the Prophet's time kept him from finishing the Inspired Version of the Bible (JST) and translating more of the Book of Abraham, which he had hoped to publish "till the whole is completed."

The first segment of the Book of Abraham was published in the Times and Seasons under the date of March 1, 1842. It in-cluded Facsimile 1 and the text that is now found in Abraham 1:1-2:18. The paper was apparently not printed March 1, since an entry in the Prophet's journal on that date reads: "During the forenoon I was at my office and the printing office, correcting the first plate or cut of the records of Father Abraham, prepared by Reuben Hedlock, for the Times and Seasons, and in council in my office, in the afternoon; and in the evening with the Twelve and their wives at Elder Woodruff's." [^15] The occasion was Elder Woodruff's thirty-fifth birthday.

The next day the Prophet recorded, "I read the proof of the Times and Seasons, as editor for the first time, No. 9, Vol. III, in which is the commencement of the Book of Abraham." [^16] On March 4 he was in the printing office "exhibiting the Book of Abraham in the original to Brother Reuben Hedlock, so that he might take the size of the several plates or cuts, and prepare the blocks for the Times and Seasons; and also gave instruction concerning the arrangement of the writing on the large cut, illustrating the principles of astronomy, with other general business." [^17]

The "large cut" Joseph referred to was Facsimile 2, which was published in the next edition of the newspaper in double-page size. Reuben Hedlock's name, as the engraver, still appears on Facsimiles 2 and 3 in the present edition of the Pearl of Great Price.

On March 8, Joseph Smith wrote in his journal, "Recommenced translating from the records of Abraham for the tenth number of the Times and Seasons, and was engaged at [my] office day and evening." [^18] The next day he noted: "Examining copy for the Times and Seasons, presented by Messrs. Taylor and Bennett, and a variety of other business in my office, in the morning; in the afternoon continued the translation of the Book of Abraham, called at Bishop Knight's and Mr. Davis', with the recorder, and continued translating and revising, and reading letters in the evening, Sister Emma being present in the office." [^19]

The history is not clear about whether Joseph was further translating new material or proofreading the text he had translated seven years before in Kirtland. The handwritten text for the second installment that was published in the Times and Seasons had been completed in Kirtland, and very few changes were made in the printed copy.

The second installment of the Book of Abraham, which included the rest of the text of the present Book of Abraham, Abraham 2:19-5:21, and Facsimile 2 in an oversized double-page hypocephalus, appeared in an issue of Times and Seasons dated March 15, 1842. However, it was actually printed March 19, according to Wilford Woodruff's journal entry for that date: "Spent the day in the printing Office we struck off about 500 No of the 10 No 3 vol of Times & Seasons which contained the portion of the Book of Abraham that gave his account of Kolob, Oliblish, God sitting upon his Throne The Earth, other planets & many great & glorious things as revealed to Abraham through the power of the priesthood. The truths of the Book of Abraham are truly edifying great & glorious which are among the rich treasures that are revealed unto us in the last days."

Facsimile 3 was published May 16, 1842, without any explanation as to why it was detached from the text printed two months earlier. It is assumed the woodcut was not ready to be included in the previous edition. The Prophet simply stated in his journal on May 16, 1842: "I published in this day's Times and Seasons the following fac-simile from the Book of Abraham." [^20]

More of the Book of Abraham Is Promised

The two short March 1842 entries in the Times and Seasons are not the entire text of the Book of Abraham. For the introduction to the Book of Abraham Joseph Smith wrote: "A Translation of some Ancient Records that have fallen into our hands, from the Catacombs of Egypt, purporting to be the writings of Abraham, while he was in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham, written by his own hand upon papyrus." [^21] The present text of the Book of Abraham does not deal with Abraham while he was Egypt, but only some preliminary experiences he had prior to going there. He was on his way to Egypt from Ur, by way of Haran, with a stop in Shechem, when the story ends. Does this mean that the five chapters presently printed in the Pearl of Great Price are not the complete Abrahamic text Joseph Smith purchased from Michael H. Chandler?

The Times and Seasons dated February 1, 1843, has the following notice, written by John Taylor, who succeeded the Prophet as editor:

We would respectfully announce to those of our subscribers, (and there are a good many of them) who commenced their subscriptions for the Times and Seasons at the time when brother Joseph took the editorial department, that the term for which they subscribed for is nearly at a close: most of those commenced at the seventh and eighth numbers; at the time when the translations from the Book of Abraham commenced. This is the sixth number, which only leaves four weeks until the time that they subscribed for, will be fulfilled.

We have given this timely notice that our friends may prepare themselves. We would further state that we had the promise of Br. Joseph, to furnish us with further extracts from the Book of Abraham. These with other articles that we expect from his pen, the continuation of his history, and the resources that we have of obtaining interesting matter; together with our humble endeavors, we trust will make the paper sufficiently interesting.22

A month later, on March 1, the Twelve Apostles wrote to the branches of the Church "in and around Ramus" and asked the Saints to assist the Prophet and his family by being generous with their means to allow him to devote his time to bringing forth "the revelations, translation, and history." The statement reads:

BELOVED BRETHREN:-As our beloved President Joseph Smith is now relieved from his bondage and his business, temporarily, and his property, too, he has but one thing to hinder his devoting his time to the spiritual interests of the Church, to the bringing forth of the revelations, translation, and history. And what is that? He has not provisions for himself and family, and obliged to spend his time in providing therefor. His family is large and his company great, and it requires much to furnish his table. And now, brethren, we call on you for immediate relief in this matter; and we invite you to bring our President as many loads of wheat, corn, beef, pork, lard, tallow, eggs, poultry, venison, and everything eatable at your command, (not exepting unfrozen potatoes and vegetables, as soon as the weather will admit,) flour, etc., and thus give him the privilege of attending to your spiritual interest.

The measure you mete shall be measured to you again. If you give liberally to your President in temporal things, God will return to you liberally in spiritual and temporal things too. One or two good new milch cows are much needed also.

Brethren, will you do your work, and let the President do his for you before God: We wish an immediate answer by loaded teams or letter.

Your brethren in Christ, in behalf of the quorum,

Brigham Young, President.

Willard Richards, Clerk

P.S. Brethren, we are not unmindful of the favors our President has received from you in former days. But a man will not cease to be hungry this year because he ate last year. [^22]

As far as is known, the Prophet, with many demands on his time, was unable to return to translating the Book of Abraham after March 1843.

A nonmember, in a sixteen-page pamphlet recalling his visit to the Church headquarters at Kirtland, stated:

The Mormons have four mummies, and a quantity of records, written on papyrus, in Egyptian hierogliphics, which were brought from the catacombs near Thebes, in Egypt. They say that the mummies were Egyptian, but the records are those of Abraham and Joseph, and contain important information respecting the creation, the fall of man, the deluge, the patriarchs, the book of Mormon, the lost tribe, the gathering, the end of the world, the judgment, &c. &c. This is as near as I can recollect; if there is an error I hope some of the Mormons will point it out, and I will recall it. These records were torn by being taken from the roll of embalming salve which contained them, and some parts entirely lost but Smith is to translate the whole by divine inspiration, and that which is lost, like Nebuchadnezzar's dream, can be interpreted as well as that which is preserved; and a larger volume than the Bible will be required to contain them." [^23] [Emphasis added.]

Papyri Fragments Pasted on Paper

The fragments of papyrus that the Church received from New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1967 had been cut into smaller pieces and mounted on irregular-sized sheets of paper, apparently to make it more convenient to work with the Egyptian manuscripts. The smallest piece of backing (fragment number 11) is 4 7/8 inches by 6 3/4 inches, while the largest piece (fragment number 9) is 7 5/8 inches by 12 1/2 inches. All twelve fragments were glued on stiff backing paper to preserve them from further disintegration.

It is a fair assumption that much of the papyri was glued to backing paper. Whether this was done in Kirtland, Missouri, or Nauvoo is not known. In an article published in the May 1968 issue of the Improvement Era, Dr. T. Edgar Lyon explained that the backing paper contained parts of maps of Ohio's Western Reserve; floor and building plans assumed to be for the Kirtland Temple; sketches probably of the proposed temple in Jackson County, Missouri; and a piece labeled "House of the Lord for the Presidency," which Dr. Lyon said "resembles papyri sketches." [^24] To further protect them, some of the fragments were placed between panes of clear glass.

How many fragments were in the collection that Joseph Smith purchased is unknown, but we may conclude from the following incident that there were many. In 1906 historian Preston Nibley accompanied President Joseph F. Smith, a nephew of the Prophet and the sixth president of the Church, on a visit to the Nauvoo House. Brother Nibley reported that President Smith "recalled with tears the familiar sight of 'Uncle Joseph' kneeling on the floor of the front room with Egyptian manuscripts spread out all around him, weighted down by rocks and books, as with intense concentration he would study a line of characters, jotting down his impressions in a little notebook as he went." [^25]

If there were only twelve or fifteen pieces of papyri in the entire collection, as some writers have concluded, they could easily be studied while a person was comfortably seated at a desk or table. The fragments Joseph Smith was studying apparently were not all under glass, nor were they all mounted; had they been so, it would have been unnecessary to weight them down. The twelve fragments from this collection now in the hands of the Church, I can personally attest, can be placed on an average-sized desk for convenience in working with them.

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCTranslating the Papyrus

Students of the Book of Abraham have wondered how long it took Joseph Smith to translate the record. The History of the Church does not provide us with a definitive answer. Journal entries in the History of the Church provide documention of when the translation was done, but one quickly notices that the history does not mention every day, and those days that are mentioned give very little detail.

When the Prophet did mention he worked on the translation, was he engaged in this activity several hours a day or only for short times here and there? If we list all of the entries in the History of the Church in which the Prophet, either alone or in company with his scribes, worked with the scrolls, we find a total of twenty-four days mentioned. Did he spend all twenty-four days, and possibly others not reported, in academically learning—that is, "studying out in his mind"—what he could about the unknown text and in translating only the five chapters contained in the present Pearl of Great Price?

If Anson Call's account is accurate that some brethren in Missouri read from the writings of Abraham for nearly two hours, the Prophet translated considerably more of the papyri than is currently printed in the Pearl of Great Price. An average reader can read aloud the published Book of Abraham account in approximately thirty to thirty-five minutes. And how does one separate inspired truth that someone has learned through honest scholastic study from direct revelation? Believing as we do that the Lord can and does speak to his children in various ways, such as through dreams, visions, theophanies, inspiration, and stupor of thought, this is a difficult question to attempt to answer.

By way of comparison, students of the Book of Mormon estimate that Joseph Smith, aided by the Urim and Thummim, spent approximately sixty working days in translating the gold plates, producing a double-columned text of 531 pages.

Of the approximately twenty-four days when Joseph was reported working with the papyri, about two-thirds of his time was spent "continually engaged in translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language." [^26] Since there was no dictionary of Egyptian hieroglyphics readily available, were the Prophet and his scribes honing their skills in an attempt to produce a guidebook for future translators or only making notes for their own benefit?

Joseph Smith and the Translation of the Book of Abraham

LocationDatesNo. of DaysNature of WorkKirtlandJuly 5 and/or 6, 1835Probably 1 day"Commenced the translation of some of the characters or hieroglyphics."KirtlandRemainder of July 1835 (after the 10th)Probably 15 to 18 days (16?)"I was . . . translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language.KirtlandOctober 1, 1835Â½ day"I labored on the Egyptian alphabet . . . and during the research, the principals of astronomy as understood by Father Abraham . . . unfolded to our understanding."KirtlandOctober 7, 1835Â½ day"This afternoon I re-commenced translating the ancient records."KirtlandNovember 19, 18351 day"I . . . spent the day translating the ancient records."KirtlandNovember 20, 18351 day"We . . . spent the day in translating, and made rapid progress."KirtlandNovember 24, 1835Â½ day"In the afternoon we translated some of the Egyptian records."KirtlandNovember 25, 18351 day"Spent the day in translating."KirtlandNovember 26, 18351 day"Spent the day in translating Egyptian characters from the papyrus."NauvooMarch 8, 18421 day"Recommenced translating from the records of Abraham."NauvooMarch 9, 1842Â½ day"In the afternoon . . . continued translating and revising" the Book of Abraham.Total: 23 to 26 days

More than fourteen years earlier, Oliver Cowdery unsuccessfully tried to use the Urim and Thummim for a short time when he desired to translate from the gold plates. The Lord explained:

Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

But, behold I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me.

Now, if you had known this you could have translated; nevertheless, it is not expedient that you should translate now. (D&C 9:7-10.)

Though Oliver was discouraged that he could not translate the Nephite plates, he also received this promise from the Lord: "Other records have I, that I will give unto you power that you may assist to translate. Be patient, my son, for it is wisdom in me, and it is not expedient that you should translate at this pres-ent time." (D&C 9:2-3.) Perhaps Oliver's belaboring over and attempting to translate the Egyptian scrolls with the Prophet and William Phelps was a partial fulfillment of that promise.

While working with the papyri, the brethren purchased a book 8 inches by 12 1/4 inches in size in which to make notes. They titled the ledger book "Grammar and Alphabet of the Egyptian Language." How much of its content reflected Joseph Smith's thinking is difficult to say. Both John C. Bernhisel and William Clayton, his secretaries, were intrigued with foreign languages and may have done much or most of the studying and organizing. The Lord's command was "Study it out in your mind." Whatever they were doing and why they were doing it is unclear. As Dr. Hugh Nibley explained:

"This afternoon," the Prophet reported, "I labored on the Egyptian alphabet, in company with Brothers Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps, and during the research, the principles of astronomy as understood by Father Abraham and the ancients unfolded to our understanding." Here the Prophet received information on two different levels, according to a procedure prescribed by revelation: ". . . you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right. . . ." (D&C 9:8.) The revelation may or may not confirm one's studied conclusions. Joseph Smith's work, here mentioned, on the Egyptian alphabet was never accepted or even presented to the Church as revelation, and no one is bound by it; but the zeal and application of the brethren was rewarded by a revelation that far transcended any intellectual efforts of man. It is this revelation that is comprised in the Pearl of Great Price, and it is by it and others like it that one may judge the Prophet Joseph, and not by such preliminary gropings as the so-called Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar, which was never completed, never released for publication, and, so far as we have been able to discover, never even mentioned in public. Granted that diligent searching and study may be a preliminary to receiving revelation, the revelation when it comes is certainly not to be judged by them. We are not only permitted but also in-structed to cast about from possible solutions in our minds before the real solution is given us, and if we find Joseph Smith doing just that, we should not rush to point out pos-sible flaws in his preliminary speculations as proof that he was not inspired.

Where translation is concerned, Joseph Smith also operated on two levels, with no danger of confusing the two. At no time did he claim that the gift of tongues is constant or permanent; like all gifts of the Spirit, it is bestowed when and as God chooses. The Prophet stated publicly more than once that he had to study languages the hard way, like anyone else, when not actually receiving revelation. And so we must allow him the luxury of having his own ideas about things, and of making his own mistakes and his own translations, as long as he plays the game fairly and never presents them as binding on others. [^27]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCWas the Urim and Thummim Used?

It is not clear how or how often Joseph Smith used the Urim and Thummim to aid in the translation of the Book of Abraham. Elder Wilford Woodruff wrote in his journal December 27, 1841: "The Twelve, or part of them, spent the day with Joseph the Seer, and he confided unto them many glorious things of the kingdom of God. The privileges and blessings of the priesthood, etc. I had the privelege of seeing for the first time in my day, the Urim and Thummim."

Elder Woodruff became business manager of the Times and Seasons less than six weeks later, and on February 19 he wrote in his personal journal: "The Lord is Blessing Joseph with Power to reveal the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; to translate through the Urim and Thummim Ancient records and Hieroglyphics as old as Abraham or Adam, which caused our hearts to burn within us while we beheld their glorious truth opened unto us."

Many years later, Orson Pratt commented: "One of the first gifts bestowed by the Lord for the benefit of His people, was that of revelation, the gift to translate, by the aid of the Urim and Thummim, the gift of bringing to light old and ancient records." [^28]

Parley P. Pratt, upon printing the Book of Abraham in Liverpool, England, a few months later, also stated that the Prophet utilized the Urim and Thummim in translating the writings of Abraham. [^29]

Joseph Smith did not leave an explanation of how the Urim and Thummim worked. If it were only a matter of reading an English rendition of the Egyptian hieroglyphics, the Book of Abraham could have been translated, dictated, and recorded in a few hours. If reading a screen with the correct English were all that was required, the Book of Mormon could have been dic-tated in less than a week instead of the approximate sixty working days that it actually took. The Prophet was required to concentrate, study, and resolve in order to translate (see D&C 9) while using the divine spectacles.

Orson Pratt, speaking of the calling of a seer, stated: "The ability to 'see' by means of a stone is a great gift—the greatest—but the use of a stone is not always necessary. The stone is a means or aid in helping or strengthening the gift and ability of the seer. As a man uses this gift he will develop that power and ability without the use of a stone. Joseph received several revelations to which I was witness by means of the Seer stone, but he could receive also without any instrument." [^30]

National Publicity on the Book of Abraham

As the Church continued to grow in size and prominence, the eyes of the world were increasingly focused on its every move. Several prominent newspapers in the Eastern United States kept abreast of the Mormons. Without wire services from which editors could randomly select their stories as is done today, newspaper editors in Joseph Smith's day constantly borrowed articles from other publications, usually documenting their source at the bottom of the article.

A New York Tribune article published in the Bellafonte, Pennsylvania, Democratic Whig stated on April 23, 1842: "The Mormons have found a new book called the book of Abraham. It purports to have been written by that patriarch, and is said to have been found in the Catacombs of Egypt by an English traveller who brought it away with eleven mummies. Jo [sic] Smith is engaged in translating this book for the Nauvoo, 'Times and Seasons.' The first chapter appears in the last number that has reached us.—N. Y. Tribune."

An article in the New York Herald dated April 3, 1842, read:

We give in this day's paper, a very curious chapter from the "Book of Abraham," which we find published in the last number of a weekly journal, called the "Times and Seasons," conducted by Joe Smith the great Mormon Prophet, in the city Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois.

The Prophet says that it was found in the catacombs of Egypt, but he is mistaken in this idea.—The article was discovered, we presume by Joseph Smith, the grandfather, near one of the propylons of Medinet Abu in the "City of the Sun," in Upper Egypt. The same city which Homer says had one hundred gates. Champollion, Young, Rosselini and various other antiquarians give notices of the magnificent ruins, in red granite, that are strewn over the banks of the Nile. Be all this as it may, the Prophet of Nauvoo has given the chapter, and it is set down as a revelation among the Mormons.

This Joe Smith is undoubtedly one of the greatest characters of the age. He indicates as much talent, originality, and moral courage as Mahomet, Odin, or any of the great spirits that have hitherto produced the revolutions of past ages. In the present infidel, irreligious, material, ideal, geological, animal-magnetic age of the world, some such singular prophet as Joe smith is required to preserve the principle of faith, and to plant some new germs of civilization that may come to maturity in a thousand years. While modern philosophy, which believes in nothing but what you can touch, is overspreading the Atlantic States, Joe Smith is creating a spiritual system, combined also with morals and industry, that may change the destiny of the race.—Joe believes himself divinely inspired and a worker of miracles. He cures the sick of diseases—so it is said—and although Joe is not aware of the fact, we have been informed by a medical man that his influence over nervous disorders, arises from a powerful magnetic influence—that Joe is a magnet in a large way, which he calls a power or spirit from heaven. In other respects Joe is a mighty man of God—possessing large stores of human nature—great shrewdness, and as he has taken the management of the Mormon newspaper organ, the "Times and Seasons" into his hand, we look for many revelations, and some curious ones too, pretty soon.

We certainly want some such prophet to start up, take a big hold of the public mind—and stop the torrent of materialism that is hurrying the world into infidelity, immorality, licentiousness, and crime. Professor Lyell, Richard Adams Locke, Dr. Brisband, Master Emmerson, Prophet Brownson, Horace Greely, and all the materialists of the age, ought to take a leaf of common sense out of Joe's book. [^31]

Two days later the New York Herald added: "Joe Smith, in his last 'Times and Seasons,' gives us another slice of the 'Book of Abraham,' embracing a synopsis of his geology and astronomy, illustrated with a curious map of the Mormon Solar System. Joe also gives his readers a bit of his auto-biography—quite rich it is, too." [^32]

The brethren at the Times and Seasons office were well aware of the attention being given to the publication of the Book of Abraham in prominent newspapers. The Prophet, acting as editor, entered the following article in the Times and Seasons May 16, 1842:

It will be seen by several extracts taken from different papers, that the press is changing its tone a little, in regard to the subject of Mormonism; many of the most re[s]pectable, influential, and widely circulated periodicals are beginning to look at Mormonism in its true light: at any rate they are for investigating the subject impartially, and as honest and candid journalists, they speak of it as they find it. Such is Mr. James G. Bennett, of the New York Herald; Mr. William Bartlett, of the Dollar Weekly Bostonian; the New York State Mechanic, published by Mr. Joel Munson; and the Chicago Democrat; published by Col. John Wentworth.

The first cut of a facsimile from the Book of Abraham, has been re-published both in the New York Herald, and in the Dollar Weekly Bostonian, as well as in the Boston Daily Ledger, Edited By Mr. Bartlet; together with the translation from the Book of Abraham. Mr. Bartlett says that he "intends opening a corespondence with us, that he may acquaint himself with our public and private acts." &c. we can assure Mr. Bartlett that we shall be most happy to put him in possession of any information that he may require pertaining to our society, as we have always courted publicity, and investigation, and chose light rather than darkness.—ED. [^33]

Joseph Smith quoted the Dollar Weekly Bostonian article in the Times and Seasons:

Joe is decidedly the greatest original of the present day. He carries all before him when he undertakes an enterprise—knows no impediment—and never halts in his course till he has accomplished his object. His post, at the head of the Mormons, is a conspicuous one, and in a few years of such advancement as he has met with for the past year, will give him a numberless host of followers. We should not be surprised if Joe should become as omnipotent as ever the Pope was in his palmiest days. He is a genius—and a rare one—and all the armies of Satan, should they confront him in a solid phalanx, would be sure to meet with sore discomfiture, if not with complete annihilation. The true philosophy of go-aheadity—the quintessence of concentrated moral and spiritual energy—fears no combat—and although we cannot say it exactly courts danger, it never flies from the post of duty on its approach.—We have so high an opinion of Joe Smith that we intend to open a correspondence with him in order to acquaint ourself with all his secret springs of action, and thus get all the secrets of his success, public and private, worldly and ecclesiastical.

The chapter from the recently recovered Book of Abraham, and the unique cut which illustrates it, on our outside, has occasioned us some expense; but we care not for that so long as we please our patrons, which we mean to do at all hazards, trusting to the good sense of the most enlightened public in this, or any other universe, for suitable remuneration.

The Mormons hold meetings in Boston regularly on the Sabbath, somewhere in commercial street, and are equally successful in saving souls, healing the sick and restoring sight to the blind. Meetings are also held in Chelsea, and the cause is on the increase in that place.—

Will Elder Nickerson, or some of the brethren, furnish us with the statistics? [^34]

A New York State Mechanic article referring to the Book of Abraham was also included in the Times and Seasons for the benefit of the Saints: "The Times and Seasons, the Mormon news-paper, published at Nauvoo by Joseph Smith, has commenced the translation of a book written by Abraham, and discovered in the catecombs [sic] of Egypt! This people, from a handful of persecuted outcasts, have become a numerous sect, and are able to protect themselves against insult and oppression; in fact, it is said that they have revolutionized the state of Illinois." [^35]

With the incessant borrowing from the larger metropolitan newspapers by the smaller presses, it appears that the Book of Abraham must have received wide notice in the papers of the United States.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Geauga County Courthouse records, Chardon, Ohio. Copy of documents in author's possession.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Joseph Smith Collection, Archives Division, Church Historical Depart-ment.
[^5] Common Pleas Record Book X, Geauga County Courthouse, Chardon, Ohio. Sargent and Craig vs. Chandler (April 7, 1841), 610-12.
[^6] Common Pleas Record Book, Geauga County Courthouse, Chardon, Ohio. Sargent and Craig vs. Chandler (October 22, 1844), 464.
[^7] HC 4:402-3.
[^8] HC 4:503.
[^9] Ebenezer Robinson, "Valedictory," Times and Seasons 3 (February 15, 1842): 695-96.
[^10] Joseph Smith, "To Subscribers," Times and Seasons 3 (February 15, 1842): 696.
[^11] Wilford Woodruff's Journal: 1833-1898, typescript, ed. Scott G. Kenney (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1983), entry dated February 19, 1842.
[^12] HC 4:517-18.
[^13] Joseph Smith Collection, "Letters of 1842," Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
[^14] Times and Seasons 3:710.
[^15] HC 4:519.
[^16] HC 4:542.
[^17] HC 4:543.
[^18] HC 4:548.
[^19] Ibid.
[^20] HC 5:11.
[^21] HC 4:524.
[^22] John Taylor, "Notice," Times and Seasons 4 (February 1, 1843): 95.
[^23] HC 5:293.
[^24] William S. West, A Few Interesting Facts, Respecting the Rise Progress and Pretensions of the Mormons (Warren, Ohio, 1837), 5.
[^25] T. Edgar Lyon, "The Sketches on the Papyri Backings," Improvement Era, May 1968, pp. 18-23. See also Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham, pp. 351-64.
[^26] Hugh Nibley, "A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price," Improvement Era 71 (March 1968): 17-18.
[^27] HC 2:238.
[^28] Joseph Smith Journal, November 13, 1843, in the Joseph Smith Collection, Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
[^29] HC 6:79.
[^30] 30. Nibley, "A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price," 18.
[^31] 31. Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses 20:65.
[^32] 32. Millennial Star 3 (July 1842): 46-47.
[^33] 33. Millennial Star 40:49.
[^34] 34. "The Mormons—A Leaf from Joe Smith," New York Herald, April 3, 1842. This article was reprinted in the Times and Seasons 3 (May 2, 1842): 773-74.
[^35] 35. "More Prophecy," New York Herald, April 5, 1842, 2.
