H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

13

"Chandler Was Only an Agent"

After the Saints had moved to the Nauvoo area, an interesting story was unfolding relative to the mummies back in Ohio. A brief review will set the stage for this new development.

Michael Chandler spent about a week in Kirtland in 1835, displaying the four mummies and the papyrus, visiting with Joseph Smith relative to the interpretation of the hieroglyphs, and making arrangements for the sale of the antiquities at $2,400. As indicated earlier, Joseph Coe paid $800, Simeon Andrews paid $800, and Joseph Smith raised the balance of $800 through contributions from various friends.

Chandler did not return to Pennsylvania to live after he sold these last four mummies. The next year he and his wife, Frances, bought two parcels of adjoining land totaling 83.46 acres in Parkman Township, Ohio, approximately forty miles southeast of Kirtland and ten miles northeast of Hiram. The land was purchased for $600 on August 10, 1836, in the name of "Frances Chandler wife of Michael Chandler," from George and Francis Parkman, who lived in Boston. [^1] On August 23, 1839, a little over three years later, the Chandlers sold their land for $1410. [^2]

By 1857 Michael Chandler had purchased a farm from David Tod about one mile east of his first farm, consisting of three parcels of ground totaling 100.53 acres. [^3] The new farm covered three corners of an intersection that some older residents in the area still call "Chandler's Corners."

Joseph Coe, the one-time financial assistant to Joseph Smith who had loaned the Church $800 to assist in purchasing the mummies and papyrus, apostatized from the Church in 1837 in Kirtland and remained there while the Saints moved to Missouri and then to Nauvoo. On January 1, 1844, he wrote to Joseph Smith in Nauvoo regarding some unresolved financial matters he claimed to have with the Prophet, and in his letter he mentioned a current lawsuit involving Michael H. Chandler: "Chandler was only an agent acting under some men in Philadelphia the mummies when delivered to him for exhibition were valued at some 2 or 300 dollars, but they sued him and was allowed the sum which he sold them to me for viz. $2400. It also appeared on the trial that the out goes while Chandler was exhibiting them exceeded the income $1550. I suppose the owners are if it not outlawed liable for the fraud thus practiced by their agent but I have hitherto been unable to attest to the collection of it." [^4]

Chandler's statement that he was "only an agent acting under some men in Philadelphia" conflicts with his claim of inheriting the mummies from his Italian uncle, Antonio Lebolo. Coe further stated that Chandler's expenses exceeded his income by $1550 the last two years he was exhibiting the mummies. Since Coe was residing in Kirtland and was aware of the court case, it seems logical that Chandler was being sued by the owners of the mummies in a nearby court. And since Chandler had resided in Parkman, Ohio, since 1836, the setting for the trial would be Chardon, the county seat of Geauga County, which is also where Kirtland was located.

Craig and Sargent vs. Michael H. Chandler

Beginning on October 1, 1838, and ending on October 10, 1853, two prominent Philadelphia maritime merchants, William Craig and Winthrop Sargent, were plaintiffs in a continuation of lawsuits against Michael H. Chandler. At issue was $6,000, which the plaintiffs said the defendant owed them. The trials were held in the Court of Common Pleas in Chardon, Geauga County, Ohio.

The Common Pleas record books at the county courthouse in Chardon contain a summary of the various proceedings of the case:

Pleas before the Court of Common Pleas within and for the county of Geauga in the State of Ohio at a time of said Court begun and held at the Court House in Chardon, on the twenty-seventh day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-one.

Be it remembered that heretofore, at the November Term of said Court, in the year of our Lord one thousand Eight hundred and thirty Eight, Winthrop Sargent and William Craig, sued out of the office of the Clerk of said Court, a writ of summons against Michael Chandler in the words and figures following, to wit:—"The State of Ohio, Geauga County, Seal

To the Sheriff of said County, Greeting: We command you that you summon Michael Chandler to appear forthwith before our Court of Common Pleas for said County, now setting at the Court House in Chardon, to answer unto Winthrop Sargent and William Craig in a plea of assumpsit to their damage six thousand dollars as is said, Herein fail not but of this writ and your service make due return. Witness D. D. Aiken, Clerk of said Court at Chardon, this thirteenth day of November A.D. 1838. C. H. Foot, Dep. Clerk"

Upon the writ was the following endorsement, to wit:—"Suit both to recover for work and labour and materials done and found by the plaintiffs for deft, for goods, wares and merchandise sold by plffs to deft. for money paid and expended by plffs for use of deft. for money had and received by deft. for use of plffs, and for money found due on an account stated between them. Amount claimed $3000."

The said writ was forthwith returned to Court, by the sheriff of said county, having thereon endorsed the return of his service of the same, in the words and figures following, to wit:—"The State of Ohio, Geauga County ss

I have executed the command of this writ by leaving a true copy of this writ, at the residence of Michael Chandler, he being absent. N. Webb. Dept Shff."

And it was ordered by the Court, that this cause be continued until the next term of said Court. Afterwards, to wit on the twentieth day of December in the year last aforesaid the said Winthrop Sargent and William Craig filed in the office of the Clerk of said Court, their Declaration, in the words and figures following, to wit:—"The State of Ohio Geauga County ss

Court of Common Pleas, Vacation after November Term A.D. 1838.

Winthrop Sargent & William Craig vs Michael Chandler

Declaration in assumpsit. The said defendant was summoned to answer the said plaintiff, in a plea of assumpsit, and therefore come the plaintiffs by Bolton & Kelley their attorneys, and complain of the said defendant: for that whereas the said defendant heretofore to wit, on the first day of October A.D. 1838 at Philadelphia, to wit, at Chardon in said County of Geauga and State of Ohio was indebted to said plaintiffs in the sum of six thousand dollars, for the work, labour, care diligence and attention of them the said plaintiffs, before that time done, performed and bestowed in and about the business of said defendant and for the said defendant, and at his special instance and request; and also in the further sum of six thousand dollars, for divers goods wares and merchandise and other personal property, before them by said plaintiffs sold and delivered to said defendant, and at His like special instance and request of said defendant: and also in the further sum of six thousand dollars, for so much money before there by said plaintiffs lent and advanced to, and paid laid out and expended for said defendant, and at His like special instance and request; and also in the further sum of six thousand dollars for other moneys before there by said defendant had and received to and for the use of the said plaintiff: and being so indebted he the defendant, in consideration thereof, afterwards to wit, on the same day and year last aforesaid, undertook and then and there faithfully promised the said plaintiffs to pay them the said several sums of money in this court mentioned, when he the said defendant should be thereunto afterwards requested;

And whereas, also, afterwards, to wit, on the first day of October A.D. 1838, at Philadelphia, to wit at Chardon in said Geauga County, the said defendant accounted with the said plaintiffs (of and concerning divers other sums of money, for the said defendant to the said plaintiffs, before that time due and owing and there in arrear and unpaid, and upon such accounting the said defendant was there and there found to be in arrear and indebted to the said plaintiffs in the further sum of six thousand dollars, and being so found in arrear and indebted, he the said defendant in consideration thereof afterward, to wit, on the same day and year last aforesaid, at Philadelphia, to wit, at Chardon aforesaid, undertook and there and there faithfully promised the said plaintiffs to pay them the said further sum of six thousand dollars, in this court mentioned when he the said defendant, should be thereunto afterwards requested. Yet the said defendant his said several promises and undertakings in no wise regarding, but contriving etc. has not as yet paid the several sums of money in this Declaration mentioned, or any or either of them, or any part thereof to the said plaintiffs (although often requested etc.) But the said defendant to pay the said plaintiffs the same, has hitherto wholly neglected and refused, and still does neglect and refuse. To the damage of the said plaintiffs of six thousand dollars and therefore they sue etc.

Bolton & Kelley, Attys for plaintiffs."

Afterwards, to wit, on the twenty-sixth day of December in the year last aforesaid, the said Michael Chandler filed in the Clerk's office aforesaid, his plea & notice, in the words and figures following, viz.

"The State of Ohio Geauga County ss

Michael A. Chandler

at suit of

Winthrop Sargent & William Craig

In the Common Pleas, Vacation after November Term 1838

Plea & Notice

And now comes the said Chandler by Tod & Hoffman his Atty's and defends etc. and says that he did not undertake and promise in manner and form as the said Sargent and Craig have above thereof declared against him and of this he puts himself upon the county for trial. etc. Tod & Hoffman, Atty's for deft."

The said plaintiffs or their Atty's will take notice that the defendant on the trial of this cause, will give in evidence and insist that at the commencement of this suit, said plaintiffs were and they still are indebted to said defendant, in the sum of six thousand dollars, for goods before them sold & delivered by said defendant to said plaintiffs at their request, also in the sum of six thousand dollars for work done and materials for the same provided, by said defendant, before them for said plaintiffs at their request. Also in the sum of six thousand dollars for money before them had and received by said plaintiffs to and for the use of money found to be due from the plaintiffs to the defendant, on an account before them stated between them. And that on said trial, the defendant will set off against any demand of said plaintiffs to be proved thereon, so much of said several sums of money due defendant, as will be sufficient to satisfy such demands of the plffs, and the deft will also on said trial ask the Court to give him a judgment for the balance of said sums as per statute.

Respectfully Yours Tod & Hoffman, Atty's for deft.

Afterwards, at the April Term of said Court, in the year of our Lord one thousand Eight hundred and thirty-nine, it was ordered by the Court, that this cause be continued until the next term of said Court. Afterwards, at the June Term of said Court, in the year last aforesaid, it was ordered by the Court that the Plaintiffs give bail for costs twelve days before the next term, or in default that he become now suit, and that this cause be continued until the next term. Afterwards, at the November Term of said Court, in the year last aforesaid, it was ordered by the Court, that this cause be continued until the next time of said Court, and that the defendant pay the costs of term in sixty days. Afterwards at the April term of said Court, in the year of our Lord one thousand Eight hundred & forty, by consent of the parties, it was ordered that this cause be continued until the next term of said Court. Afterwards at the June Term of said Court, in the year last aforesaid it was ordered by the Court, that this cause be continued at the costs of the plaintiffs, until the next term of said Court. And now at this term of said Court, that is to say, at the term thereof first aforesaid, come the said parties, and thereupon came a Jury, to wit, Enoch Scott, Willes Foot, Stanley Spencer, Lewis Smith, Olney Percival, Zenas Gurney, David C. Osborn, Austin Carver, William Holliday, Linsen T. Patchin, Nathaniel C. Stone and Chester Houghton, who being duly impaneled and sworn to say that the deft did espouse and promise as the plaintiffs have declared against him and assess the plaintiffs damages at Eight hundred and fifty dollars. It is therefore considered that the plaintiffs re-cover of the defendant, the said sum of Eight hundred and fifty dollars, the damages aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid assessed, and also their costs & charges by him made in defending this suit, taxed at seven dollars and sixty-Eight cents, and in default thereof that execution issue to collect the same—The defendant gives notice of his intention to appeal to the Supreme Court.— [^5]

Pleas before the Court of Common Pleas within and for the County of Geauga in the State of Ohio at a term of said Court begun and held at the Court House in Chardon on the twenty second day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty four.

Be it remembered that heretofore to wit on the twenty sixth day of March in the year aforesaid Lyman Cowdery brought into Court and filed his deposition in the words and figures following to wit Geauga Common Pleas April term A.D. 1841

Winthrop Sargent & William Craig vs Michael Chandler

The State of Ohio, Geauga County SS

Judgment of the Plaintiff Damages $850.00

Plffs costs 42.99

Defts costs 7.68

Lyman Cowdery of lawful age being duly sworn according to law deposes and says that Meprs Boulton and Kelley of Cleveland attourneys for said plaintiffs requested this deponent to obtain from Col. Spencer Sheriff of said County his return to the execution issued the 14th day of December 1841 for the purpose as they said to draw a bill in Chancery against the said defendant that on the first day of the next term of this Court this deponent called on Col. Spencer for said execution for the purpose of copying the return of the same which he delivered to this deponent indorsed on the back "To goods chattels lands or tenements whereon to levy" and officially signed by said Sheriff Spencer by his Dept Atwood Whither this deponent sent said deposition to said Boulton and Kelly or has mislaid or lost the same this deponent cannot state but further says that he has no recollection of returning said Execution to said Sheriff Further this deponent saith not.

Sworn and subscribed before me this 26th day of March 1844

Reuben St. John, Clerk of Geauga Common Pleas

And now at this term of said Court that is to say at the term thereof first aforesaid it appearing to the Court by the affidavit of Lyman Cowdery Esq that the execution issued in this case Dec 11, A.D. 1841 has been lost. It is therefore considered by the Court that a new execution issue and that the plaintiff pay the costs of this motion taxed at one dollar. [^6]

Who Were Craig and Sargent?

William Craig and Winthrop Sargent were maritime business partners from Philadelphia. Their names were commonly seen in the classified ads of the prominent Philadelphia papers under "Imports," since they were frequently involved in international trade. They were involved in merchandising numerous and varied products, from lumber to wines, colognes, and hair dressings (pomades). They also leased ocean-going vessels.

Taking people to court was not a new experience for Craig and Sargent. The appearance dockets in the Philadelphia District Court between March 1833 and December 1836 list the partners ten times as plaintiffs, not once as defendants.

It is possible that the eleven mummies shipped from Trieste to New York City to the combined companies of Maitland & Kennedy and McLeod & Gillespie would be sent on to Philadelphia by water in preference to overland travel. Since Chandler was being sued by Craig and Sargent of Philadelphia, is it possible that these two merchants underwrote Chandlers' acquisition of the eleven mummies? Chandler charged Joseph Smith $600 per mummy. If the $6,000 lawsuit was for the acquisition of the eleven mummies alone, then the price per mummy is close to the same: about $545 per mummy. The Common Pleas records from Ohio do not specify the nature of the merchandise or service being contested.

There is plenty of Irish or Scottish-Irish blood among these merchants with names like Maitland, Kennedy, McLeod, Gillespie, Craig, and Sargent. Could Michael H. Chandler or his wife, Frances F. Ludlow, both Irish born, be related to any of them? Or was Chandler a former employee of Craig and Sargent? Six thousand dollars was a very large sum of money to lend to a stranger in 1833, or even the $850 that was finally resolved.

The original receivers of the mummies in the United States, maritime merchants Maitland, Kennedy, McLeod, and Gillespie, may also have had family ties with the Philadelphia merchants William Craig and Winthrop Sargent. In a Philadelphia Appearance Docket dated September 1839 is a case listing as plaintiffs Davis S. Kennedy, David Maitland, Stuart C. Maitland, and Henry S. Craig, trading as Kennedy Maitland and Co. The defendant is John W. Stitt, trading as John W. Stitt and Co. In December 1839 Henry S. Craig is again listed as a partner and a plaintiff for the firm Maitland, Kennedy and Co.

More Conjecture

Michael Chandler was displaying the mummies in Hudson, Ohio, as early as February 19, 1835, and displaying the four mummies in Cleveland in late March. Three months later he was in Kirtland, Ohio, where he spent a week among the Latter-day Saints. In the Cleveland Advertiser of March 26, 1835, the announcement of the mummy and papyri display ends with this sentence: "The collection is offered for sale by the pro-prietor."

One cannot help wondering why Chandler was in that isolated area of Ohio for over four months. Was he displaying his artifacts up and down the newly opened Ohio Canal? Was he visiting family members in the area? Was he traveling with relatives? Or was he looking for land, since he bought a farm in that region the following year?

About a week before he arrived in Kirtland, an interesting item appeared in the Daily Cleveland Herald for June 23, 1835, in a column that listed guests staying in local hotels. On June 22, "S. W. Craig, Philadelphia" registered at the Mansion House. Is this William Craig of the firm of William Craig and Winthrop Sargent? Was he in Cleveland to check on Chandler's overdue loan? It is even more interesting to read that "M. W. Chandler of Stow" registered at the Cleveland House on June 25. And on July 18, "M and F Chandler, [of] Stow," Ohio, registered at the same hotel. This was ten or eleven days after Michael Chandler agreed to sell the four mummies and the papyri to the Church.

The inscription for Michael H. and Frances on the Chandler tombstone in the West Farmington, Ohio, cemetery reads "M. H. and F. Chandler." Why did Michael H. and Frances Chandler list their home as Stow, about thirty miles away? Had the family permanently left Pennsylvania, or were they visiting loved ones?

The letter from Joseph Coe to the Prophet Joseph Smith raises several questions relative to Chandler's dealings with the mummies. Some perceptive historians will someday piece this part of the puzzle together. It appears that this series of court cases further discredits Michael H. Chandler's claims to any blood relationship with Antonio Lebolo.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] "A gentleman, travelling in Egypt made a selection of several mummies." Millennial Star 3 (August 1842): 70-71.
[^2] "On his way to England he died." Lack of leadership skills among the new converts. Realizing that the printed word could help inexperienced converts to learn better their duties as well as the gospel, the Book of Mormon, the Church hymnbook, and many tracts were printed in England. England, with a concentrated population of about 27 million in the 1840s, was the dominant world power, while the United States had a population of about 23 million scattered over an immense area of land. The printing presses and paper quality in England were state of the art, and because the geographical area was small, it was fairly easy to reach the Saints there. Millennial Star 3 (July 1842): 46-47.
[^3] "They [the mummies] arrived in the Thames." A shortage of gospel literature and adequate means of distribution. Millennial Star 26 (February 20, 1864): 118.
[^4] The mummies were bequeathed to a gentleman by the name of Chandler. James R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), 197. The 1851 statistic is in Richard O. Cowan, "Church Growth in England, 1841-1914," in Truth Will Prevail, ed. V. Ben Bloxham, James R. Moss, and Larry C. Porter (Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987), 213.
[^5] "A number of gentlemen in the neighbourhood, [Kirtland] not connected with the Saints, united together, and, purchasing the record together with some or all of the mummies, made Mr. Smith a present of them." Ibid., 197.
[^6] "The record is now in course of translation by means of the Urim and Thummim." British Mission Manuscript History, June 2, 1850, Church Historical Department, Salt Lake City.
