H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

14

The Book of Abraham Is Published in Liverpool

The Book of Abraham was initially published in England in 1842 in the Millennial Star, a monthly British Mission publication under the editorship of Elder Parley P. Pratt, the mission president and a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The following announcement appeared in the June 1842 edition of the Millennial Star: "Also, we expect in next month's 'Star,' to give some extracts from the 'Book of Abraham'—a relick of greater antiquity than the Bible, written on papyrus and taken from the breast of an Egyptian mummy, now in the possession of and translated by Joseph Smith.—Ed."

Joseph Smith first published the Book of Abraham in three installments in the Times and Seasons: in the edition dated March 1, 1842, Abraham 1:1-2:18, including Facsimile 1; March 15, 1842, Abraham 2:19-5:21, including Facsimile 2; and May 16, 1842, Facsimile 3. Parley P. Pratt followed a similar schedule in England. Abraham 1:1-2:18 and Facsimile 1 were printed in the July 1842 edition of the Millennial Star, and Abraham 2:19-5:21 was printed in the August 1842 edition. Neither Facsimile 2 nor Facsimile 3 was reproduced in the 1842 Millennial Star.

In the August 1842 edition, Elder Pratt wrote:

When we read the Book of Abraham with the reflection that its light has burst upon the world after a silence of three or four thousand years, during which it has slumbered in the bosom of the dead, and been sealed up in the sacred archives of Egypt's moldering ruins; when we see there unfolded our eternal being—our existence before the world was—our high and responsible station in the councils of the Holy One, and our eternal destiny; when we there contemplate the majesty of the works of God as unfolded in all the simplicity of truth, opening to our view the wide expanse of the universe, and showing the laws and regulations, the times and revolutions of all worlds, from the celestial throne of heaven's Kings, or the mighty Kolob, whose daily revolution is a thousand years, down through all the gradations of existence to our puny earth, we are lost in astonishment and admiration, and are led to exclaim, what is man without the key of knowledge? or what can he know when shut from the presence of his maker, and deprived of conversation with all intelligences of a higher order? Surely the mind of man is just awaking from the deep sleep of many generations, from his thousand years of midnight darkness. The morning of celestial light has dawned upon a benighted world—

"The opening seals announce the day

By prophets long foretold."

No doubt, many will startle at the term "Gods," or deity in the plural number; yet it is a fact that the bible calls them Gods to whom the world of God came. And in the beginning of Genesis, and throughout the bible, the Hebrew word Elohim (Gods), is actually in the plural, though the translators have rendered it (God) in the singular. [^1]

Either Elder Pratt relied too heavily on his memory or he had been given some new information as to the origin of the Egyptian text, because he published an account that contains several puzzling statements not mentioned or confirmed elsewhere:

We have much pleasure this month in being able to give an illustration and extract from the Book of ABRAHAM; a book of higher antiquity than any portion of the bible. Singular is the providence by which this ancient record fell into the hands of the servant of the Lord, JOSEPH SMITH. A gentleman, travelling in Egypt, made a selection of several mummies, of the best kind of embalming, and of course in the best state of preservation; on his way to England he died, bequeathing them to a gentleman of the name of CHANDLER. They arrived in the Thames, but it was found the gentleman was in America, they were then forwarded to New York and advertised, when Mr. CHANDLER came forward and claimed them. One of the mummies, on being unrolled, had underneath the cloths in which it was wrapped, lying upon the breast, a roll of papyrus, in an excellent state of preservation, written in Egyptian character, and illustrated in the manner of our engraving, which is a copy from a portion of it. The mummies, together with the record, have been exhibited, generally through the States, previous to their falling into our hands.

Mr. CHANDLER was, of course, anxious to find some one who could interpret or translate this valuable relic of antiq-uity, and, we believe, on one occasion, met with an individual who was enabled to decipher a small portion, or, at least, to give an opinion of what he supposed its meaning to be. He every where heard mention of JOSEPH SMITH and the Book of Mormon, but so generally associated with something slanderous, that he could scarcely think seriously of applying to him. But at length, however, he called upon Mr. SMITH, to inquire if he had a power by which he could translate the ancient Egyptian. Mr. SMITH replied that he had, when Mr. CHANDLER presented the fragment which had been par-tially interpreted. Mr. SMITH retired into his translating room, and presently returned with a written translation in English, of the fragment, confirming the supposed meaning ascribed to it by the gentleman to who it had been previously presented.

An event, of a nature so extraordinary, was of course soon noised abroad, when a number of gentlemen in the neighbourhood, not connected with the Saints, united together, and, purchasing the record together with some or all of the mummies, made Mr. SMITH a present of them. The record is now in course of translation by the means of the Urim and Thummim, and proves to be a record written partly by the father of the faithful, Abraham, and finished by Joseph when in Egypt. After his death, it is supposed they were preserved in the family of the Pharaohs and afterwards hid up with the embalmed body of the female with whom they were found. Thus it is, indeed, true, that the ways of the Lord are not as man's ways, nor his thought as our thoughts. Here, then, is another subject for the Gentile world to stumble at, and for which to persecute the Saints, not knowing that there is nothing hidden but what shall be brought to light, and nothing secret but what shall be discovered. Let us have no revelations is the popular cry of the day; any one's creed but God's. How true were the words of Jesus, "because I come unto you in my father's name ye will not receive me; if another should come in his own name, him ye will receive."

The language of the present generation is, we can believe in the marvelous works of God in former ages, but not now; how will they be confounded as the mighty purposes of Jehovah roll on unfolding mystery after mystery to his people, while his judgments are pouring out upon the ungodly and the unbelieving.

Let the Saints be faithful and watchful, and be ready to receive all things that God shall be pleased to communicate for their well-being in these the last days; bearing in mind that his great and finishing work, his gathering of the Saints together into one, in order to establish his kingdom, the dominion of which shall be universal, and all powers become subject unto it, will require revelations peculiar to itself, such as were never communicated at any former period of time. Now is the day of the trial of our faith, the day of warfare and of strife against the powers of darkness; but anon shall be the day of triumph, blessed shall they be who endure unto the end, and overcome, and swell the song of victory, for they shall have power over the nations to rule them with a rod of iron, and they shall have given unto them the morning star. [^2]

The article contains several puzzling declarations:

This statement implies that a tourist or perhaps a businessman went to Egypt to procure some antiquities. It has some ring of truth but it is also misleading, since Antonio Lebolo had been employed in Egypt as an excavator and antiquities dealer for several years.

No evidence has been found that Lebolo ever planned to go to England. Some Italian families by the name of Lebolo did live in England at that time, or Antonio may have had business interests there, but evidence is lacking. Did a Lebolo family member travel to England from Trieste with the shipment of the mummies?

The eleven mummies may have been in England while en route to the United States, since we are unable to determine the specific ship that brought them the states or the exact route it took, but their final destination was New York City.

Michael H. Chandler related a similar story to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, but Lebolo's will and his son Pietro's letter of authorization to Francesco Bertola seem to disprove this statement. Elder Pratt appears to be recalling some of the Oliver Cowdery report.

Several people in the Kirtland area aided in purchasing the antiquities and assisted Joseph Smith in raising his third of the purchase price, along with Joseph Coe's third and Simeon Andrew's third, so it is possible that nonmembers may have assisted in their purchase. However, it seems inconceivable that only nonmembers would, at Joseph Smith's request to acquire them, contribute $2,400 and then present them to him as a gift. Other reports do not support this statement.

How extensively did Joseph Smith use the Urim and Thummim in translating the Book of Abraham? Some writers believed that he returned the Urim and Thummim to the angel Moroni along with the plates in 1829 and did not have them thereafter. Others believed the seer stones were also referred to as Urim and Thummim. Joseph Smith did have one or more seer stones after 1829, and a generic terminology may have been used in calling it (or them) Urim and Thummim. Whether he used a seer stone or Urim and Thummim while translating the Abrahamic scrolls is not answered in his personal writings or in the Church history. Since he spent considerable time on "translating" an alphabet and grammar, it seems doubtful that those sacred instruments were utilized extensively or at all in the Abrahamic translation between 1835 and 1841. However, as noted in chapter 12, Wilford Woodruff wrote that the Prophet had been using the Urim and Thummim to translate Abraham's record in February 1842. He also recorded on December 27, 1841, that "the twelve or a part of them spent the day with Joseph the Seer and he unfolded unto them many glorious things of the kingdom of God the privilege and blessings of the priesthood etc. I had the privelege of seeing for the first time in my day the Urim and Thummim."

Brigham Young's report of the same meeting, however, leaves it unclear whether the Urim and Thummim or a seer stone was in Joseph's hands on that date. He wrote: "I met with the Twelve at Brother Joseph's. He conversed with us in a familiar manner on a variety of subjects, and explained to us the Urim and Thummim which he found with the plates, called in the Book of Mormon the Interpreters. He said that every man who lived on the earth was entitled to a seer stone, and should have one, but they are kept from them in consequence of their wickedness, and most of those who do find one make an evil use of it; he showed us his seer stone." [^3]

Some accounts refer to two scrolls received by Joseph Smith: the scroll of Abraham and the scroll of Joseph. This account is another possibility.

This account in the Millennial Star states that it was a pharaonic line of dignitaries that preserved the sacred documents, and that the final resting place was in the sarcophagus of an embalmed female. Other accounts refer to the parchments' having been found accompanying the body of a male.

The Pearl of Great Price Is Published in England

The writings of Abraham were published in England nine years later, in 1851, in a mission publication entitled The Pearl of Great Price. Many important events had transpired between the time the Book of Abraham was published in the Millennial Star and this new publication.

The Church in Great Britain grew at a phenomenal rate between 1837, the year the gospel was first introduced there, and 1851, when emigration to the United States caused the membership to decline. The following figures indicate the rapid rate of growth of the Church between 1837 and 1851:

1840 2,544 1844 7,797 1848 17,902

1841 5,814 1845 9,032 1849 26,012

1842 7,514 1846 10,894 1850 30,747

1843 7,975 1847 12,139 1851 32,894 [^4]

Usually when students are asked, "Where did the majority of Latter-day Saints live in 1850 or 1851," most respond, "In Utah." Others, remembering that many members were still gathering to Utah from the eastern states, may say, "Utah along with the immigrants heading west along the Mormon trail." Neither answer is correct.

The 1850 census indicates there were 5,779 members of the Church in Salt Lake City; about 11,000 in all of the Utah terri-tory, including Salt Lake City; and 15,531 scattered elsewhere in the United States. Compare this with 30,747 members in Great Britain in 1850, and the total worldwide membership of 57,278 that year, and we can readily see that the majority lived in Great Britain. [^5]

In 1850 and 1851 the Church in Great Britain faced several major problems:

l. Church headquarters located thousands of miles away in the American West.

The Saints in the West had many problems of their own to resolve, such as inclement weather; a short growing season; lack of adequate irrigation systems and other challenges related to agriculture; a shortage of essential equipment, tools, and supplies; transportation and communication difficulties; Indian relationships; and financial concerns.

In England local Church units were administered by recent converts who had little or no experience in observing or managing the affairs of the kingdom. Over two-thirds of the British members in 1850 had been baptized in the previous four years. Most of these new members were from the laboring classes and had few or no leadership skills prior to joining the Church.

The Great Basin desert lacked timber, a vital ingredient in papermaking. The little amount of paper available was necessary to carry out the official business of the territorial government and the immediate needs of the Church. There was no excess paper available for printing materials to send to England.

The Brethren met these needs and overcame these obstacles in the following ways:

l. Strong leaders, including several apostles, were sent to Great Britain to administer and minister to the needs of the membership there.

A Mission Pamphlet Is Proposed

With the rapid growth of the Church in England and the shortage of the printed word, most British Saints in 1850 did not own a copy of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, or any of the many pamphlets the missionaries used in proselyting. President Franklin D. Richards of the European Mission encouraged them "to read Elder [Orson] Pratt's pamphlets, and lend them to others, so the people might know that Mormonism included all that is good." [^6]

On February 1, 1851, President Franklin D. Richards wrote to his uncle Levi Richards, who was serving a mission in Swansea, south of Liverpool, and proposed that he (Franklin) compile selected quotations from the writings of Joseph Smith for the British Saints. He listed some material he had collected and asked Levi if he thought the proposal had merit. This letter is a follow-up to previous discussions or correspondence on this proposal:

You will perhaps recollect my naming to you that I thought of issuing a collection of revelations, prophecies &c., in a tract form of a character not designed to pioneer our doctrines to the world, so much as for the use of the Elders and Saints to arm and better qualify them for their service in our great war. The order of the work which I had thought to adopt so far as I have considered is about as follows:

First the revelation to Moses then the translation of the first chap of Genesis. Then perhaps the revelation to Enoch after which or perhaps before it, items of revelation informing of Gods second law to Adam, viz faith repentance &c. as given to him by ministration of an Angel. The particular place could perhaps be better determined after close examination. Then perhaps, Mr. Chandler's letter about the mummies containing an account of the sale of them to the Church &c. &c. followed with a fac simile of the plates and the translation of the Book of Abraham. I have not particularly determined in my own mind as to the consecutive order of the other items such as translation of 24th Matthew. The destiny of the American Union &c., any further that I had thought it might perhaps be as well to close up with the Key to Revelation. Giving the whole a general feature of chronological order except it be Joseph's prophecy of the Union.

Will you please to give me your views upon the matter in full with any suggestions which may occur to your mind relative to the subject at your earliest convenience. I desire that the whole thing may bear the dignity and weight of character which justly belongs to the revelations of God. [^7]

As far as is known, the name of the new publication was first mentioned on May 8, 1851, when Levi Richards wrote in his journal: "With Franklin at 15 Wilton, Liverpool, reading proof sheets of Pearl of Great Price." [^8] The Pearl of Great Price was announced to the British Saints on July 15, 1851, in the Millennial Star:

Pearl of Great Price, is the title of a new work which will soon be ready for sale, containing 64 pages on beautiful paper of superior quality, and on new type of larger size than any heretofore issued from this office. It contains

Extracts from the prophecy of Enoch, including a revelation of the Gospel to our first parents after their expulsion from the Garden of Eden.

The Words of God, which he spake unto Moses at the time when Moses was caught up into an exceeding high mountain, and saw God face to face, and talked with him, and the Glory of God was upon Moses, so that he could endure the presence of the Lord. Including also the history of the creation of this heaven and this earth, together with the inhabitants thereof, and many historical items until the time of the flood, being items from the new translation of the scriptures by the Prophet Joseph.

The Book of Abraham—a translation of some ancient records that fell into the hand of the Church a few years since from the catacombs of Egypt, purporting to be the writings of Abraham while he was in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham, written by his own hand upon Papyrus; translated from the Papyrus by Joseph Smith. Connected with this translation are three fac-similes from the Papyrus.

An extract from a translation of the Bible—being the Twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, commencing with the last verse of the Twenty-third chapter, by the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, Joseph Smith.

A Key to the Revelations of St. John, in a series of questions and answers. By the same.

A Revelation given December, 1832, which has never before appeared in print.

Extracts from the History of Joseph Smith, containing an account of the First Visions and Revelations which he received, also of his discovery and obtaining the Plates of God which contain the Record of Mormon; its translation, his baptism, and ordination by an Angel; items of doctrine from the revelations and commandments to the Church, &c.

This little work though not particularly adapted nor designed as a pioneer of our faith to unbelievers of present revelation, will be a source of much instruction and edification to many thousands of the Saints, who will by an acquaintance with its precious contents, be more abundantly qualified to set forth and defend the principles of our Holy Faith before all men. The PEARL OF GREAT PRICE will recommend itself to all who appreciate the revelations of truth as hidden treasures of Everlasting Life. Prices printed on the covers. [^9]

The first edition was not sixty-four pages, as announced, but fifty-six pages. The book included the following preface by President Richards:

The following compilation has been introduced by the repeated solicitations of several friends of the publisher, who are desirous to be put in possession of the very important ar-ticles contained therein. Most of the Revelations composing this work were published at early periods of the church, when the circulation of its journals was so very limited as to render them comparatively unknown at present, except to a few who have treasured up the productions of the Church with great care from the beginning. A smaller portion of this work has never before appeared in print; and altogether it is presumed, that true believers in the Divine mission of the Prophet JOSEPH SMITH, will appreciate this little collection of precious truths as a Pearl of Great Price that will increase their ability to maintain and to defend the holy faith by becoming possessors of it.

Although not adapted, nor designed, as a pioneer of the faith among unbelievers, still it will commend itself to all careful students of the scriptures, as detailing many important facts which are therein only alluded to, or entirely unmentioned, but consonant with the whole tenor of the revealed will of God; and, to the beginner in the Gospel, will add confirmatory evidence of the rectitude of his faith, by showing him that the doctrines and ordinances thereof are the same as were revealed to Adam for his salvation after his expulsion from the garden, and the same that he handed down and caused to be taught to his generations after him, as the only means appointed of God by which the generations of men may regain His presence.

Nor do we conceive it possible for any unprejudiced person to arise from a careful perusal of this work, without being deeply impressed with a sense of the Divine calling, and holy ordination, of the man by whom these revelations, translations, and narrations have been communicated to us. As impervious as the minds of men may be at present to these convictions, the day is not far distant when sinners, as well as Saints, will know that JOSEPH SMITH was one of the greatest men that ever lived upon the earth, and that under God he was the Prophet and founder of the dispensation of the fullness of times, in which will be gathered together into one all things which are in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth.

This first edition of the Pearl of Great Price contained the entire published text of the Book of Abraham and the three facsimiles as printed in the Times and Seasons in 1842. The facsimiles are listed in the table of contents under the heading "Index to Wood-Cuts."

The mission publication was not intended to be used as a proselyting tool, as was the Book of Mormon, but it was, as stated in the preface, intended to convince "true believers in the Divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith . . . [in order to] increase their ability to maintain and to defend the holy faith by becoming possessors of it."

I studied quite carefully the personal journal entries of President Richards for this time period and concluded that to him, the compiling of the Pearl of Great Price was not considered a monumental accomplishment. My colleague, Dr. Richard O. Cowan, came to a similar conclusion. He wrote:

Perhaps President Richards and his associates did not fully realize the significance of what had been done. He did not refer to the publication of this future canonized scripture in his journal, nor does the Star's enumeration of his accomplishments as mission president mention it (MS 14:168). Nevertheless, the Saints immediately recognized President Richards's work as a major contribution to their literature, and as early as 1857 President Brigham Young included the Pearl of Great Price among the few books he placed in the foundation stone of the Salt Lake Temple, which was then under construction (JH 13 Aug. 1857). [^10]

President Young presented a copy of the Pearl of Great Price to the Harvard College Library on September 1, 1864, along with the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. Although the Pearl of Great Price was not a canonized book of scripture in 1864, this gift indicates the respect the leading brethren had for the British Mission publication. [^11]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Courtesy of Kristin Linebarger, a student in a Pearl of Great Price class at Brigham Young University and a great-great-granddaughter of Elizabeth Clements Kendall, who told the story. The account was written by Bertha Pearl Kendall Molmstrom, Elizabeth's daughter.
[^2] "A Glance at the Mormons," Alexandria Gazette, quoted in the Quincy Whig, October 17, 1840.
[^3] Ida A. Isaacson, "They Knew the Prophet Joseph Smith," Relief Society Magazine 53 (July 1966): 507.
[^4] "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," The Overland Monthly (December 1890): 623-24.
[^5] HC 6:33.
[^6] Millennial Star 4 (December 1843): 122-23; quoted from the Nauvoo Neighbor.
[^7] Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past from the Leaves of Old Journals, 386-87.
[^8] Ibid., 387.
[^9] HC 2:348.
[^10] William I. Appleby Journal, electronic version in Backman and Perkins, Writings of Early Latter-day Saints and Their Contemporaries, 64-65.
[^11] Nellie Stary Bean, "Reminiscences of the Granddaughter of Hyrum Smith," Relief Society Magazine 9 (January 1922): 9.
