H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

15

Displaying the Antiquities in Nauvoo

In Nauvoo, as in Kirtland, the temple construction and the mummies and papyri were high on the list of things to see while visiting the headquarters of the Church. The Egyptian antiquities were displayed in three locations in Nauvoo: (1) on the second floor of Joseph Smith's two-story log cabin; (2) for a time at his mother's log cabin; and (3) at the "Mansion House," a combination hotel and home for the Prophet that was completed in 1843. The Prophet was murdered before the Nauvoo Temple was completed, and it appears that the antiquities were never housed there as they had been in the Kirtland Temple.

As a young girl, Elizabeth Clements Kendall recalled visiting Joseph Smith's log-cabin home to deliver some laundry. He asked if she would like to see the Egyptian mummies. According to an account of the incident written by her daughter, Elizabeth reported that

she was very thrilled at the thought and of course very curious, but she felt it a great privilege to be allowed to see them. The mummies were kept in the attic where they wouldn't be destroyed and in those days there weren't any stairways in the houses such as we have now, and in order to get to the attic one had to climb a ladder which was straight up along the wall.

She told Joseph in a very timid voice that she would like to see them, but was a little frightened while climbing the ladder to the attic. But when at the top she saw the room with the curious looking things, and Joseph seeing she was a little frightened stepped to her side, laid his hand on her shoulder and said, "come little one, do not be afraid." He took her by the hand and led her to them saying, "touch them and you will never be afraid of the dead." It was then that he placed his hands on her shoulder and head and gave her a blessing. He told her that when she grew up she would be a nurse and would care for the sick and the dead all her life. [^1]

The following report, which appeared in the Quincy (Illinois) Whig under the title "A Glance at the Mormons," described a writer's visit to Nauvoo in late April 1840:

After [Joseph Smith] had shown us the fine grounds around his dwelling; he conducted us, at our request, to an upper room, where he drew aside the curtains of a case; and showed us several Egyptian Mummies, which we were told that the church had purchased, at his suggestion, some time before, for a large sum of money.

The embalmed body that stands near the centre of the case, said he, is one of the Pharaohs, who sat upon the throne of Egypt; and the female figure by its side was probably one of the daughters.

It may have been the Princess Thermutis, I replied, the same that rescued Moses from the waters of the Nile.

It is not improbable, answered the Prophet; but my time has not yet allowed me fully to examine and decide that point. Do you understand the Hebrew language, said he, raising his hand to the top of the case, and taking down a small Hebrew Grammer of Rabbi Seixas.

That language has not altogether escaped my attention was the reply.

He then walked to a secretary, on the opposite side of the room, and drew out several frames, covered with glass, under which were numerous fragments of Egyptian papyras, on which, as usual, a great variety of hieroglyphical characters had been imprinted.

These ancient records, said he, throw great light on the subject of Christianity. They have been unrolled and preserved with great labor and care. My time has been hitherto too much taken up to translate the whole of them, but I will show you how I interpret certain parts. There, said he, pointing to a particular character, that is the signature of the patriarch Abraham.

It is indeed a most interesting autograph, I replied, and doubtless the only one extant. What an ornament it would be to have these ancient manuscripts handsomely set, in appropriate frames, and hung up around the walls of the temple which you are about to erect at this place.

Yes, replied the Prophet, and the translation hung up with them. [^2]

Catherine Hulet Winget related in her history that in the fall of 1840 she attended the "first conference ever held in Nauvoo. It was held out of doors. There was considerable sickness there that fall and many of the people attending the conference were pale and sickly. While there, I went to the house of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He had three Egyptian mummies in his room. I saw them standing against the wall." [^3]

On February 19, 1843, a girl named Charlotte visited Joseph and Emma Smith, then called on Lucy Mack Smith, Joseph's mother. In a magazine article entitled "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," she wrote about the visit:

Madame Smith's residence is a log house very near her son's. She opened the door and received us cordially. She is a motherly kind of woman of about sixty years. She receives a little pittance by exhibiting The Mummies to strangers. When we asked to see them, she lit a candle and conducted us up a short, [narrow] stairway to a low, dark room under the roof. On one side were standing half a dozen mummies, to whom she introduced us, King Onitus and his royal household,—one she did not know. Then she took up what seemed to be a club wrapped in a dark cloth, and said "This is the leg of Pharaoh's daughter, the one that saved Moses." Repressing a smile, I looked from the mummies to the old lady, but could detect nothing but earnestness and sincerity on her countenance. Then she turned to a long table, set her candle-stick down, and opened a long roll of manuscript, saying it was "the writing of Abraham and Isaac, written in Hebrew and Sanscrit," and she read several minutes from it as if it were English. It sounded very much like passages from the Old Testament—and it might have been for anything we knew—but she said she read it through the inspiration of her son Joseph, in whom she seemed to have perfect confidence. Then in the same way she interpreted to us hieroglyphics from another roll. One was Mother Eve being tempted by the serpent, who—the serpent, I mean—was standing on the tip of his tail, which with his two legs formed a tripod, and had his head in Eve's ear. I said, "But serpents don't have legs."

"They did before the fall," she asserted with perfect confidence.

The Judge slipped a coin in her hand which she received smilingly, with a pleasant, "Come again," as we bade her goodby. [^4]

The Prophet posted a sign on the front of his house on September 15, 1843, that read:

NAUVOO MANSION

In consequence of my house being constantly crowded with strangers and other persons wishing to see me, or who had business in the city, I found myself unable to support so much company free of charge, which I have done from the foundation of the Church. My house has been a home and resting-place for thousands, and my family many times obliged to do without food, after having fed all they had to visitors; and I could have continued the same liberal course, had it not been for the cruel and untiring persecution of my relentless enemies. I have been reduced to the necessity of opening "The Mansion" as a hotel. I have provided the best table accommodations in the city; and the Mansion, being large and convenient, renders travelers more comfortable than any other place on the Upper Mississippi. I have erected a large and commodious brick stable, and it is capable of accommodating seventy-five horses at one time, and storing the requisite amount of forage, and is unsurpassed by any similar establishment in the State. [^5]

Many hundreds of visitors to Nauvoo stayed at the Mansion House, which was the social center of the city. The mummies were kept there, readily available for those who chose to see them. One visitor wrote: "After supper [we] were introduced to Mr. Smith the prophet. Suffice it to say we were agreeably disappointed in his person, appearance, and manners. He seemed to be very sociable and ready in conversation upon any subject. Upon his warm solicitation, we spent the night at his house. The morning was spent in examining some very curious ancient records found with a number of mummies in good pres-ervation, in ancient Thebes. They contain some very curious representations." [^6]

Josiah Quincy, a prominent nineteenth-century American who later became mayor of Boston, visited Nauvoo in the spring of 1844 in his attempt to personally unscramble the enigma of Joseph Smith and the controversial Mormons. The much publicized report of his visit in company with Charles Francis Adams, son of U.S. President John Quincy Adams, contains the following about the mummies and parchments:

"And now come with me," said the prophet, "and I will show you the curiosities." So saying, he led the way to a lower room, where sat a venerable and respectable-looking lady. "This is my mother, gentlemen. The curiosities we shall see belong to her. They were purchased with her own money, at a cost of six thousand dollars;" and then, with deep feeling, were added the words, "And that woman was turned out upon the prairie in the dead of night by a mob." There were some pine presses fixed against the wall of the room. These receptacles Smith opened, and disclosed four human bodies, shrunken and black with age. "These are mummies," said the exhibitor. "I want you to look at that little runt of a fellow over there. He was a great man in his day. Why, that was Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt!" Some parchments inscribed with hieroglyphics were then offered us. They were preserved under glass and handled with great respect. "That is the handwriting of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful," said the prophet. "This is the autograph of Moses, and these lines were written by his brother Aaron. Here we have the earliest account of the Creation, from which Moses composed the First Book of Genesis." The parchment last referred to showed a rude drawing of a man and woman, and a serpent walking upon a pair of legs. I ventured to doubt the propriety of providing the reptile in question with this unusual means of locomotion. "Why, that's as plain as a pikestaff," was the rejoinder. "Before the Fall snakes always went about on legs, just like chickens. They were deprived of them, in punishment for their agency in the ruin of man." We were further assured that the prophet was the only mortal who could translate these mysterious writings, and that his power was given by direct inspiration. [^7]

As Joseph Smith and his distinguished guests left the room that housed the mummies, he told his visitors, "Gentlemen . . . those who see these curiosities generally pay my mother a quarter of a dollar." [^8]

Though some errors are noted, such as the price paid for the mummies and some of the writers of the parchment, Josiah Quincy, a Harvard scholar, did state that the hieroglyphics "were preserved under glass and handled with great respect," and that Joseph's abilities to translate were not in consequence of any scholastically attained skills but by "direct inspiration."

Who Were the Mummies?

When the mummies were purchased in 1835, rumors were so rampant as to their identification that Oliver Cowdery was compelled to publish a disclaimer: "It has been said that the purchasers of these antiquities pretend to have the bodies of Abraham, Abimelech, (the king of the Philistines,) Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, etc., etc., for the purpose of attracting the attention of the multitude, and gulling the unwary; which is utterly false. Who these ancient inhabitants of Egypt were, I do not at present say." [^9] If Joseph knew who the mummies were at the time they were in Kirtland, he didn't say.

The writer of the article "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo" stated that Lucy Mack Smith claimed the mummies were "King Onitus and his royal household." The author of the article entitled "A Glance at the Mormons" recorded that according to Joseph Smith, one of the mummies "is one of the Pharaohs, who sat upon the throne of Egypt; and the female figure by its side was probably one of his daughters." When the visitor suggested that the daughter might be Princess Thermutis, who was believed to have rescued Moses from the Nile, it is reported that the Prophet answered, "It is not improbable . . . but my time has not yet allowed me fully to examine and decide that point." At the time he had had the mummies in his possession for more than five years.

William I. Appleby visited the Prophet in Nauvoo in June 1841 and wrote that he "viewed four Mummies, one male and three females brought from Ancient Thebes in Egypt,—saw the Roll of Papyrus, and the writings thereon, taken from off the bosom of the Male Mummy, being some of the writings of ancient Abraham and of Joseph that was sold into Egypt." He noted that "the Male mummy was one of the Ancient Pharaoh's of Egypt, and a Priest, as he is embalmed with his tongue extended,—representing a speaker. The females were his wife and two daughters, as a part of the writing has been translated, and informs us who they were, also whose writings it is, and when those mummies were embalmed, which is nearly four thousand years ago." [^10]

Many years later Jerusha Walker Blanchard, the oldest granddaughter of Joseph Smith's brother Hyrum, remembered playing hide and seek with her cousins Joseph, Frederick, Alexander, and David Smith. Her favorite hiding place, she said, "was in an old wardrobe which contained the mummies." She recalled that there were three mummies: "the old Egyptian king, the queen and their daughter," and that "in the arms of the Old King, lay the roll of papyrus from which our prophet translated the Book of Abraham." [^11]

In a lengthy handwritten account entitled "When the Mormons Dwelt among Us," Eudocia Baldwin Marsh wrote that when she visited Nauvoo with some members of her fam-ily, they dined at the "Mansion House Smiths large Hotel. After dinner," she said, "we were told that in an adjoining room some Egyptian mummies were exhibited for a small sum—Some of the party expressing a wish to see them, we were ushered into the room where we found them presided over by the mother of the Prophet, a trim looking old lady in black silk gown and white cap and kerchief."

According to Mrs. Marsh, Lucy Mack Smith, using a "long wand," pointed out to the visitors "old King Pharaoh of old Egypt himself, with wife and daughter and gave us a detailed account of thier [sic] lives and doing three thousand years before." When asked how she obtained this information, "she replied in a severely virtuose tone and a manner calculated to repress all doubt and further question—'My Son Joseph Smith has recently received a revelation from the Lord in regard to these people and times—and he has told all these things to me.'" [^12]

The written accounts of visitors to Nauvoo seem to be in general agreement that those who displayed the mummies said the male mummy was one of Egypt's pharaohs and the female figures were members of his family. However, there are several inconsistencies in the various accounts: the time frame, the names of the mummies, the gender of the mummies, and even the number of mummies. With boxes around the room where the mummies were exhibited, it is easy to see why some writers assumed there were bodies still inside. Also, sometimes a mummy or two might have been on loan for display elsewhere, accounting for differences in the number of antiquities. As-suming that the visitors received correct information during the exhibit, if considerable time elapsed between the visit and the recording, faulty memories might also have played a major role.

Mother Lucy Mack Smith, Curator

As has been noted, several of the visitors who saw the mummies in Nauvoo commented that Joseph Smith's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, appeared to be in charge of the Egyptian artifacts in the log cabin and later in the Mansion House. When Joseph Smith was home, he apparently showed them on occasion, but more frequently his mother would conduct the tours and answer the questions, for which she charged a fee of twenty-five cents per person.

After the deaths of three of her sons within a few weeks of each other—Joseph and Hyrum at Carthage Jail on June 27, 1844, and Samuel five weeks later—leaving William as her only surviving son, Mother Smith continued to manage the small museum to help maintain herself. More than fifty years later Joseph Smith III, Joseph and Emma's eldest son, reflected back upon the Nauvoo period and reported: "The papyrus from which the Book of Abraham, was said to have been translated by Father, was with other portions found in a roll with some Egyptian mummies, pasted on either paper or linen and put into a small case of flat drawers, some dozen or sixteen in number. This case, with two cases of mummies containing five persons, one much smaller than the others, were in the keeping of Grandmother Lucy Smith, Father's mother, for some time before Father's death, and were still in her possession both at the time he was killed and after." [^13]

Some highlights of Lucy Mack Smith's life after the deaths of her sons until her demise have been recorded as follows as a note in her family history:

Of the life of Lucy Smith, familiarly called Grandmother Smith, after the Martyr's death, little need be written. At the time of the tragedy at Carthage, Grandmother Smith was living with Joseph, and continued living with Emma until in September following, when she removed with her son-in-law, Arthur Millikin, and her daughter Lucy, into a house known as the Ponson house, hired for them by the Church, which also hired a girl to wait upon her and help generally. Sometime that fall, the fall of 1844, she commenced her history, the work now being republished, Mr. and Mrs. Corey writing for her.

She completed this work sometime in 1845, the copyright being secured for her by Elder Almon W. Babbit, in that year, or in the early part of 1846. The family moved into the house owned by Elder William Marks in 1845, but remained only till the next year, when they settled in a house bought for Grandmother, by the Church. In the fall of 1846, under the pressure of the mob coming against the city, they moved to Knoxville, Illinois, remaining over the winter, and in the spring of 1847 returning to Nauvoo, again. Here they remained till the fall of 1849, when they moved to Webster, in the same county, staying there two years, when they removed to Fountain Green. In the Spring of 1852 Grandmother Smith, and a grand child, a daughter of Samuel H. Smith, Mary Bailey Smith by name, went to Nauvoo to live with Major Lewis C. Bidamon, whom Emma Smith had married in 1847. She remained with them, until her death, which occurred on the farm owned by the prophet before his death, two and a half miles east of Nauvoo, on the road to Carthage. The farm was then being carried on by Sr. Emma and her boys; and here, on May 8th, 1855 [actually May 14, 1856], watched over and ministered to by Emma, the wife of her son Joseph, her grand son Joseph 3rd, and the young daughter of a neighboring farmer, Elizabeth Pilkington by name, this noble-hearted mother in Israel went to her rest.

Her grand daughter, Mary B. Smith, had some months before her death, married a Mr. Edward Kelteau, and had taken up her battle with the things of this life for herself. Major Bidamon was always kind to Grandmother Smith, and being a skillful workman in wood, constructed for her use a chair and carriage, upon which she was wheeled about the house and grounds, she being a bed-ridden invalid for years, helpless to a great extent.

For a time she derived a little income from the exhibition of some mummies and the papyrus records found with them, which had been left in her care by the Church for this purpose. [^14]

William Smith and the Mummies

In 1846 William Smith, Joseph's brother, mentioned the mummies in two letters to James J. Strang, a self-appointed leader of a group that had broken off from the Church. In a letter dated December 2, 1846, William wrote: "You in quire what may be the pleasure of Mother Smith it is to see her Children prosperous all gathered to Voree in the spring as soon as the roads & weather will permit, & teams & money sent to remove us the Mumies and records are safe etc., etc."

In a follow-up letter postmarked December 19, 1846, from Knoxville, Illinois, to "Brother Strang" at Burlington W. T., William wrote, ". . . to remove us it will require 7 teams, and one extra Carriage for Mother Smith to ride in. She is quite feeble and I feel anxious that she may be removed to [Vroe or Vree] and see the Prophet before that she is—gathered to the Land of her fathers the mummies & records are with us and will be of benifit to the Church." [^15]

William was excommunicated from the Church on October 12, 1845, by Brigham Young and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Several of his business dealings were questionable, and on his missions, "the course of conduct he pursued toward the females subjected him to much criticism." [^16] At the time he wrote the letters to Strang, he was making himself available to the apostate leader, who attempted to organize a church of his own. Apparently in William's mind, possessing the mummies and records added status to his claim that he was a viable church officer or patriarch.

There is an interesting account extant that William Smith displayed the mummies and parchments during a lecture series. Joseph Smith III, his nephew, reported that when Lucy Mack Smith returned to Nauvoo to live with her daughter Lucy, she did not bring with her "the mummies and case of drawers." He continued: "We learned that while living near Galesburg, Uncle William undertook a lecturing tour, and secured the mummies and case of records, as the papyrus was called, as an exhibit and aid to making his lectures more attractive and lucrative. Uncle William became stranded somewhere along the Illinois River, and sold the mummies and the records with the understanding that he might repurchase them. This he never did." He also wrote: "Uncle William never accounted for the sale he made, except to state that he was obliged to sell them, but fully in-tended to repurchase them, before the fire [the Chicago fire of 1871]; and of course could not after they were burned." [^17]

Brigham Young was apprised of the fact that William had taken control of the mummies. Almon W. Babbitt, who was in charge of the Church's affairs in Nauvoo after the apostles left, wrote to President Young on January 31, 1848, and told him, "William has got the mummies from Mother Smith and refuses to give them up." [^18]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Jay M. Todd, "Egyptian Papyri Rediscovered," 16.
[^2] As quoted in Richard P. Howard, "The 'Book of Abraham' in the Light of History and Egyptology," Courage, April 1970, 44.
[^3] "Question Time #63," The Saints' Herald, November 1955, 75-76.
[^4] Howard, 45.
[^5] Joseph Smith III, "Another Book of Abraham," The Saints' Herald, January 11, 1899, 18.
[^6] General Index to Deeds, Trumbull County, Ohio 1848-1855, January 7, 1855, 67; 73:554.
[^7] James R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), 158-61.
[^8] "Museum & Concert!," St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, August 2, 1856.
[^9] "St. Louis Museum," St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, August 14, 1856.
[^10] "Amusement Notices," St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, August 14, 1856.
[^11] "The Mormon Prophet's Mummies," St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, June 12, 1857.
[^12] Stanley B. Kimball, "New Light on Old Egyptiana: Mormon Mummies 1848-71," Dialogue, a Journal of Mormon Thought 16, no. 4 (Winter 1983): 72.
[^13] James Grant Wilson and Johne Fiske, Appleton's Cyclopedia of American Biography, 6 vols. (New York, 1888-89), 5:474.
[^14] "Lectures on Egyptian Archaeology," New York Daily Times, May 28, 1856.
[^15] Kimball, 74.
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] Doyle L. Green, "New Light on Joseph Smith's Egyptian Papyri: New Fragment Disclosed," and Jay M. Todd, "Background of the Church Historian's Fragment," Improvement Era, February 1968, 40, 40B, and 40C.
[^18] St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, August 14, 1856, and July 8, 1863.
