H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

16

The Elusive Trail of the Mummies

Did William Smith have the mummies, as Almon Babbitt reported to Brigham Young? This account is puzzling, since the four mummies and the papyrus were previously presumed to be in Lucy Mack Smith's possession when she died on May 14, 1856.

Twelve days later, the "four mummies and records of them" were sold by Emma Smith Bidamon, Lewis C. Bidamon (the man Emma married in 1847), and Joseph Smith III to a man who certainly had no special feelings for what these sacred records and the mummies had meant to Joseph Smith and to members of the Church. The bill of sale, dated May 26, 1856, stated:

This certifies that we have sold to Mr. A. Combs four Egyptian Mummies with the records of them. This mummies were obtained from the catacoms of Egypt sixty feet below the surface of the Earth by the antiquaritan society of Paris & forwarded to New York & purchased by the Mormon Prophet Joseph Smith at the price of twenty four hundred dollars in the year eighteen hundred thirty five they were highly prized by Mr. Smith on account of the importance which attached to the record which were accidentaly found enclosed in the breast of one of the Mummies. From translations by Mr. Smith of the Records these Mummies were found to be the family of Pharo King of Egypt. they were kept exclusively by Mr. Smith until his death & since by the Mother of Mr. Smith notwithstanding we have had repeated offers to purchase which have invariably been refused until her death which occurred on the fourteenth day of May last. [^1] The document was signed "L. C. Bidamon, Emma Bidamon, Joseph Smith [her son]."

The statement that the antiquities were "highly prized by [Joseph] Smith on account of the importance which attached to the record" is particularly interesting. Some of Emma Smith's descendants in the leadership of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS) have minimized the worth of the message of the scrolls and Joseph Smith's respect for them. Joseph Smith III and Heman C. Smith, who co-authored a multivolume history of the church in 1898, wrote: "The church has never to our knowledge taken any action on this work, either to endorse or condemn; so it cannot be said to be a church publication; nor can the church be held to answer for the correctness of its teaching. Joseph Smith, as the translator, is committed of course to the correctness of the translation, but not necessarily to the endorsement of its historical or doc-trinal content." [^2]

RLDS President Israel A. Smith stated, "We have no record that Joseph Smith, Jr., ever endorsed its contents or teachings. He merely translated on the basis of his own learning and study. He referred to it as a 'purported' record." [^3]

In 1970, RLDS President W. Wallace Smith made it even clearer with his disclaimer of the Abrahamic writings: "The Book of Abraham, published by Joseph Smith, Jr., in 1842 at Nauvoo, Illinois, and canonized by the Utah Mormon Church in 1880, provides much of the rationale for the Mormon Church's denial of priesthood to the black man. I do not consider the Book of Abraham to be anything other than the speculative writings of its author, and certainly neither intended by him nor endorsed officially by the Reorganized Church at any time since its founding in 1852 to qualify as 'inspired' writing." [^4]

Curiously, Joseph Smith III published the following statement, which was written in Lamoni, Iowa, on October 24, 1898, and is addressed to "Bro. Heman C. Smith, Lamoni, Iowa":

The papyrus from which the Book of Abraham, was said to have been translated by Father, was with other portions found in a roll with some Egyptian mummies, pasted on either paper or linen and put into a small case of flat drawers, some dozen or sixteen in number. This case, with two cases of mummies containing five persons, one much smaller than the others, were in the keeping of Grandmother Lucy Smith, Father's mother, for some time before Father's death, and were still in her possession both at the time he was killed and after. She took them from our house, some time after Father's death, and had them at her daughter Lucy Millikin's, when they moved into Knox County, Illinois, not far from Galesburg. I cannot give you dates, but during a part of 1846-7 Mother and fam-ily were away from Nauvoo and Grandmother was at Lucy Millikin's. Grandmother finally came back to Nauvoo with Lucy's family, but came without the mummies and case of drawers. We learned that while living near Galesburg, Uncle William undertook a lecturing tour, and secured the mummies and case of records, as the papyrus was called, as an exhibit and aid to making his lectures more attractive and lucrative. Uncle William became stranded somewhere along the Illinois River, and sold the mummies and the records with the understanding that he might repurchase them. This he never did. Part of the stock, one case of mummies and part or all of the cases of drawers, found their way to Wood's Museum, Chicago, and a part to St. Louis, where, we never learned. [^5]

The bill of sale also affirms that the mummies "were kept exclusively by Mr. Smith until his death." This does not mean that Joseph Smith did not allow other responsible people to display them. We know that they were displayed in and around Kirtland by Frederick G. Williams of the First Presidency, guides in the Kirtland Temple, and Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother. But these trusted people were personally responsible to Joseph for keeping the mummies safe. In the same vein, the letter confirms that the mummies had been kept by "the Mother of Mr. Smith" since the Prophet's death. The document also helps establish Lucy's death date as May 14, 1856, there being several incorrect dates in print.

Who Was A. Combs?

The purchaser of the antiquities was "Mr. A. Combs." Who was he? How did he know that the mummies and papyri were for sale? Is it possible that he lived in the vicinity of Nauvoo and was aware of Lucy Smith's failing health and death and the availability of the antiquities? Did Emma and the family advertise that they were for sale? How much did Combs pay for the antiquities? What did he intend to do with them?

Through some excellent research carried out by Brigham Young University Family History Services personnel, A. Combs was located. His given name was Abel, and he was born in the state of New York about 1823. He is first located in 1844, when, on April 4, he married Eliza Jane Johnson in Trumbull County, Ohio. On their marriage license, both Abel and Eliza Jane, who was born in Virginia in 1824, listed Bristol, Trumbull County, as their place of residence. One child, a son whom they named Oscar, was born in 1845. Another fact we have learned—one whose significance is not yet known—is that between 1844 and 1855, Abel and Eliza owned land in Southington, Ohio, about thirty miles from Kirtland and just ten to fifteen miles from Michael H. Chandler's farm.

We do not know if Combs lived in Trumbull County as a boy. If he did, he might have visited Kirtland sometime between 1835 and 1838, when the mummies and papyri were on display there, or Rochester, Portage County, Ohio, where Joseph Smith Sr. kept the mummies at the Woolley home when their safety was threatened by radical apostates in Kirtland. If Combs did not personally see the antiquities in Kirtland as a young man, he surely would have learned while living there that Michael H. Chandler, the Irish farmer who lived but a few miles from his home, was the one who had sold them to the Mormon prophet.

Combs is listed in census records for Trumbull County as a "hardware plater." He and Eliza sold a thirty-nine-acre farm in Farmington, Trumbull County, on January 7, 1855, [^6] and where they went after that time is unknown. They are not listed in Trumbull County in the 1860 census. Whether they moved to the Nauvoo area sometime after leaving Ohio is also unknown. Their son, Oscar, married a "Nellie" Ellen Donovan from Illinois in 1863. Many years later, from 1874 to 1892, Abel lived in Philadelphia, where the city directory listed his business as "lamps" and later as "artist."

How Combs learned of the death of Lucy Mack Smith and the availability of the mummies and papyri remains a mystery. There is no evidence that he toured and displayed the mummies as did Michael Chandler. We also do not know at this time how much he paid for the antiquities, since the price was not re-corded on the bill of sale. Perhaps William Smith had entered into an agreement months or even years before the items were sold, and the bill of sale merely made the transfer of ownership official.

Two Mummies and Some Records in St. Louis

Dr. James R. Clark, my mentor at BYU and author of The Story of the Pearl of Great Price, was well aware that some of the antiquities were in the Wood's Museum prior to the great Chicago fire of 1871. After examining the Chicago Museum catalog of 1863, he learned that the two mummies on display had been acquired from the St. Louis Museum. [^7] Through his initial research and the combined efforts of several later researchers, the story of the antiquities following their sale to Abel Combs is coming into sharper focus.

In a St. Louis newspaper on August 2, 1856, an interesting advertisement appeared under the title "Museum and Concert!" The ad stated that a "Floating Palace" containing upwards of one hundred thousand curiosities—including "Ancient Relics from Egypt, Greece, Rome, Pompeii and Herculaneum"—would be exhibited at the Steamboat Landing on August 7, 8, and 9. [^8] This information is possibly unrelated but at least it is noteworthy because of an announcement that appeared in the local newspaper twelve days later. On August 14, 1856, the St. Louis Museum released the following story under the heading "A Combination of Exhibitions! Third Story Wyman's Hall, (opposite the court house)":

This establishment is now open for exhibition, under the management, and for the benefit of Mr. J. P. BATES, practical naturalist, and contains

FIRST—The finest and most unique collection of Birds, Quadrupeds, Reptiles, Fish, and other illustrations of Natural History in the West, and unrivalled for its choice and rare specimens, (about 2,000 in number,) and the style and beauty displayed in their preparation and arrangement.

SECOND—The greatest geological wonder in the world, the CETACEAN SAURIAN OPHIDIAN MONSTER,

ZEUGLODON MACROSPONDYLUS,

Of Muller, discovered by Dr. Koch, in Alabama, a complete skeleton 96 feet in length, and set in natural position.

THIRD—TWO MUMMIES from the Catacombs of Egypt, which have been unrolled, presenting a full view of the RECORDS enclosed, and of the bodies which are in a remarkable state of preservation.

FOURTH—Vance's great collection of panoramic views of towns, cities and places of note in California—about 200 in number, and exhibited to thousands of persons in New York, at a charge of 25 cents.

FIFTH—A fine collection of MINERALS, FOSSILS, SHELLS, CHOICE PAINTINGS and CURIOSITIES.

Admission fee to the whole 25 cents—and refunded if satisfaction is not given.

Open every day (Sunday's excepted) from 9 A.M., to 6 P.M., and on Tuesday and Saturday evenings from 7 to 10 P.M.

Contributions solicited and carefully preserved.

Taxidermal work executed as usual. [^9]

In the same edition of the newspaper, the editor, in a column entitled "Amusement Notices," encouraged readers to visit the museum, confirming that the mummies were a new addition to the displays: "Lately, we observe a new attraction, consisting of a pair of MUMMIES from the Catacombs of Egypt, which are a great novelty in these parts, and should be seen by all." [^10] An entry published on June 12, 1857, in the St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat should quell all doubts that these mummies were from the Joseph Smith collection, a premise that had apparently been challenged:

THE MORMON PROPHET'S MUMMIES—Not long since, we stated that the mummies and accompanying Egyptain manuscripts at the museum were the identical mummies and manuscripts formerly found by Smith the mormon prophet. They were purchased by the proprietor of the museum from Mr. A. Combs, who bought them at Nauvoo city on the 26th of May, 1856. In a work published by "the saints" is a facsimile of the manuscripts with the information added that they were written by the great Jewish patriarch, Abraham himself. Doubt having still been expressed that they were the prophet's mummies, etc., we now append the certificate with which the sale of them to Mr. Combs was accompanied. [^11]

The bill of sale, with a few grammatical, spelling, and punctuation corrections and changes, followed this announcement. The article stated that the mummies were purchased "by the proprietor of the museum from Mr. A. Combs, who bought them at Nauvoo city on the 26th of May, 1856." It is not clear whether Edward Wyman of the St. Louis Museum purchased the mummies from Abel Combs in Nauvoo or somewhere else, or whether Combs traveled to St. Louis via the "Floating Palace" or by some other means. What is apparent is that two of the four mummies and some papyri from the Mormon collection were in St. Louis just ten weeks after Combs purchased them in Nauvoo.

Dr. Stanley B. Kimball, a professor of history who lives in the St. Louis area, searched the local newspapers for any mention of the mummies. He discovered an article in the St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, dated May 13, 1857, that read, "Some of the brethren have had the hardness to deny that these were the patriarchal manuscripts and relics. But an unanswerable confirmation of the fact has lately occurred; certain plates issued by the elders as facsimiles of the original having fallen into Mr. Wyman's hands, which plates are also facsimiles of the hieroglyphics in the museum." [^12]

Dr. Kimball hypothesized that Wyman had seen a copy of the 1851 edition of the Pearl of Great Price, which apparently confirmed that one or more of the facsimiles reproduced therein were on display at the St. Louis exhibit. This is a logical conclusion. The producing of the bill of sale a month later apparently settled the misunderstanding. This episode indicates that the local Saints or some who were traveling through St. Louis were aware that the two mummies and the papyri were being exhibited at Wyman's Hall and had raised some questions about Wyman's claim to their authenticity.

Professor Seyffarth and the Papyri

Another piece to the puzzle is found in New York City, where Professor Gustavus Seyffarth was lecturing on Egyptian archaeology at the same time that Abel Combs bought the mummies in Nauvoo. Dr. Seyffarth, a professor of archaeology and exegesis at Concordia Lutheran theological seminary in St. Louis between 1855 and 1871, was born in Saxony in 1796 and studied in Paris in 1820 under Champollion, the celebrated French Egyptologist. He became well known as a decipherer of Egyptian hieroglyphics. Between 1825 and 1855 he was professor of Oriental archaeology at the University of Leipzig. [^13]

Dr. Seyffarth, who differed from Champollion on how to interpret Egyptian hieroglyphics, emphasized in his New York lectures his own correctness in deciphering the glyphs. A promotional article in a New York City newspaper, under the headline "Lectures on Egyptian Archaeology," stated:

The first of a series of three lectures on this recondite subject,—interesting because of the relation to the authenticity of Biblical literature,—was delivered at Stuyvesant Institute, last evening, before a numerous and intelligent auditory. The lecturer is Professor G. SEYFFARTH, M. A., Phil. Doct., who has long enjoyed a distinguished reputation, both in the New and Old Worlds. These lectures will prove of great value, as they will serve as a commentary upon the hidden stores of Egyptian lore contained in the Abbott Museum of the institute, one of the most valuable and interesting collections of that kind in the world.

The general drift of the first lecture was the assertion and proof that the Egyptian hieroglyphics, dispersed over the world and found upon an immense number of ancient monuments, are all susceptible of a syllabic or alphabetic interpre-tation.

DR. SEYFFARTH afforded sufficient indications that the principal upon which CHAMPOLLION had proceeded was radically insufficient, and, therefore, incorrect. The idea of the French savan was that the greater part of these inscriptions and characters were susceptible of a symbolic interpretation, or that they contained symbolic signs. He admitted the existence of the alphabet, but his admission of determinatives, and sometimes of symbolic characters, was so blended as to present a system radically differing from that of DR. SEYFFARTH, a system which, when tested by efforts at translation, presents in the one case an unintelligible complication of words—in the latter a rhetorical sense.

At the conclusion of the lecture the Doctor recited a translation of the first sacred book of the ancient Egyptians, the "Turin" papyrus, of which several copies are extant, three of which were in the Abbott Museum. The theology which that document involves is by no means inconsistent with received Christianity, pointing clearly to the fact of a flood, the doctrine of reward and punishment, and more especially of the existence of a Triuno Divinity and the observance of the Sabbath.

We cannot follow these matters in detail. To those who are especially interested in the inquiry, (as who indeed, is not?) these lectures will prove highly interesting and valuable. [^14]

Seyffarth's theory was later proven wrong and Champollion's skills have prevailed, but during his lifetime Seyffarth was recognized as a capable—though controversial—scholar.

Professor Seyffarth returned to St. Louis and visited the exhibit at Wyman's Hall in September 1856. Dr. Kimball states that Seyffarth reported, " . . . visitors will find also some large fragments of Egyptian papyrus scrolls, with pieratic [hieratic] (priestly) inscriptions, and drawings representing the judgment of the dead, many Egyptian gods and sacred animals, with certain chapters from the old Egyptian sacred books." [^15]

The 1859 catalog of the St. Louis Museum quotes Seyffarth as saying, "The papyrus roll is not a record, but an invocation to the Deity Osiris . . . and a picture of the attendant spirits, intro ducing the dead to the Judge, Osiris." [^16] Dr. Seyffarth may have been looking at two fragments now known as IIIA, Court of Osiris (on the throne), or perhaps Facsimile 3 in the Book of Abraham, or some other fragment presently unknown. [^17]

Two Mummies and Some Papyri Move to Chicago

When Edward Wyman established his school in St. Louis in 1843, he also established a museum of natural history and hired J. P. Bates, called by one writer "a naturalist of no mean ability," to head it. In the ads announcing that the Mormon mummies were in the St. Louis Museum, "Mr. J. P. Bates" is listed by various titles and assignments, such as "manager" and "under the personal supervision and management of Mr. J. P. BATES, Practical Naturalist." [^18] According to an 1863 museum guide, Bates "has devoted his life, with the enthusiasm of an artist, to this branch of [natural] science and now stands without fear of rivalry, at least in America. . . . He has made frequent journeys to Europe, South America and the tropical regions, in order to obtain the best and rarest birds and quadrupeds which these continents afford." [^19] A notice in the St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat on July 3, 1863, noted that the St. Louis Museum would soon be moving from St. Louis. An announcement in the newspaper six days later stated: "The St. Louis Museum WILL POSITIVELY CLOSE on Saturday, the 11th inst. AND IT IS BEING REMOVED TO CHICAGO. J. P. BATES Manager."

On July 6, the Chicago Tribune announced "with pleasure that through the liberality of two of our worthy and public spirited citizens the Saint Louis Museum has been purchased, and will soon be removed, and permanently located in this city. This museum is much the largest in the West, and in several features the choicest one in the United States." Five weeks later, on August 10, 1863, the Chicago Times stated: "There are the two mummies which in the hands of Joe Smith were made to give a revelation and still they bear the original tablets with the cabalistic or coptic characters thereon."

"A Complete Guide to the Chicago Museum," dated 1863, gave the same description of the two mummies as appeared in the 1859 St. Louis Museum Catalogue:

These Mummies were obtained in the Catacombs of Egypt, sixty feet below the surface of the earth, for the Antiquarian Society of Paris, forwarded to New York, and there purchased, in the year 1835, by Joe Smith, the Mormon Prophet, on account of the writings found in the chest of one of them, and which he pretended to translate, stating them to belong to the family of the Pharaohs'—but, according to Prof. Seyffarth, the papyrus roll is not a record, but an invocation to the Deity, Osirus, in which occurs the name of the person, (Horus) and a picture of the attendant spirits introducing the dead to the Judge, Osirus. The body of one is that of a female, about forty; the other, that of a boy about fourteen. They were kept by the Prophet's mother until his death, when the heirs sold them, and were shortly after purchased for the Museum.

The art of embalming is, in a measure, lost, and its details are not known or practiced as among the ancients. With the poor it was a very simple process, and the principle articles used were salt and asphaltum. The rich spent large sums in embalming the dead, using the most costly spices and perfumes. The practice was not confined to Egypt: several examples have been found in the Western States of this country, showing that it was in use to some extent among the aborigines. [^20]

Wood's Museum in Chicago

The original buyers of the Chicago Museum did not maintain ownership for very long. They sold their property to Joseph H. Wood about six months later, in 1864, and he changed the name to Wood's Museum. Wood's Museum expanded as did the city itself in the next few years. When Nauvoo was the largest city in Illinois in 1844, its population was between 10,000 and 12,000, compared to Chicago's 5,000. By 1871, the year of the great fire, the population of Chicago was 334,270 and it had become America's fourth largest city, surpassed only by New York, Philadelphia, and Brooklyn. [^21]

A few interested parties reported seeing the two mummies and some papyri on display in Wood's Museum between 1864 and 1871. C.C.A. Christensen, a Utah artist, wrote: "As this writer, in the year 1865, along with fifty other missionaries from Utah, were on our way to our destination after having visited different towns, some of us got together in New York where we signed up for the boat going to Liverpool, and one of these brethren, I believe it was Elder Penrose, who told me that he had visited the museum in Chicago, and there saw the original papyrus rolls from whence Abraham's book had been trans-lated into English, and to the side of it was a written declaration from Mr. Chandler." [^22] Michael Chandler's certificate attesting to Joseph Smith's ability to translate the papyrus was then quoted.

The Salt Lake City Directory and Business Guide for 1869 under the heading "Chicago, Its Trade and Growth," noted that the museum had numerous and sundry items on display, including "the mummies around which the papyrus was rolled on which the Book of Abraham—published with the Pearl of Great Price—was inscribed, from a collection of specimens worthy of attention of all and the admiration of the students of nature. The mummies were sold by those who had them in charge after the death of the Prophet, Joseph Smith, and were afterwards obtained for the museum—so the printed catalogue states."

President Joseph Smith III of the RLDS church wrote in 1898:

I personally, in company with Elder Elijah Banta, of Sandwich, Illinois, saw the mummies and case of drawers in the museum in Chicago, before the great fire, in 1871; in which they undoubtedly perished with the rest of the accumulated relics and curiosities. . . .

So far as anything is known by us about the fate, or final disposition of the papyrus, the foregoing is correct, and I was knowing to the facts as they occurred; and saw the mummies and case of drawers in Wood's Museum, Chicago, not long before the fire of October 1871. I was at the time living at Plano, Illinois, fifty-three miles west from Chicago, and did business in the city in behalf of our Publishing Department and Herald, and visited the city frequently. [^23]

On the evening of October 8, 1871, a fire in Chicago "broke out on the corner of DeKoven and Twelfth streets, at about 9 o'clock on Sunday evening, being caused by a cow kicking over a lamp in a stable in which a woman was milking. An alarm was immediately given but owing to the high southwest wind, the building was speedily consumed, and thence the fire spread rapidly." [^24]

The fire, coming after an excessively dry summer and autumn and fanned by high winds, quickly devoured an area of more than two thousand acres, destroying some 18,000 buildings—two-thirds of the city's structures—and property valued at about $196 million. Approximately 90,000 people were left homeless, and it is estimated that at least three hundred died in the conflagration. [^25]

The Chicago Tribune for October 19 reported that "the only article spared from the immense collection of curiosities which were stored in Wood's Museum is a silver mounted revolver." [^26]

The mummies and manuscripts were not popular attractions at Wood's Museum and were seldom, if ever, mentioned after their acquisition in 1863. If they were on display or in storage in the museum that fateful night of October 8, they were undoubtedly destroyed. If they survived the fire, they were either on loan at the time or were stored somewhere beyond the reach of the devastating flames. Colonel Wood, still a showman at heart, placed a sign amid the blackened ruins of his smoldering building: "Col. Wood's Museum, Standing Room Only." [^27]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Were the manuscripts of Abraham and Joseph still in existence in Chicago seven years after the great fire, or were the brethren merely checking out a hopeful but unfounded rumor? In the author's personal correspondence file.
[^2] What about the manuscripts? Did the two apostles believe that the actual papyri containing the writings of Abraham and Joseph were still in existence in Chicago, or that the Prophet Joseph Smith had translated more of the writings of Abraham and Joseph than were published, or both? Elder Pratt had spoken to President Taylor about the desirability of acquiring "the manuscripts." A definition of manuscript is "a written or typewritten composition or document as distinguished from a printed copy." [^15]What was his understanding of the word? Without his report of his prolonged visit to Chicago, we are left without answers. In the author's personal file. The minutes were recorded by George Reynolds, secretary.
[^3] Historical Department Journal, Archives Division, Church Historical Department.
[^4] Wilford Woodruff's Journal: 1833-1898, entry dated September 2, 1878.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), 237.
[^6] Millennial Star, October 28, 1878.
[^7] Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation—Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible (Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1975), 221-32.
[^8] Joseph F. Smith and Orson Pratt, "Mission to the States,"Deseret Evening News, November 16, 1878. Information in this section regarding the apostles' visit in Missouri and Illinois, prior to their going on to Kirtland, Ohio, and New York State, is from this article.
[^9] Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith, 251.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Joseph F. Smith, personal (Private Letterbook) C. #3 = 5/6.
[^13] Millennial Star, October 28, 1878.
[^14] LaMar C. Berrett, An Annotated Catalog of Documentary-type Materials in the Wilford C. Wood Collection 1 (Provo, Utah: Wilford C. Wood Foundation, September 1972): 172.
[^15] Kimball, 74.
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] Doyle L. Green, "New Light on Joseph Smith's Egyptian Papyri: New Fragment Disclosed," and Jay M. Todd, "Background of the Church Historian's Fragment," Improvement Era, February 1968, 40, 40B, and 40C.
[^18] St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, August 14, 1856, and July 8, 1863.
[^19] Kimball, 73, note 2.
[^20] As quoted in Clark, 159.
[^21] Chicago Director, Census Reports, 1871, 1246. Footed in Alen R. Cooper, "Colonel Wood's Museum: A Study in the Development of the Early Chicago Stage," master's thesis, Roosevelt University, 1974.
[^22] Translated from Danish, Bikuben, Salt Lake City, July 28, 1910.
[^23] Joseph Smith III, "Another Book of Abraham," The Saints' Herald, January 11, 1899, 18.
[^24] "Extra" edition, Chicago Evening Journal, October 9, 1871.
[^25] Bessie Louise Pierce, "Chicago," Encyclopaedia Britannica (Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., 1964), 5:481.
[^26] Kimball, 80.
[^27] Ibid.
