H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

17

Searching for the Original Manuscripts

In 1969 I was preparing an article relative to the canonization of the Pearl of Great Price, which took place on October 10, 1880, and wrote to Joseph Anderson, secretary to the First Presidency, for related information. I specifically inquired if Elder Orson Pratt had been given explicit instructions by the Brethren as to what to include or exclude in the 1878 edition—the first American edition—of the Pearl of Great Price, which he was preparing for publication and canonization. The following reply arrived about three weeks later:

Dear Brother Peterson:

Referring to your letter of May 21, 1969, as per your request I have looked into the minutes covering the period mentioned but find no information on the subject of the Book of Abraham or the anticipated preparation of the American edition of the Pearl of Great Price published in 1878 other than the statement that Elder Pratt, under date of September 2, 1878, mentioned to the brethren the desirability of obtaining the manuscript of the books of Abraham and Joseph which were at the time in the Woods Museum in Chicago, and authorization was given by President Taylor to take the necessary steps to obtain these manuscripts if possible.

I regret that I cannot be more helpful to you in the matter. [^1]

My initial reaction to Elder Anderson's reply was to smile and set it aside, since it did not add anything to my meager knowledge on the preparation of the 1878 American edition of the Pearl of Great Price. I also felt that he had looked in the minutes for the wrong year, since the writings of Abraham and Joseph were apparently destroyed in the Chicago holocaust of 1871.

After I reread the letter several hours later, it slowly dawned on me that Elder Anderson's reply might contain some valuable information on the possible survival and whereabouts of the Egyptian manuscripts after the devastating inferno of 1871. Surely President John Taylor and the General Authorities were well aware of the tragedy in Chicago and the incineration of Wood's Museum seven years before. True, Chicago had suffered a great tragedy, but like the legendary phoenix, out of the ashes had grown a great city.

Had Wood's Museum been rebuilt? Was it possible that through some miraculous means, the sacred records had survived the great inferno? Many questions came to mind as I walked across the BYU campus to the Harold B. Lee Library to resolve whether the revitalized Chicago of the early 1870s included a newly constructed Wood's Museum. I soon discovered that Colonel Wood did rebuild his popular museum, and also built a museum in Philadelphia in 1872.

I had been granted sufficient research funds to allow me to travel to Chicago to pursue this fascinating new development, but I wanted to ascertain the exact wording of President Taylor's counsel to Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith prior to their departure for Chicago to learn if it contained additional information that might help me in my research. With permission, I went to the Church Office Building to visit with Brother Anderson.

While I was waiting to see him, President N. Eldon Tanner's secretary asked if I would care to talk personally to President Tanner, since he had been overseeing Pearl of Great Price matters in recent years. I was elated with the opportunity to visit with President Tanner about my research. After a pleasant visit, he sent for Brother Anderson and asked him to allow me to see the journal entry in the First Presidency's minute book pertaining to the proposed trip of Elders Pratt and Smith. Brother Anderson reminded President Tanner that this request was irregular, but I was allowed to follow him to a room where I was seated at a table, and Elder Anderson brought out the ledger containing the minutes for September 2, 1878.

Elder Anderson located the particular entry and covered up the rest of the page with books so that I could read only the relevant material. Because he hovered so closely over my shoulder as I began to copy the entry for September 2, I jokingly said to him, "Brother Anderson, promise you won't leave me alone in here," to which he quietly but firmly replied, "Rest assured you won't be left alone."

Looking through the hastily constructed rectangular peep hole that Elder Anderson made, I copied the following entry:

An informal meeting of the Council was held after Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith had been set apart for their mission to the United States. Present—Pres. John Taylor and Elders Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith and A. Carrington.

Brother Orson Pratt spoke of the desirability of obtaining the mss. of the Books of Abraham and of Joseph now in Woods Museum, Chicago.

Brother Taylor considered it to be well to do so though he thought it would be well not to appear too anxious, or advantage might be taken if such a feeling were manifested. He felt that anything that would throw light on the subjects, embraced in the mission of Bros. Pratt and Smith should be encouraged. [^2]

The Mission to the States

The calling of Elders Pratt and Smith to go east was referred to as "a mission to the States." The entry in the Historical Department Journal dated September 2, 1878, reads: "Elder O. Pratt was set apart by Pres. John Taylor, and Elder Joseph F. Smith by Elder W. Woodruff, in the President's office this morning on a mission to the States." [^3] What was the objective of their "mission to the States"?

Elder Wilford Woodruff made this personal journal entry under that same date:

Joseph F. Smith and W. Woodruff set apart 6 missionaries to Scandinavia and in the afternoon 6 of the twelve set apart Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith for a mission to visit Jackson County and other parts of Missouri to visit David Whitmer and John Whitmer family to see if they can obtain the early history of the Church in the hands of John Whitmer family and to perform any other acts that may be necessary upon the mission. John Taylor was mouth in blessing Orson Pratt and W. Woodruff in blessing Joseph F. Smith. [^4]

Elder Smith's journal entry dated Monday, September 2, 1878, emphasized the importance of acquiring records along with oral histories: "Brother Orson Pratt and I were set apart by President John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and A. Carrington, to take a mission to the states to gather up records and data relative to the early history of the Church." [^5]

After he returned to Utah about a month later, Elder Smith reported at the October general conference that "the chief object of their mission east, was to obtain, if possible, some dates and facts that pertained to the early history of the Church, which, for the want of more correct records in that early date, were lacking, supposing that some things might be gleaned from the old settlers still living in that neighborhood, but they found no one who could give them any information, or who knew as much as ourselves on these matters." [^6]

Elder Pratt had just finished preparing the first American edition of the Pearl of Great Price, an assignment that would constantly remind him how grossly limited the historical records of the Church were. Over half of the material in the Pearl of Great Price—selections from the Book of Moses (Moses 1-8) and Joseph Smith-Matthew—is extracted from Joseph Smith's inspired corrections of the King James Version of the Bible, which is now commonly referred to as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (JST). The original handwritten pages and the large family Bible from which Moses 1-8 and Joseph Smith-Matthew came remained in the possession of Emma Smith and her family, who refused to let the apostles take them west with them. Professor Robert J. Matthews, in his book A Plainer Translation: Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, explained that Orson Pratt used the RLDS 1867 edition of the Joseph Smith Translation to prepare the 1878 edition of the Pearl of Great Price. [^7]

Elder Pratt and other leading Brethren who had worked closely with Joseph Smith while he made the changes in the Bible were satisfied that the RLDS church had been honest in their 1867 printing of the revisions.

When the Saints moved west to the valleys of the mountains, the original manuscripts and the papyri were left in Emma's home, the Mansion House in Nauvoo.

The last book in the Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith-History, covers the life of Joseph Smith between the time of the First Vision in 1820 and the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood through John the Baptist in 1829. As Elder Woodruff reminded us in his September 2, 1878, journal entry, the two apostles were to visit the families of David and John Whitmer to see if they could "obtain the early history of the Church." Elder Pratt, the Church historian, did not have access to even one primary source from which to prepare the first American edition of the Pearl of Great Price.

Upon returning to Salt Lake City, the brethren reported their "mission to the States," and it was published in the Deseret Evening News in two installments, on November 16 and November 23, 1878. In summary it began:

Left Salt Lake City Sept. 3rd 1878

Arrived at Independence, Mo. Friday Sept. 6th AM, 1878 Stayed at the Merchants Hotel - Visited the Temple Lot. Visited Mr. Eaton who had some years before purchased part of the Temple site. Mr. Eaton was in "feeble health." His wife was the widow of John E. Page. Mrs. Eaton was hospitable. The Eatons informed them that there were "Some 70 families gathered in and around Independence, who are awaiting the Redemption of Zion, etc." [All RLDS] [^8]

At Independence, the brethren met with William E. McLellin, one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve. "He seemed pleased to see us, and urged very strongly for us to prolong our visit," they said. They also visited a family named Humphreys who "still claimed to belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Called on Brother Humphreys at his shop where they found him pleased to meet with us."

Then the two apostles boarded the train for Richmond, where they stayed at the Shaw House. On Saturday morning, September 7, they met with David Whitmer, "the last remaining one of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon." "He seemed wonderfully pleased as well as surprised at seeing Elder Orson Pratt," they reported. They spent many hours with Whitmer, and detailed accounts were kept of the interviews. In the company of several others, Whitmer bore strong testimony of the appearance of Moroni, seeing the gold plates, and hearing the voice of the Lord "as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God."

When Elder Pratt inquired whether David Whitmer had in his possession the original manuscripts of the Book of Mormon, he replied that "they are safe and well preserved."

Elder Pratt asked, "Would you not part with them to a purchase?"

Whitmer replied, "No. Oliver charged me to keep them, and Joseph told my father's house to keep the records. I consider these things sacred, and would not part with nor barter them for money."

Elder Smith clarified that he and Elder Pratt were not there to barter for the manuscripts, but wished to see them preserved in some institution "that will not die as man does."

Philander Page, a son of Hiram Page, was present and remarked, "Do you think that the Almighty cannot take care of his own?"

On Sunday, September 8, in the presence of several on-lookers, David Whitmer displayed the manuscript of the Book of Mormon. After carefully perusing it, Elder Pratt again raised the issue of procuring the manuscripts, but, he said, "we found that nothing could move him on this point."

That evening David Whitmer called on the two apostles at their hotel. Aware of Oliver Cowdery's rebaptism at Council Bluffs, he stated that "Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw[;] after shaking hands with the family and kissing his wife and daughter, he said, 'Now I lay me down for the last time, I am going to my Savior' and [he] died immediately with a smile on his face."

David Whitmer's parting words to Elders Pratt and Smith were: "This may be the last time I shall ever see you in the flesh so farewell."

On Monday, September 9, Elder Pratt and Elder Smith went to Far West, Missouri, to visit with several members of the Whitmer family, but they found a cold reception. When Elder Pratt inquired about the manuscript that John Whitmer had kept as Church historian, John's son replied, "We've got no history here, all father's papers have gone to Richmond long ago." Elder Pratt told him they had interviewed his uncle David Whitmer in Richmond and had seen the manuscript of the Book of Mormon, but that David had said nothing about having any other papers. John's son repeated, "We have got no papers here." The brethren were convinced that further efforts would be unproductive "where the spirit of bigotry and opposition was so intense."

The apostles then went to Cameron, a railroad station ten miles from Far West, where they booked passage to Quincy, Illinois. They had intended to visit Nauvoo the next day, September 10, but on arrival at Quincy they found that there were no convenient railroad connections to Nauvoo. Early on the morning of September 11, they took a train to Colchester about fifty miles away, en route to Plano and Chicago. During a two-hour wait at Colchester, they met with Lucy Milliken, Joseph Smith's youngest sister, and her husband, Arthur, and family. They also met with the only daughter and the granddaughter of the Prophet's eldest sister, Sophronia McCleary, who was deceased. The reception there was warm.

The evening of September 11 the two brethren went to the house of the president of the RLDS church, Joseph Smith III, in Plano, Illinois, but he was attending a meeting in Iowa. The next day, Thursday, they again visited at President Smith's home and had a "pleasant visit" with his wife and her father. They also called at the printing and publishing office of the RLDS church. When they stated their business, the workers said they could not assist them without Joseph Smith III's permission. They subsequently telegraphed this message to Iowa: "Joseph F. Smith and Orson Pratt here, wish to examine the MS of the new translation. When can you come? Is MS here?" They expected an answer that afternoon "but none came." The next morning a postal card arrived announcing that the conference in Iowa would not be completed until Sunday. The two brethren chose to continue their journey, leaving behind their address in New York and their request to see the transcript of the Bible. If it was in Plano and could be seen, one or both would call back upon their return home.

The brethren both spoke at an RLDS meeting that evening, and Orson Pratt reviewed his experiences in the early days of the Church, including Joseph Smith's means of receiving revelation and the circumstances surrounding his receiving the revelation on "plural or celestial marriage."

Next the two apostles visited Kirtland, Ohio, going by way of Chicago to Cleveland and then to Willoughby, about three miles from Kirtland. They reported that the Kirtland Temple was in an ill state of repair. They also visited several significant sites and several residents of the town who recalled its early history.

Leaving Kirtland, the brethren decided to visit the Hill Cumorah. They were so impressed with the area, Elder Smith said, that they knelt down in a grove of trees on the hill and "each pronounced upon the other a blessing by the spirit of inspiration and prophecy." [^9]

On Tuesday, September 17, after a fourteen-hour train ride from Palmyra, they arrived in New York City and were met by two elders. They spent several days in New York, where they "attended to much church business in regard to immigration and missionary work." [^10] Then they started on their homeward journey on September 21. [^11]The two-part report in the Deseret Evening News ends with their arrival in New York on September 17.

In his journal, Elder Smith noted that he sent a telegram from New York to his cousin Joseph Smith III asking for the opportunity to stop in Plano while en route home to examine the manuscripts of the Inspired Version of the Bible. The reply: "Cannot tell till I see you." Though the answer was less than encouraging, Elder Smith desired to have a friendly visit with his cousin.

According to Elder Smith's journal, when the brethren arrived in Chicago, he (Elder Smith) went on to Plano alone. There, he wrote, the reunion between the sons of the two martyred prophets, Joseph and Hyrum, was "rather strained." Joseph III refused to allow him to see the manuscripts of the Joseph Smith translation of the Bible, although he did give him a printed copy of the work that had been published eleven years earlier. With a feeling of sadness, Elder Smith went back to Chicago and then returned to Utah, arriving home the evening of September 28. [^12]

Unresolved Questions

This mission of Joseph F. Smith and Orson Pratt leaves several questions unresolved, including the following:

Elder Smith's journal indicates he arrived in Salt Lake City on September 28, while an entry in the Historical Department Journal reports that "Orson Pratt returned from his mission to the States" on October 3, five days later. Why did Elder Pratt, who was serving as the Church Historian, spend several extra days in the east, probably in and around Chicago, while Elder Smith returned home?

We learn a little more from a letter written by Elder Smith, dated December 5, 1878, to William E. McLellin in Independence, Missouri. He wrote: "Elder Orson Pratt visited his connexions in Carthage and accomplished his business sooner than he anticipated, so he hurried home to be present at our Semi annual conference commencing October 6th." [^13]

It was Elder Pratt who had initially contacted the Church leaders about "the desirability of obtaining the manuscripts of the books of Abraham and Joseph which were at that time in the Woods Museum in Chicago." Elder Smith reported to the October conference that "the entire account of their visit and experience while east, has been written and placed in the possession of President John Taylor." [^14]

Elder Franklin D. Richards of the Quorum of the Twelve wrote in his journal on Saturday, October 5, 1878 that he had met at nine o'clock that morning with President John Taylor and ten members of the Quorum of the Twelve, "and heard read—report of O. Pratt and J.F. Smith of their visit to the Whitmers in Missouri and to Young Joseph in Plano, Illinois to Cumorah and City of New York till after one."

Anxious to pursue the possibility that the ancient papyri containing holy writ or more of its translation might be extant even today, I have spent considerable time pursuing this matter. My research is summarized in a letter dated September 15, 1987, from Richard E. Turley Jr., assistant managing director of the Church Historical Department, to Dr. Robert J. Matthews, then dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University. Dr. Turley wrote:

Dear Brother Matthews:

. . . In your letter, you enthusiastically endorsed the research of Brother H. Donl Peterson, who has been trying to determine whether any useful information exists about the September 1878 "mission to the states" of Elder Orson Pratt and Elder Joseph F. Smith.

A search has been made for information that would supplement data Brother Peterson has already collected. The Historical Department has not been able to locate any documents that would add significant details to what Brother Peterson already knows. As Brother Peterson knows, an October 1878 conference report suggests that Elder Pratt and Elder Smith wrote a full report of their mission to President John Taylor. This report, if different from the New York letter published in the Millennial Star, has not been located.

An inquiry was made to the First Presidency to determine whether such a report might be in the First Presidency's vault. Brother F. Michael Watson, Secretary to the First Presidency, responded that the First Presidency apparently does not have such a report.

We appreciate Brother Peterson's diligent research on the Pearl of Great Price and wish him success in his research efforts. If he has any further questions about this matter, we hope he will feel free to contact us.

Wilford C. Wood Acquires Some Manuscripts

Wilford C. Wood, who died in 1968, was a Latter-day Saint who spent much of his life purchasing property and a large collection of items once identified with Joseph Smith. He often purchased things in his own name and sold them at a great savings to the Church. Since his death, his family has maintained his large collection of Mormon memorabilia at his museum in Woods Cross, Utah, a few miles north of Salt Lake City.

An annotated catalog of the collection mentions that Lewis C. Bidamon's son, Charles E. Bidamon, sold to Wilford C. Wood "several deeds and documents, valuable papers such as an original manuscript of the Book of Abraham" on July 10, 1937. At the time Charles E. Bidamon was living in Wilmette, a suburb of Chicago. The catalog states that "the handwriting is done very neatly and could be possibly that of Oliver Cowdery. The translation includes Chapter 1 (all verses, 1-31) and Chapter 2 (verses 1-18) of our present Book of Abraham . . . and consists of 9 1/2 pages." [^16] A facsimile from the Book of Abraham is also listed. Brother Wood deposited the original manuscript in the Church Historian's Office, after he made copies for his own use and a copy for President Heber J. Grant. This 1937 purchase was probably of the material that the two apostles were hoping to find in their "mission to the States."

At this writing, in answer to the question "Did some of the manuscripts of Abraham and Joseph once displayed in the Wood's Museum survive the Chicago Fire," I must answer, "I don't know."

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Salt Lake Tribune, October 11, 1880.
[^2] Deseret News, October 11, 1880.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Wilford Woodruff's Journal: 1833-1898, entry dated September 2, 1878.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), 237.
[^6] Millennial Star, October 28, 1878.
[^7] Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation—Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible (Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1975), 221-32.
[^8] Joseph F. Smith and Orson Pratt, "Mission to the States,"Deseret Evening News, November 16, 1878. Information in this section regarding the apostles' visit in Missouri and Illinois, prior to their going on to Kirtland, Ohio, and New York State, is from this article.
[^9] Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith, 251.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Joseph F. Smith, personal (Private Letterbook) C. #3 = 5/6.
[^13] Millennial Star, October 28, 1878.
[^14] LaMar C. Berrett, An Annotated Catalog of Documentary-type Materials in the Wilford C. Wood Collection 1 (Provo, Utah: Wilford C. Wood Foundation, September 1972): 172.
[^16] Ibid.
