H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

18

The Pearl of Great Price Becomes a Standard Work

In 1878 the venerable apostle-historian Orson Pratt was preparing the first American edition of the Pearl of Great Price. Several changes from the first edition, published in 1851 in Great Britain, were made in this new edition.

The 1851 edition had two excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Genesis: "Extracts from the Prophecy of Enoch containing also a Revelation of the Gospel unto our father Adam, after he was driven out from the Garden of Eden. Revealed to Joseph Smith, December 1830" (now Moses 6:43-68 and Moses 7:1-69); and "The words of God, which he spake unto Moses at the time when Moses was caught up into an exceeding high mountain, and he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure His presence. Revealed to Joseph Smith, June, 1830" (now Moses 1:1-42a; 2:1-4:13a; 4:14-19; 4:22-25; 5:1-16a; 5:19-23a; 5:32-40; and Moses 8:13-30).

In the American edition, the following verses were added to complete the text:

Moses 1:42b

Moses 4:13b

Moses 4:20-21; 26-32

Moses 5:16b, 17-18, 23b, 24-31, 41-59

Moses 6:1-42

Moses 8:1-12

Four partially quoted verses were completed and 102 new verses were added, making a total of 106 new verses added to the 1878 edition from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. Since the Church did not have the original manuscripts of the Joseph Smith Translation, these additions in the Pearl of Great Price were based on the first edition of the Joseph Smith Translation, published by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints in 1867.

Joseph Smith had gone through the King James Bible on three different occasions, each time making additional corrections and clarifications. The original Book of Moses material in the 1851 Pearl of Great Price was based on an earlier manuscript prepared by him, not the one used in the 1867 RLDS publication and reproduced in the American edition. Therefore, there are some variations in the wording in some of the verses.

Orson Pratt and his associates were confident that the RLDS church had been honest in their printing of the Inspired Version in 1867. Because many of the leaders had worked closely with the Prophet in bringing it to light or had read and preached from his corrections for many years, they were assured of the in-tegrity of the RLDS printed text.

No changes were made in the text of the Book of Abraham between the 1851 British edition and the 1878 American edition of the Pearl of Great Price. Both publications were based on the 1842 Times and Seasons printing in Nauvoo, which was faithfully reproduced in the 1851 edition. Although Orson Pratt and his assistants did not have the dictated manuscripts of the Book of Abraham in their possession, the Times and Seasons reproductions were considered accurate, since they were published in the Church owned newspaper when Joseph Smith was editor and John Taylor was his assistant.

The balance of the 1878 Pearl of Great Price remained the same as the 1851 first edition with one exception: the commandment entitled "A revelation on the Eternity of the Marriage Covenant, Including Plurality of Wives" (now Doctrine and Covenants 132) was added. This revelation was also published in the 1876 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

At the time of the printing, the Church and the federal government were in contention over the issue of polygamy. Because of the relevance of this important revelation at the time, it was published in the Pearl of Great Price to make it more accessible to the Saints.

What Constitutes Scripture?

The first American edition of the Pearl of Great Price became the fourth standard work of the Church on October 10, 1880. Prior to reviewing that significant event, it seems appropriate to briefly answer this question: What constitutes scripture?

The Lord explained through the Prophet Joseph Smith that this earth will eventually become a celestial world, that "the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it," and that those who "are not sanctified through the law . . . , even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom." (D&C 88:17-18, 21.) He further explained that throughout the vast planetary creations, "unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified." (D&C 88:38-39.)

In order to establish a kingdom of God, four basic components are required: (1) a righteous king (the lawgiver); (2) divine law; (3) subjects who are willing to follow the laws of their king, and (4) a land of inheritance. In speaking of the kingdom of God, it is not difficult to determine who is the king. In order to follow his laws, his people must know what his laws are. The Lord explained: "For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written." (2 Nephi 29:11.)

These holy books, these sacred words spoken by the Lord and brought to light by his prophets to whom he has spoken, are referred to as "the standard works." Members of the house of Israel will be judged, as the scriptures teach, by their actions, according to the standards—that is, the measuring rods—established by the Lord. In these last days, those who are obedient to the Lord's counsel "shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions." (2 Nephi 29:14.) Following the Millennium, the entire earth will become a celestial world, and the meek—those who have been submissive to divine law—shall eternally inherit the earth, united as one under their king and lawgiver, even the Lord Jesus Christ. (D&C 88:17-20.)

A New Standard Work Is Added

The year 1880 was a jubilee year in the Church, the fiftieth anniversary since its incorporation. At the semiannual general conference in October, three important items of business were transacted: (1) after a three-year interval, a new First Presidency was sustained; (2) twenty-six new sections were added to the text of the Doctrine and Covenants; and (3) the Pearl of Great Price was presented and sustained as the fourth standard work of the Church. All three matters were transacted in the two o'clock session on Sunday afternoon, October 10. The conference ran from Wednesday afternoon to Sunday evening, one of the longest conferences in several years.

The new first presidency, consisting of President John Taylor and counselors George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, was sustained by the various priesthood quorums, who were grouped and voted by standing vote of the individual quorums. Following this, the congregation as a whole stood and voted in the same manner. A non-Mormon newspaper reporter covering the proceedings confirmed in an interesting way that the sustaining of the new First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve had been unanimous: "These [the various quorums] voted in the order above named, by rising to their feet and extended the right hand upwards. Finally, the congregation as a whole voted in the same manner. The votes were unanimously in the affirmative everytime, and though we tried to find a single individual who we thought might possess sufficient backbone to vote in the negative, we did not succeed." [^1]

The unanimity was apparently difficult for the reporter to comprehend.

President Cannon stated that to save time, the same order of voting—by individual quorums and then the rest of the congregation as a whole—would not be continued as the other general officers were sustained, but would be done in the cus-tomary way, with everyone present voting at the same time.

Following the sustaining of the general officers, President Cannon stated:

I hold in my hand the Book of Doctrine and Covenants and also The Pearl of Great Price, which books contain revelations of God. In Kirtland, the Doctrine and Covenants in its original form, as first printed was submitted to the officers of the Church and the members of the Church to vote upon. As there have been additions made to it by the publishing of revelations which were not contained in the original edition, it has been deemed wise to submit these books and their contents as from God, and binding upon us as a people and as a Church. [^2]

Following President Cannon's proposal, President Joseph F. Smith said: "I move that we receive and accept the revelations contained in these books, as revelations from God to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and to all the world." [^3]

The motion of adding twenty-six new sections to the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price to the canon of scripture, was sustained by the "unanimous vote of the whole conference." These great truths, recognized as holy from their first hearing, were now added to the sacred texts that we accept as scripture, even the mind and will of the Lord.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Todd, The Saga of the Book of Abraham, 1.
[^2] Ibid., 3-5.
[^3] Todd, "Egyptian Papyri Rediscovered," 13-15.
