H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

19

Eleven Papyrus Fragments Are Discovered

Latter-day Saints were surprised when the Church issued a press release on Monday, November 27, 1967, that began as follows:

NEW YORK—A collection of papyrus manuscripts, long believed to have been destroyed in the Chicago Fire of 1871, was presented to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormon) here Monday by the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

The long-lost manuscripts were presented to President N. Eldon Tanner of the First Presidency, the governing body of the Mormon Church, by Thomas P. F. Hoving, director of the museum.

Accompanying the manuscripts was a letter attesting to the fact that the papyri had been the property of the Prophet Joseph Smith, first president of the Church. The letter, dated May 26, 1856, was signed by Emma Smith Bidamon, widow of the Prophet, and his son.

Included in the papyri is a manuscript identified as the original document from which Joseph Smith had copied the drawing which he called "Facsimile No. 1" and published with the Book of Abraham.

An interpretation of the facsimile was prepared by Joseph Smith, and the Book of Abraham now forms part of the volume known as The Pearl of Great Price. [^1]

Before that time, it was generally assumed by historians and members alike that the Chicago fire of 1871 had closed the door on that chapter of Church history—the Egyptian mummies and papyri had been burned.

The article continues:

The Pearl of Great Price is accepted as one of the four volumes of scripture by Church members. The others are the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants.

Included in the museum's presentation are a number of other papyri once in the possession of Joseph Smith.

These include conventional hieroglyphic and hieratic Egyptian funerary texts. Such papyri, including passages from the well-known Book of the Dead, were commonly buried with Egyptian mummies.

The papyri originally came into Joseph Smith's possession in 1835 along with four Egyptian mummies purchased by some church members in Kirtland, Ohio. After his death in 1844, the mummies and papyri were sold by his widow. At least two of the mummies were burned in the Chicago fire of 1871, and it had been assumed the documents were also destroyed at that time. The collection presented to the Church today is only a part of the papyri which Joseph Smith had in his possession.

Dr. Aziz S. Atiya, only recently retired as Director of the University of Utah Middle East Center, said he was electrified when he saw the ancient documents.

"It was one of my most important finds," the distinguished professor said. He is known throughout the academic world as a historian, writer, and teacher. He was instrumental in building the Middle East library at the University of Utah to one of the five finest and most complete in the U.S. For this effort he has been honored by having that library named the Aziz S. Atiya Library for Middle Eastern Studies.

His work in the ancient histories concentrated on Coptic and Arabic scripts. He is a member of the Christian Coptic Orthodox Church but is intensely interested in the Mormon story.

The papyrus documents will be taken to Salt Lake City for further study and research. [^2]

Dr. Atiya related his personal account of the discovery for an article that appeared in the Church-owned Improvement Era:

I was writing a book at the time, one that I had started while a professor of world Christianity and eastern Christianity, and I went to the Metropolitan Museum of Art looking for documents, papyri, pictures, and illustrations to serve the book. It must have been in the early spring of 1966. I really forget the date. My book was ready for the press, and I was looking for supplementary material.

While I was in one of the dim rooms where everything was brought to me, something caught my eye, and I asked one of my assistants to take me behind the bars into the storehouse of documents so that I could look some more. While there I found a file with these documents. I at once recognized the picture part of it. When I saw this picture, I knew that it had appeared in the Pearl of Great Price. I knew the general format of the picture. This kind of picture one can find generally on other papyri, but this particular one has special peculiarities. For instance, the head had fallen off, and I could see that the papyrus was stuck on paper, nineteenth century paper. The head was completed in pencil, apparently by Joseph Smith, who must have had it when that part fell off. He apparently drew the head in his own hand on the supplementary paper. Also, the hands of the mummy, raised as they are, and the leg, raised as it is—usually the mummies lie straight forward—are very peculiar. This papyrus is Egyptian, true enough, but what it stands for, I really don't know.

Now when I saw this, I began to search further. I saw more pieces of papyri stacked together and suspected that Providence had assisted. Another document was found with these documents, signed by Joseph Smith's wife, his son, and someone else, testifying that these papyri were treasured and owned by Joseph Smith.

In 1918 a Mrs. Heusser came to the museum and informed the officials that she had some papyrus, but an understanding was not reached until 1947. They were then acquired by the museum, and then the museum changed curators of Egyptian antiquities and the whole subject was forgotten.

When I saw these documents, I really was taken aback. I know the Mormon community, what it stands for, its scripture, etc., and I said at once that these documents don't belong here. They belong to the Mormon Church. Well, of course, the people in the museum are good friends of mine, and I tried to tempt them into ceding the documents to the Church. I informed my good friend Taza Pierce, who is executive secretary of the Salt Lake Council for International Visitors, and we discussed the manner in which I should acquaint the Mormon community of the find. She suggested I see President Tanner, and she was the intermediary who arranged and attended our first two meetings. Thereafter, I met directly with President Tanner, who had said the Church was very, very interested and would do anything or pay any price for them. Since that time, we worked quietly on the possibility of their transference to the Church.

In these kinds of things, I never push. I take my time. With some kindly persuasions and discussions, the museum ultimately put a memorandum on the subject to the board of trustees of the museum. This took a long time to come to that step. The board discussed the matter at very great length, greater length than you might think, and in the end they thought that since the museum had papyri of this nature in plenty, why should they keep these documents from the Church?

When their generous decision was made, it was telephoned to me by the curator, and he wrote to me also. Then we had a lull in the situation, because the curator had to go to Egypt for a month in order to arrange final steps for the transference to the Metropolitan Museum of another treasure, in which I also had a hand. It concerns a great temple that is being presented by the Egyptian government to the American nation in recognition of the contributions America has made toward the salvage of the Abyssinian monuments.

When the curator came back, he reported very nicely about the subject and said, "The decision has been taken; your Mormon friends are going to get these papyri. So, you go to your friends and the President of the Church and make the necessary arrangements for a ceremony."

Of course, President Tanner was just as excited as I was. He reported to President McKay, who was very enthusiastic about the project also. We then decided the way in which the ceremony would be conducted.

I felt very honored and very, very pleased to be in the center of the picture with such a distinguished person as President Tanner and Mr. Thomas P. F. Hoving, who is director of the museum. He's a very important man, as is his assistant and vice director, Dr. Joseph Noble. He's a very fine man. All of them were there, and to my surprise I found that the papyri were prepared in a very fine box for safekeeping.

But during the morning of that day I made it a point to go in at an early hour, long before the meeting of these magnates, in order to make sure that the papyri were there—not only the papyri, because what is of importance is the document that accompanied the papyri. It was a faded thing, in nineteenth century hand. I found that the museum had photographed it. Well, of course, they had tried to photograph it before, but it wouldn't show because it was very faded blue paper. Now they used infra-red and ultra-violet photography to get the text out, so that now the photograph is very much better than the original.

I was enchanted about the discovery of the papyri, which had been in the hands of Joseph Smith, but the discoveries were not ended there. On the morning of handing over the papyri, I began looking them up and down, up and down, and lo! I found on the back of the paper on which the papyri were glued writings and maps and an enumeration of townships and material of the highest value to Mormon history, made, I think, by Joseph Smith's own hand. Three of the backs were full of notes and maps, which have to be studied by the specialists. I am not a specialist of that, but I have an eye for original documents, and these papyri documents are not fakes; they are original Egyptian papyri of a pre-Christian era. They could be from 3000 B.C. to 300 B.C.—over 300 B.C., at any rate. This is my estimate. The era will have to be decided by the specialists.

I know the kind of ink the Egyptians used and the difference between genuine and fake. Papyrus writings were usually placed with the mummy—papyri of many kinds—but essentially the "Book of the Dead," which would give the mummy safe passage to the world beyond. The papyri were sometimes colored. You find papyri like this with blue, gold, and red colors. This is not out of the ordinary. With regard to the ink used, it was generally made of soot and glue, and that is why it was eternal. I think these scrolls are written in that kind of ink. Usually the priests did the writing—they were most skilled. They used reed pens, and had to sharpen the reed and split it in the middle.

The Egyptians had the papyrus plant, and they used to split it into thin layers and put the layers crisscross on one another, pound them with a wooden hammer, and them glue them together. They cut them to suit the purposes of the documents they wanted to write. Usually long strips were used to make scrolls, and this one was made in that fashion.

In order to protect the papyrus, which becomes brittle with age—for instance, the head of the person fell off simply because the papyrus was brittle—Joseph Smith probably thought that the best thing for its protection was to glue it on paper. When I first discovered these documents, I was so excited about the Egyptian writings that I did not look on the back of the paper, but when I returned to the museum, I noticed the writings on the back by Joseph Smith. These writings may not turn out to be of very great importance; how-ever, any footnote one can get in the restoration of Mormon history is valuable.

The exciting part, which has proved beyond doubt that this was the papyri that was in Joseph Smith's hand, was established by that document signed by his widow. When I saw that, I had it transcribed and a copy typewritten to show to President Tanner.

Do you know that this discovery appeared in the Egyptian press on the day following the ceremony? On the first page of the most important paper! You would be surprised at the attention that was given to this discovery, and apparently the Egyptians were very pleased about the revealing of these documents. I consider it a great honor to have been able to make this discovery. Great discoveries are always accidental, and this one was as accidental as any discovery I have made—and probably more exciting than all of them. It was an honor to have been able to persuade such an august body as the Metropolitan Museum to present it to another body as august as the Mormon Church. I feel flattered to have been able to do what I did. [^3]

The announcement of the find was widely circulated throughout the world by radio, television, and the press because of the respected credentials of Dr. Atiya, [^4] and also because of universal interest in the doings of the Church.

How the Metropolitan Museum Acquired the Papyri

Through the courtesy of officials of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, who generously gave me access to their correspondence file relative to their acquisition of the eleven papyri fragments, we are better able to piece the story together.

On January 16, 1918, Dr. A. M. Lythgoe, the museum's first curator, wrote an in-house memorandum that read in part:

In connection with the effort made by Bishop Spaulding of Utah about 1912 to obtain confirmation, from various Egyptian scholars of Europe and America, that Joseph Smith's supposed translations of sacred Egyptian texts on which he founded his "Pearl of Great Price" were a fraud, an interesting piece of evidence turned up at the Museum today. A Mrs. Alice C. Heusser, of 221 Ralph Avenue, Brooklyn, brought for our inspection some eight or ten fragments of papyri, all from late funerary papyri with small vignettes interspersed throughout the text. With the fragments she had a letter dated 1856 at Nauvoo City, and signed by three persons (one of them the former wife of Joseph Smith, and another Joseph Smith the son of the older Joseph Smith) vouching for the authenticity of these papyri as original Egyptian documents and as having belonged to the "family of one of the Pharaohs," and which they were selling to a Mr. A. Combs.

Mrs. Heusser's mother was a servant in the Combs family and at his death he left these papyri to her.

No transaction took place as a result of that meeting—it was probably intended only for an appraisal of the value of the papyrus fragments—but the memorandum was noticed by Ludlow Bull, the associate curator of the museum, twenty-seven years later. In December 1945 Mr. Bull wrote a letter to Mrs. Heusser inquiring after the papyrus. He sent the letter to the address given in 1918, but it was returned marked "addressee unknown." On December 28, 1945, Mr. Bull wrote to an Edward Heusser in the New York City borough of Brooklyn at an address close to Alice Heusser's old address, but that letter also was returned unclaimed. But Mr. Bull was persistent. On January 7, 1946, he wrote to a Heusser family in Queens, another borough of New York, and received the following short but important reply: "Sorry for the late information. Mrs. A. Heusser has passed away, and her late husband and son reside at 1321 Halsey St., Brooklyn, N.Y. I am Mrs. Heusser's nephew."

On April 29, 1946, Mr. Bull wrote to Edward Heusser: "Our records show that in January, 1918, Mrs. Alice C. Heusser, who we understand, was your wife, brought to the Museum for our inspection eight or ten fragments of ancient papyrus documents. Do you still possess these fragments and, if not, can you tell us where they are at present?"

The next day the following brief handwritten note, signed by Albin Edward Heusser, was sent to the museum: "I am writing in behalf of my father, Edward Heusser. He is still in possession of the papyrus documents mentioned in your letter of April 29 and is awaiting further word from you."

Mr. Bull replied on May 1: "If your father is inclined to dispose of these papyrus fragments, it is possible that this museum might be interested in them." He invited the Heussers to make an appointment with Ambrose Lanning, the curator of the department, to further discuss the matter.

In a letter dated May 5, 1946, Albin Heusser said that his father was "quite willing to show his documents, which incidentally are in the same condition as they were in 1918." He also asked for an evening or Saturday appointment, explaining that his father was "now in his 80th year and would find it quite difficult to travel alone." He added that he himself had also just returned from military service and hesitated to ask his em-ployer for time off.

Five weeks later, on June 11, 1946, Mr. Bull sent the following offer to Albin Edward Heusser:

We have looked over the fragments of Egyptian papyri which you recently left with us. They all come from a late pe-riod in Egyptian history and are fragments of four different Books of the Dead. We have a number of complete funerary papyri in excellent condition in our collection and do not really need these pieces. Such fragments can also be found in all museums which do not possess important collections of Egyptian antiquities. Never-the-less, if you wish to dispose of these fragments, we are prepared to offer you [a certain dollar amount]. [^5]

A former member of our staff, now retired, who was in the Museum at the time your mother first brought the papyri here, has told us that he thought your mother also brought a circular piece of either linen or wood, or possibly metal, bearing hieroglyphic inscription, perhaps eight inches in diameter. This was the type of object that was placed under the head of the mummy in its coffin. Do you recall having such a piece in your family? It may be that our friend's recollection is at fault after so many years.

Our records of your mother's visit also suggest that you had some papers referring to the acquisition of the papyri and indicating who some of the previous possessors of them were. If you have these papers, we should be glad to see them. [^6]

On July 30, 1946, Albin Heusser responded to the offer, stating: "My father has decided to accept your offer . . . . for his Egyptian relics. . . . I know that somewhere on the premises we have the papers pertaining to the acquisition of the papyrus, and when I locate them I shall gladly forward them to you."

More than twenty-one years after the museum acquired the eleven papyrus fragments from the Heusser family, Thomas P. F. Hoving, director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, sent to President N. Eldon Tanner of the First Presidency the following letter, dated November 1, 1967:

Dear President Tanner,

It is a very great pleasure for me to inform you that the Metropolitan Museum is prepared to give the Latter Day Saints Church a group of Egyptian Funerary papyri formerly in the possession of Joseph Smith, one of which is illustrated in The Pearl of Great Price.

We should be very happy to receive you and other delegates of the Church to effect the transfer of these documents. I shall myself be present, as will our Curator of Egyptian Art, and we hope that Professor Aziz Atiya can attend as well. As a tentative date for the ceremony, I propose that we meet on Monday, November 27, at midday.

President Tanner replied in a letter dated November 7, 1967:

Dear Mr. Hoving:

It is impossible for us to express in words our appreciation for the very generous action on the part of the Metropolitan Museum in giving the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints a group of Egyptian funerary papyri formerly in the possession of Joseph Smith, one of which is illustrated in the Pearl of Great Price.

Monday, November 27, at midday as a time to receive these documents is most satisfactory. Dr. Atiya, and probably one or two delegates of the Church, will be in attendance on this occasion. We are so happy that you and your Curator of Egyptian Art and others, as you wish, will be present to make the transfer.

Professor Aziz Atiya, who has been most kind, considerate, and helpful in this matter, will be coming to New York preceding this ceremony and will arrange to see you or Dr. Fisher early Monday morning, the 27th.

Again on behalf of the First Presidency of the Church I wish to express our sincere and deep appreciation to you and those associated with you for this most generous gift.

Abel Combs Returns to Center Stage

In his memorandum of January 16, 1918, Dr. Lythgoe, the museum's first curator, mentioned that the Heusser family had acquired the eleven fragments from Mrs. Heusser's mother, who was "a servant in the Combs family and at his death he left these papyri to her."

Many interested parties have attempted to piece this part of the puzzle together without success. I was fortunate to engage the services of one of the finest genealogical researchers in the Church to aid me in this project. With great effort, skill, and a unique intuition that some would call inspiration, Preston J. Owens, an analyst at the Brigham Young University Family History Services, struck pay dirt. There are still some gaps in the story, but considerably fewer than before.

As we learned in chapter 17, Abel Combs lived in Farmington, Ohio, and owned land in Southington, Ohio, just a few miles from Michael H. Chandler's home in Parkman, in the 1840s and early 1850s. He sold his farm on January 7, 1855, and next we hear of him buying the four mummies and papyri from Emma Smith Bidamon, Joseph Smith III, and Lewis C. Bidamon in Nauvoo on May 26, 1856. A few weeks later, Combs was in St. Louis, where he sold two mummies and some papyri to the St. Louis Museum.

We lose track of Combs between 1856 and 1874. Eighteen years later, he and his wife, Eliza Jane, with their son Oscar, are living in Philadelphia. In Ohio he had listed his occupation as a plater. In the Philadelphia city directory, he was listed between 1875 and 1893 as "A. Combs and Son Oscar—lamps"; and in 1888 and 1889, as an artist. Oscar, at the same address, was listed as a lather in 1888; as a machinist in 1889; and again as a lather in 1891 and 1892.

Although they moved to several different locations in Philadelphia, the father and son continued to work together at each location. The listings in Gospill's Philadelphia City Directory for 1892 reads: "Combs Abel, artist, 454 Glenwood av. and Combs Oscar, lather h. 454 Glenwood av." Abel died July 5, 1892, when he was sixty-nine years of age. His brief obituary states that "relatives and friends are invited to attend the funeral services, at his late residence, No. 454 Glenwood avenue, on Friday morning at 9 o'clock." [^7]

In his 1918 memorandum, Mr. Lythgoe mentioned that Alice C. Heusser's mother had worked as a servant for the Combs family, and that at his death Combs left the papyri to her. After considerable searching for Alice's mother's name, Preston Owens found two documents of relevance: (1) Alice C. Heusser's certificate of death in Brooklyn, which listed her parents' names as Henry H. Weaver and Charlotte Benecke; and (2) an 1896 application for a marriage license for Edward Heusser and Alice Combs Weaver.

From this document we learn that the married name of the "servant" who attended Abel Combs during the latter part of his life was Charlotte Benecke Weaver and that her daughter was Alice Combs Weaver. It seems very unlikely that Alice would be given the middle name of Combs unless she were related in some way to Abel Combs. Instead of the title servant, Charlotte (Lottie) E. Benecke Weaver Huntsman listed her occupation as a private nurse in the 1910 census of New Jersey, where she then resided. That was probably her role in relation to Abel Combs during the last months of his life. And as a result of the experience, she acquired the eleven papyri fragments that were eventually returned to the Church by way of the Metropolitan Museum in 1967.

Abel Combs had sold two mummies and some papyri to the St. Louis Museum in 1856, but the disposition of the other two mummies and any other papyri aside from these eleven fragments still remains a mystery.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See chapter 3 for the complete statement of Dr. Nibley, which is taken from his book Abraham in Egypt.
[^2] Ibid., 3-5.
[^3] Todd, "Egyptian Papyri Rediscovered," 13-15.
[^4] Dr. Atiya's credentials are listed in the 1992 International Who's Who (London: Europa Publications Ltd.) as follows: "M.A., Ph.D., Litt.D., D.Hum.Litt.; Egyptian historian and writer; b. 7 July 1898; ed. Univ. of Liverpool and London; . . . Prof. of Medieval History, Cairo 1938-42, Alexandria 1942-54; . . . Pres. Inst. of Coptic Studies, Cairo 1954-56; Medieval Acad. Visiting Prof. of Islamic Studies, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor 1955-56; Luce Prof. of World Christianity, Union Theological Seminary, and Visiting Prof. of History, Columbia Univ., New York, 1956-57; Visiting Prof. of Arabic and Islamic History, Princeton 1958-59; Dir., Middle East Center, Utah Univ. 1959-67; Distinguished Prof. of History, Utah 1967-; . . . The Crusade in the Later Middle Ages 1938, Egypt and Aragon—Embassies and Diplomatic Correspondence between 1300 and 1330 1938, . . . History of the Patriarchs of the Egyptian Church (2 vols.) 1948-59, Monastery of St. Catherine in Mt. Sinai 1949, The Mt. Sinai Arabic Microfilms 1954, Coptic Historiography and Bibliography 1962, History of Eastern Christianity 1968, Kitab al-Ilman by al-Nuwairy (7 vols.) 1968-76, etc. (all books in either English or Arabic)."
[^5] The amount of money the Metropolitan Museum of Art paid for the eleven fragments is privileged information; therefore it is omitted from the quoted correspondence.
[^6] I interviewed Mrs. Hilma Heusser, Albin Edward Heusser's widow, relative to the Heusser family possibly having Facsimile 2 in their possession. She stated that she was unaware of such an object.
[^7] North American, Philadelphia, July 6, 1892; Philadelphia Inquirer, July 6, 1892.
