H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

20

Ready Answers and Areas for Further Research

In 1912-13 the Reverend Franklin S. Spaulding, Episcopal Bishop of Utah, sent photographs of the three facsimiles in the Book of Abraham, along with Joseph Smith's explanations of them, to several renowned Egyptologists. The interpretations of the scholars were compared with the explanation of Joseph Smith, and a controversy began that lasted for several years but subsided with the passage of time.

When Dr. Aziz Atiya's discovery of the eleven papyrus fragments in 1967 became public, the embers of controversy again flared up. Facsimile 1 of the Pearl of Great Price was a part of the reclaimed collection. There was no doubt that these eleven fragments had once been in the hands of the Church, because included with them was the bill of sale that Emma Smith Bidamon and her associates negotiated with Abel Combs. To prevent their continued disintegration, the papyrus fragments had been glued to recognizable maps and floor plans that had at one time been in the hands of the early Saints. Claims and counterclaims were soon exchanged between opposing sides. The war of words that began again in late November 1967, though less intense today, still continues.

Over the years instructors and students of the Pearl of Great Price, knowing the claims and counterclaims, have asked about the historical background of the Book of Abraham. Following are some of their questions and my responses.

Question One: I read in an anti-Mormon publication that if Joseph Smith were really a seer, he would have been able to read unknown languages, such as that found on the papyri, as a gift from God. Is that correct?

Answer: No! A prophet is the Lord's servant. Aside from his inherent abilities and his acquired skills, he is able to do only what the Lord calls him to do and enables him to do. When translations have been necessary, the Lord has inspired various prophets to read unknown tongues and translate them for the Saints, even by "him that is not learned." (Isaiah 29:12.) This was the case with the translation of the Book of Mormon. It is the Lord alone who determines why, when, where, and how new truths are revealed or translated through his prophets. Even with the aid of such sacred instruments as the Urim and Thummim or a seer stone provided by the Lord, a prophet is obligated to work within the bounds the Lord has established for its usage. (See D&C 9:7-9.)

Question Two: The author of an anti-Mormon publication stated that the eleven fragments returned to the Church in 1967 constituted most, if not all, of the papyri that Joseph Smith bought from Michael H. Chandler in 1835. Is that correct?

Answer: Some anti-Mormon writers reason that the eleven papyri fragments returned to the Church in 1967 contained most, if not all, of the fragments Joseph Smith bought from Michael Chandler. They further reason that since the eleven pieces of papyri are the source of the Book of Abraham, and yet are identified by Egyptologists as fragments from the Book of Breathings—and not the writings of Abraham—Joseph Smith was a deceiver and a fraud. Therefore, the Book of Abraham is a product of his creative imagination and is not based on an ancient text as he claimed it was.

This claim is false. A careful reading clearly shows that at least two and probably three scrolls of unknown length were purchased by the Church, in addition to several flat pieces that were not a part of any of the scrolls.

Question Three: Does the Church claim that the papyri containing the writings of Abraham were actually "written by his own hand, upon papyrus," as a subtitle to the Book of Abraham reads?

Answer: Dr. Hugh Nibley, a gifted linguist who has made a lifelong study of ancient Near Eastern documents written in many languages and dialects, has explained: "Two important and peculiar aspects of ancient authorship must be considered when we are told that a writing is by the hand of Abraham or anybody else. One is that according to Egyptian and Hebrew thinking any copy of a book originally written by Abraham would be regarded and designated as the very work of his hand forever after, no matter how many reproductions had been made and handed down through the years. The other is that no matter who did the writing originally, if it was Abraham who commissioned or directed the work, he would take credit for the actual writing of the document, whether he penned it or not." [^1]

So, when we read "the Book of Abraham, written by his own hand upon papyrus," we are to understand, as the Saints always have, that this book, no matter how often "renewed," is still the writing of Abraham and no one else. He commissioned it or, "according to the accepted Egyptian expression," wrote it himself—with his own hand. And when Abraham tells us, "That you may have an understanding of these gods, I have given you the fashion of them in the figures at the beginning," we do not need to imagine Abraham himself personally drawing the very sketches we have before us. It was the practice of Egyptian scribes to rephrase obscure old passages they were copying to make them clearer. Then, when this was done, the scribe would add his own name to the page, which shows how careful the Egyptians were to give credit for original work only—whatever the first author wrote remained forever "by his own hand."

Question Four: Did Joseph Smith ever identify the four mummies that he acquired in 1835?

Answer: Many non-LDS newspapers published articles that stated the Church leaders in Kirtland claimed to have the bodies of various ancients, such as Abraham, Abimelech, and Joseph of Egypt. In his article published in the December 1835 issue of the Messenger and Advocate, Oliver Cowdery disclaimed all the unfounded rumors by stating, "Who these ancient inhabitants of Egypt were, I do not at present say." (See HC 2:348.) Five years later a visitor to Nauvoo reported that Joseph Smith identified one mummy as "one of the Pharaohs, who sat upon the throne of Egypt, and the female figure by its side was probably one of his daughters." The visitor suggested to Joseph Smith that the daughter might be Princess Thermutis, who rescued Moses from the Nile. Joseph is reported to have replied, "It is not improbable . . . but my time has not yet allowed me to examine and decide that point." (See page 193.)

According to another visitor to Nauvoo, Lucy Mack Smith said that her son Joseph had received a revelation from the Lord in regard to the mummies and their times and had shared the information with her. (See chapter 16.) She claimed that the mummies were a king and his wife and daughter. Emma Smith Bidamon also affirmed on the bill of sale, "From translation by Mr. Smith of the records these mummies were found to be the family of Pharo King of Egypt." (See page 203.)

Initially the Prophet did not identify the mummies, but later he is reported to have said that at least three were of Egyptian royalty. (See chapter 16.) No writings of Joseph Smith or his scribes are known to confirm the identity of the mummies.

Question Five: Michael H. Chandler originally had eleven mummies. The Church purchased four of them. Where are the other seven mummies?

Answer: Chandler initially acquired eleven mummies in New York City in the winter or early spring of 1833. He was displaying only six mummies in Baltimore that July and in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, in September. Two of the seven mummies were sold in the summer of 1833 to Dr. Samuel George Morton at the Academy of Natural Science in Philadelphia, where they were dissected as cadavers at the medical school on December 10 and 17. Two more mummies were sold between September 1833 and February 1835. Chandler explained on his placard that "the seven have been sold to gentlemen for private museums, and in consequence are kept from the public." Since they were purchased by private collectors, it has been and will be very difficult to trace them. Two of the four mummies purchased by the Church in 1835 were in Wood's Museum in Chicago prior to the fire; those two may still be in existence. Without a bill of sale or some other evidence, it will not be possible to identify a mummy as one possessed by Chandler or the Church.

Question Six: Are Joseph Smith's explanations of the three facsimiles in the Pearl of Great Price in harmony with the interpretations of Egyptologists?

Answer: Several of Joseph Smith's explanations are similar to interpretations of some Egyptologists, but some are not. Remember that Egyptology is not an exact science. Our understanding will be faulty until we have the entire text with which Joseph Smith was working and understand the Lord's way of working through his prophet. Did a later copyist insert the facsimiles in order to give readers a general idea of the accepted usage in his day? Facsimiles 2 and 3 are not mentioned in the written text, and we do not know who placed them in the texts that are currently dated many hundreds of years later than the events described. The inspired text of the Book of Abraham, as attested by the Holy Ghost, is a witness of its divine source. Someday this dilemma, along with many others, will be solved. (See D&C 101:32-34.)

Question Seven: I've heard it said that Pietro Lebolo, Antonio Lebolo's son, was a Chandler. What is significant about that? What is meant?

Answer: In considering different ways that Antonio Lebolo might have ties with an Irish nephew named Michael H. Chandler, this story has developed. Pietro Lebolo, Antonio's son, died at thirty-five in Castellamonte, Italy. By occupation he had been a wax dealer. In the English language a wax dealer, primarily one who makes candles, is called a chandler. It is an interesting similarity that has caused me many hours of double-checking, but I am confident this relationship is only coincidental.

Question Eight: I understand that an Irish genealogist made an interesting observation about Michael H. Chandler's wife's name, Frances F. Ludlow. Would you relate the experience?

Answer: While researching the Chandler and Ludlow genealogical lines in Dublin several years ago, I spoke to a prominent genealogist at the institution where I was studying. He said that it was unusual for the Irish to give females a middle initial, but that it was "common among certain Latin countries, such as Italy." "Her name may be an anglicized name from an Italian origin," he said. "Her original name would probably be Francesco and the closest name to Ludlow [Lebolo] in their language." I was extremely interested, since Antonio Lebolo had several female relatives named Francesco Lebolo. Again, a coincidence or a major clue?

Areas for Further Research

If writers waited for all the facts to be in before they published, there would be far fewer books. I have chosen to publish now what I have collected and observed over the past three decades. Future students will advance this research as new information is found and new discoveries are made. That is what research is all about. Following are some unresolved questions. I am hopeful, even confident, that this publication will help to solve some unresolved questions.

Question One: In what tomb on the West Bank of the Nile were the writings of Abraham and Joseph found?

Answer: I don't know. I would continue to look for tombs on the West Bank (Thebes) where Lebolo's name may be inscribed and that fit the description. Pit Tomb 32 has Lebolo's name chiseled in the passageway, but several other tombs may also be inscribed with his name. Some diaries, correspondence files, and journals of early travelers may yet be located in various European or Egyptian libraries and museums and family collections to assist in locating the tomb.

Question Two: What were the date and the circumstances around which the eleven mummies were excavated from the West Bank?

Answer: It must have happened between 1817 and 1822. Lebolo may have kept notes or copies of his correspondence, or Drovetti's official correspondence file with Lebolo may yet surface. It was listed as Sardinian file number 60. I would recheck the state archives in Turin, the former capital of Sardinia, and then Castellamonte. The tomb in El Gurna (or Gourneh), where he lived, may have his name carved on it.

Question Three: When did the eleven mummies enter and leave the harbor at Trieste?

Answer: They may have been in Albano Oblasser's care after being shipped from Alexandria between 1822 and 1830. Oblasser, the shipping magnate, must have shipped them to New York City shortly before Chandler acquired them (1832 or early 1833). Shipping records in Trieste and mercantile, customs, and newspaper records in New York City must have something to add. I searched through them, but obviously I missed something. What route they took between Trieste and New York City is unknown.

Question Four: Which ship transported the eleven mummies from Trieste to New York City?

Answer: I checked many documents in the National Archives in Washington, D.C., and the New York Historical Society, as well as newspaper accounts in the New York Public Library and some shipping records, but I was unable to locate specifics. Some customs records were burned in Washington, D.C., in 1833, but the chances are good that the documents missed the destruction. Do the shipping records of Maitland & Kennedy and McLeod & Gillespie still exist in some warehouse or archive or maritime firm?

Question Five: Who wrote the account that Michael Chandler gave of Lebolo's excavation of the mummies and their shipment to New York City?

Answer: Chandler had access to documents that gave him specific information concerning the mummies, Drovetti, Lebolo, Trieste, and the West Bank. It might have been a document prepared by Pietro Lebolo based on his father's or stepmother's recollections. The Trieste-Dublin-New York City story concerning Chandler and the shipping of the mummies appears to be a fabrication. I checked the newspapers in Dublin without success. The incorrect dating of Lebolo's excavations and death by two years remains a mystery.

Question Six: Were notices of upcoming auctions advertised in New York City other than in newspapers?

Answer: It still seems strange to me that if newspapers were the primary or only way to announce upcoming auctions, we've missed that column where the eleven mummies were listed. Several researchers have checked the New York City news-papers but nothing has been found. That forces me to presume that Chandler had an inside track with the receivers if the mummies were not announced for auction.

Question Seven: Who was Michael H. Chandler?

Answer: Michael H. Chandler, as listed in the Ohio cen-suses of the 1840s to 1860s, claimed to be Irish born. His wife, Frances F. Ludlow, and their first four children were also re-ported as Irish born. He claimed to live in Philadelphia at the time he acquired the mummies, but no tax records, Methodist Episcopal records, or documents of any kind have been located in Philadelphia to confirm his residency there. Further research ought to be done in and around Philadelphia, especially of port records and employees. Between 1836 and 1895, the Chandlers lived in Parkman, Geauga County, Ohio. Chandler died in 1866 in Parkman. His wife remained in Parkman, where she died in 1895.

Question Eight: Where were Chandler and the mummies between the middle of September 1833 and June 27, 1835?

Answer: We know Chandler displayed the mummies in Hudson, Ohio, in February 1835 and in Cleveland in late March 1835, but his whereabouts for the rest of the twenty-one months is unknown. Dogged researchers in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and surrounding areas will surely locate other towns where he exhibited the antiquities. Local newspapers and antique stores with old posters are prime targets.

Question Nine: Was Michael H. Chandler a nephew of Antonio Lebolo, as he claimed?

Answer: It is painful to conclude, but my research leads me to believe that Chandler fabricated that part of the report. Perhaps researchers will someday locate Chandler's and his wife's family records in Ireland. Michael was born about 1797 or 1798, and Frances was born between 1798 and 1800. Their Irish-born children and years of birth are Thomas C., 1820; Ann C., 1822; William H., 1825; and George W., 1827. Genealogists can solve the Lebolo/Chandler relationship, or lack thereof, if records surface. The Lebolo records are available for comparison.

Question Ten: What does the untranslated portion of the Book of Abraham contain?

Answer: I don't know, but we may hypothesize a few possibilities. The subtitle of the Book of Abraham reads in part "the writings of Abraham while he was in Egypt." Likewise, after Abraham was shown the planetary system in all its grandeur, the Lord told him: "Abraham, I show these things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare all these words." (Abraham 3:15.) Facsimile 3 portrays Abraham in the king's court "reasoning upon the principles of astronomy." These statements allow me to surmise that the unpublished part of the Book of Abraham speaks of astronomical matters and their relationships to God's design in organizing his enormous family in all three stages of their existence. In chapters 3 through 5, Abraham merely introduces the concept. Prophets are commanded to preach the gospel as occasion permits. Surely the untranslated portion of the Book of Abraham would contain many great eternal truths that Abraham would be able to share, including temple preparation or related insights. (See Facsimile 2.)

Question Eleven: What does the unpublished Book of Joseph contain?

Answer: The Book of Joseph appears to contain some material that is similar to sacred teachings in the temple. Perhaps it was not written for general consumption. Perhaps these documents are still in existence.

Question Twelve: When translated, how large will the Books of Abraham and Joseph be?

Answer: In the two accounts given in chapter 2, Oliver Cowdery spoke of "volumes" and William West stated that he was told that the printed text would exceed the Bible in length.

Question Thirteen: Where did William Smith display the mummies and records, and why did he allow them to be taken from his hands?

Answer: It appears that William Smith was displaying the antiquities for money. He was in western Illinois when he became financially troubled and pawned them in exchange for daily expenses. The particulars are very sketchy. Joseph Smith III reported that William never reclaimed the antiquities. Newspaper and personal histories in that area may have more answers. Perhaps some court records mention the mummies being pledged for a price.

Question Fourteen: What happened to the two mummies and any papyri that were purchased by Abel Combs from Emma Smith Bidamon and not sold to the St. Louis Museum?

Answer: Abel Combs retained some papyri, since he gave at least eleven fragments to his nurse, Charlotte Benecke Weaver, in 1892 in Philadelphia. What happened to the two missing mummies and any other papyri fragments is unknown. Combs died in Philadelphia in 1892. Additional fragments may be in museums in Philadelphia, Chicago, or elsewhere. They are probably glued to old maps cut to fit the fragments. Watchful researchers may locate something with this lead. With transportation made convenient by the great inland waterways of the United States, they could be almost anywhere.

Question Fifteen: Isn't it unusual that a bill of sale such as that which was drawn up between Emma Smith Bidamon, et al., and Abel Combs did not mention the amount of money involved for the sale of the Egyptian antiquities?

Answer: As long as both parties agree to the terms of the document, a dollar amount seems unnecessary. This document has caused me to wonder if A. Combs is the person to whom William Smith was beholden several years before when someone gave William money in exchange for the antiquities left behind as security. Combs was last known to be in Ohio in 1855 when he sold a farm just a few miles from Michael H. Chandler's farm. He was next known to be in Nauvoo on May 26, 1856, when he bought the four mummies and "the records." This is an unsolved mystery. Abel Combs lived in Philadelphia between 1874 and 1892, when he died. He had kept at least eleven fragments from the Joseph Smith collection, those that were returned to the Church in 1967.

Question Sixteen: What would lead the General Authorities to expect that the manuscripts of the writings of Abraham and Joseph were still in existence in 1878, seven years after the destruction of Wood's Museum?

Answer: We do not know what report the brethren had received that would lead them to send two apostles to several eastern states in hopes of obtaining information concerning the manuscripts of Abraham and Joseph. Orson Pratt spent several days in the Chicago area, but there is no report of his activities in available records. In the 1930s, Wilford C. Wood, an avid LDS collector of Mormon memorabilia, purchased some of the manuscripts of the writings of Abraham from Lewis C. Bidamon's son Charles in Wilmette, a suburb of Chicago. Even to hope that some of the writings of Abraham and his great-grandson Joseph are still in existence today, nearly four thousand years later, is amazing. To accept the idea that Joseph Smith had translated some of Joseph's writings and that someday they may be lo-cated is a marvelous expectation.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] As the account begins, Abraham's extended family was bitterly apostate. Terah, his father, and other close relatives had consented to have Abraham publicly murdered upon an altar of sacrifice. Journal of Discourses 26:129.
