H. Donl Peterson, Story of the Book of Abraham: Mummies, Manuscripts, and Mormonism ( 1995)

21

Concepts, Challenges, and Testimony

The contents of the Book of Abraham are far more valuable to mankind than any historical account of the mummies and papyri identified with the book. This work partially fills a previous historical void in our understanding, but it is of minimal consequence when compared to the actual words of the prophet Abraham, one who was authorized to speak the words of the Lord. Even though we have only a few introductory pages of this important work preserved in the Pearl of Great Price, we learn that the Book of Abraham contains many significant concepts and alludes to others that are logically in the balance of the lengthy manuscript. In brief, here are some significant concepts that are mentioned in the 5,552 words that we call the Book of Abraham. Most of this material is not contained in the Bible.

All of these concepts are recorded in five brief chapters. The entire text of the Book of Abraham will someday be made available and will be of great worth to those who cherish the writings of this great prophet and patriarch.

More Scriptures and Warnings of Counterfeits

This last dispensation of the gospel will be flooded with great and eternal truths that have been withheld to come forth in this era. As we review the voluminous amount of information that the Lord has promised will be revealed in these last days, we stand in awe and wonder at its magnitude. Without the forerunners of printing presses, modern transportation, duplicators, microfilms, computers, fax machines, and other modern inven tions, the management and synthesis of these pending documents would be nearly impossible.

All dispensations culminate in this dispensation. This is the time of restoration, when records of the past, both scriptural and genealogical, will be made available. Peter explained that Jesus will return after the "restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21.) The chart on pages 269-71 projects the magnitude of the restoration of scriptures and genealogies that will yet come forth.

We are also told that in the last days, false Christs and false prophets shall arise, and they will be effective in their deceit. The Lord warned that even the very elect, according to the Abrahamic covenant—that is, those married in holy temples, even active members of the Church—may be deceived by the signs and wonders these false prophets will be able to perform. (See Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:22.) False prophets have brought forth spurious teachings, prophecies, and histories as a part of their deceptive arsenal throughout history. Surely Satan will not let this moment in history pass without launching forth his most sophisticated weapons.

Our Father's teachings are eternally the same. If the restored records teach the same doctrines as the standard works and as the living prophets do, and they are confirmed in our souls by the Holy Ghost, they are undoubtedly from the same source as the standard works that are not in our possession.

My Testimony

Though my research on this topic is primarily over, I will be interested in this work as new information surfaces and this publication raises new questions. My active field work is no longer possible. My formal classroom days are over. My university teaching has been challenging and rewarding, and now younger professors with excellent credentials are fielding the questions and providing excellent answers as intelligent young scholars, armed with testimonies, continue to probe for answers.

After spending many years teaching the great doctrines of the Pearl of Great Price, I can honestly say that it has been a marvelous experience. Some things in the scriptures I do not yet fully understand, but the things that I do understand give me peace and assurance that these unknown truths will yet be received with awe and appreciation.

I know that God lives and that Jesus is the Christ. I know that an apostasy necessitated a restoration of the gospel to enable us to enjoy God's teachings and ordinances in these last days. I know with great certainty that the Book of Mormon is a divine record containing the fullness of the gospel. It is truly "the keystone of our religion"—that which holds it all together as far as testimony and doctrine are concerned. I know that each of the standard works is true. I fell in love with the Bible while I was serving as a missionary, when it was our primary scripture for proselyting. I anxiously await the day when the complete text of Father Abraham, and all other scriptures that are to come forth, will be revealed to those who honor Abraham as our exemplar, prophet, and patriarch. My major concern now is to live the truths that have already been revealed.

Notes
