Now we have a world where people are confused.

If you don’t believe it, go and watch the news.

We can get direction all along our way,

If we heed the prophets—follow what they say.

These words from “Follow the Prophet” (Children’s Songbook, 110–11) teach you to heed and follow the prophet. The words heed and follow mean to listen and obey. Can you think of a time when you listened to the prophet? Can you think of a time when you or your family chose to obey and do what the prophet asked you to do? How did you feel when you obeyed?

Listen to some Primary children share what it means to follow the prophet: Austin said, “When I do what he says, it makes me happy.” Lindsay said, “The prophet has asked me to wear modest clothes, attend church, read my scriptures, and pray. He wants me to be baptized, choose the right, and follow the examples of my mom and dad.”

Doctrine and Covenants 21:5 states, “For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth.” This scripture teaches you that the prophet will always say what Heavenly Father wants you to know. The prophet will always show you the way to live so that you can return to Heavenly Father someday.

Remove page F4, and mount it on heavy paper. Listen to the prophet speak at general conference, and choose three things he asks you to do. Write them on the poster. Hang the poster where you can see it to remind you to follow the prophet.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="127031046" id="aside1_p1"><strong>Note:</strong> If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied or printed from the Internet at <a href="https://www.lds.org">www.lds.org</a>. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on “Languages.”</p> [/SIDEBAR]

1.  Briefly share how John the Baptist came to Joseph Smith to restore the Aaronic Priesthood and how Peter, James, and John restored the Melchizedek Priesthood. Explain how Heavenly Father can bless Church members through the priesthood. Invite a priesthood leader approved by the bishop or branch president to talk to the Primary about how the priesthood blesses us. Provide paper and pencils, crayons, or markers. Invite the children to draw examples of how the priesthood has blessed their lives. Invite a child to read Doctrine and Covenants 107:64–67. Ask: “Who is the ‘Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of the Church’?” Teach the children that our prophet holds all priesthood keys; that is, he has the authority to preside over the whole Church. Sing “We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet” (Hymns, no. 19). Share your testimony of the prophet and of the priesthood.

2.  Show Gospel Art Picture Kit 520 (Gordon B. Hinckley), and share the story told by President Hinckley (1910–2008) of a woman who forgave a teenager for making a wrong choice that changed her life forever (see “Be More Forgiving,” Liahona, Mar. 2007, F2–F3). Explain that prophets have taught us to be forgiving. Use dramatizations to involve the children in learning scripture stories about forgiveness (see “Dramatizations,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 165–66). For example: Genesis 42–45—Joseph forgives his brothers; 1 Nephi 7—Nephi forgives his brothers. Share your testimony of the Savior’s Atonement. Help the children understand how He made it possible for us to repent and be forgiven so that we can return to live with Heavenly Father again.
