My best friend had gone to church with me the past two weeks. But when I invited him again, he said he would not be going with me. He wanted to enjoy the rest of the weekend by sleeping in and going out to have some fun. I accepted his reply, but inwardly I was saddened because I really wanted him to come and feel the Spirit and learn from God. When I got home, I went to my room and prayed, telling Heavenly Father of my sadness and asking for His comfort and guidance.

After finishing my prayer, I went to the kitchen to wash dishes. My father asked whether my friend would be going to church with me again the next day. When I told him what my friend had said, my father could tell that I was concerned and sad. All he said was, “You did your part. People have their agency. You planted a seed.” My father’s words of faith brought peace to my heart.

In preparation for Sunday School, I read Alma 30–32. In chapter 31, Alma prays to the Lord with all his heart for his brethren the Zoramites, who were rejecting the Lord’s ways and beginning to fall into error. As I read his words, the Spirit touched me, and I was inspired to pray as well.

I knelt and offered a prayer similar to Alma’s for my best friend. Like Alma, I told Heavenly Father that “[his soul is] precious, and [he is my brother]; therefore, give unto [me], O Lord, power and wisdom that [I] may bring [him, my brother], again unto thee” (Alma 31:35).

The next day I got ready for church, knowing that my friend would not be going with me. Nevertheless, I had peace in my heart because I, like Alma, had prayed in faith. As I set out for church, I received a call from my friend. He asked if I had already left the house and if I could stop by and pick him up. We had a wonderful meeting that Sunday, and I know that the Spirit testified of the truth to him.

I know that my friend was not the only one blessed on that day because of the Book of Mormon and the prayer of faith. My own testimony of the Lord and this book was strengthened, and that testimony led me to serve a mission and made it possible for me to testify of the truth. I know that the Book of Mormon brings us closer to God, that it teaches us to come unto Christ, and that He will save our soul.
