Neal A. Maxwell, One More Strain of Praise ( 1999)

Introduction

Many have helped me much with my illness. This is especially true of my oncologist, Dr. Clyde Ford, who has walked with me down the path of leukemia, including both his medical and his personal part in providing the blessed "delay en route."

Given all the "IV's" and literally hundreds of necessary injections to maintain and facilitate the "delay," this seems to be my life's pincushion period. Dr. Larry Staker, my primary-care physician, has been attentive and helpful both during and before these last leukemic years. Dr. David Hilleyer did "house calls" when my sinus problems caused concern from time to time. Numerous nurses have helped me greatly, especially Cara Mickelsen, Michelle Tittensor, Heather Swain, Julie McCandless, but also unnamed others.

All these individuals did not merely go through the motions but also went sensitively through the emotions—of mine as well as other patients' illnesses—maximizing what medicine can contribute when combined with kind care.

It is unsurprising that my wife, Colleen, has been the most responsive and helpful. This has included many times when her own supply of energy was low. Yet she was ever anxious not only to care for me but also to please me, and even to surprise me in different and thoughtful ways.

Our children and their spouses (Becky and Mike, Cory and Karen, Nancy and Mark, Jane and Marc) and all the grandchildren have likewise been special. Some may say that such familial love is merely to be expected, and in one sense it is. But when people do their family duties well, the rest of us are obvious beneficiaries. Then, rather than being something one takes for granted, it is something so generously granted in which one rejoices.

Not only have Colleen and the family, including my extended family, been superb, but Susan Jackson has also been a secondary sufferer, while being a primary helper. Furthermore, the regular prayers of so many members and friends in so many places have blessed and nurtured me, and still do, for which I shall be everlastingly grateful.

Finally, if more than in my past writings this spare volume blends the autobiographical and the doctrinal, it is because these two dimensions are actually inseparable, for I am long since rooted in the restored doctrines of the kingdom, however imperfectly I reflect them.

Doctrines believed and practiced do change and improve us, while ensuring our vital access to the Spirit. Both outcomes are crucial. No wonder, therefore, "One More Strain of Praise" especially for Jesus Christ (with chapter titles taken from the same hymn) focuses on certain key doctrines, because these continue to pervade my personal discipleship and help me to press forward in the great distance yet to be covered as to my personal improvement. How could it be otherwise? The scriptures, which we are to "liken unto ourselves," inevitably and blessedly blend the autobiographical with the doctrinal. (See 1 Ne. 19:23.)

I alone am responsible for the contents of this book, which, of course, is not an official Church publication, though I sincerely hope it will be helpful to the readers.
