Neal A. Maxwell, One More Strain of Praise ( 1999)

Chapter One

"Still the Notes Prolong"

Why is it that I couldn't see the illness coming? Looking back, I now recognize there were more than a few pointing indicators in addition to unusual fatigue. For instance, there was the operative role of irony about which, for years, I have spoken and written. But now it was my turn to experience it more keenly. The very title of my latest book was almost invitational—If Thou Endure It Well. This by itself might have alerted me, being issued just before the leukemia was diagnosed. Consider, as well, the book's ending poem, which was more invitational than poetic:

Submission By Neal A. Maxwell

When from Thy stern tutoring I would quickly flee, Turn me from my Tarshish To where is best for me. Help me in my Nineveh To serve with love and truth— Not on a hillside posted Mid shade of gourd or booth. When my modest suffering seems So vexing, wrong, and sore, May I recall what freely flowed From each and every pore. Dear Lord of the Abba Cry, Help me in my duress To endure it well enough And to say, . . . "Nevertheless."

Irony, the hard crust on the bread of adversity, can try both our faith and our patience (see Mosiah 23:21). Irony can be a particularly pointed form of such chastening, because it involves disturbing incongruity, contrary to our expectations. Our best-laid and even worthy plans must be sharply revised.

With such an inverting of our anticipated consequences, irony can become the frequent cause of an individual's being offended. Furthermore, the larger and the more untamed one's ego, the greater the likelihood of his being offended, especially when tasting his small portion of vinegar and gall.

It was ironic, too, that an Emily Dickinson poem was used in that same precursor book. This could have been another personal "heads up."

He stuns you by degrees— Prepares your brittle Nature For the Ethereal Blow By fainter Hammers—further heard— Then nearer—Then so slow Your Breath has time to straighten— Your Brain—to bubble Cool— Deals—One—imperial—Thunderbolt— That scalps your naked Soul— (The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson, ed. Thomas H. Johnson [Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1960], p. 148.)

Likewise, a 1995 Thanksgiving talk constituted something of a "pass in review," utilizing for the first time a previously resisted autobiographical approach. The focus was on a few special examples of my gratitude to God for the various intertwinings of my life with the lives of others.

Also emblematic and foretelling was another crescendo of sorts during my assignment in the late spring of 1995 to the Okinawa Stake conference. This visit coincided with the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the World War II fighting on that island, where I was an eighteen-year-old, inadequate, and frightened infantryman. The commemorative visit stirred many memories and much gratitude, as it doubtless did in several hundred other veterans returning to that island.

Subsequently, too, several small luncheon gatherings of surviving Okinawa and World War II buddies back home tied other needed loops together. This tying together, too, could have signaled what was impending. Those buddies, along with many members and nonmembers alike, have been enclosing me in an enveloping pattern of prayers and concern.

Interviews about my faith by an able Hugh Hewitt on PBS in 1996 also turned out to be significantly auto- biographical. This focus was not needed by viewers as much as by me—at least for the purpose of counting my blessings.

Beginning in January 1997, chemotherapy treatment and hospitalization lasted forty-six days. My preceding desires were strong and settled but without knowing whether there was to be a remission of my leukemia at all. These desires included:

When the Latter-day Saints make up their minds to endure, for the kingdom of God's sake, whatsoever shall come, whether poverty or riches, whether sickness or to be driven by mobs, they will say it is all right, and will honor the hand of the Lord in it, and in all things, and serve Him to the end of their lives, according to the best of their ability, God being their helper. If you have not made up your minds for this, the quicker you do so the better. (In Journal of Discourses 1:338; emphasis added.)

These same goals continued with me in the additional "IV" and injection chemotherapies of 1997, 1998, and 1999.

Amid it all, by giving further praise of the Master, I hope it will be said that I could "still the notes prolong."

Yes, my seventy-plus years surely constitute a generous span. But even so, generous spans even with added delays en route "glide swiftly away":

Our life as a dream, our time as a stream Glide swiftly away, . . . For the arrow is flown and the moments are gone. (Charles Wesley, "Come, Let Us Anew," Hymns, no. 217.)

The test for all of us is how well we do within our individualized fields of action and in "those years wherein we are set," just as Tolkien wrote:

Other evils there are that may come. . . . Yet it is not our part to master all the tides of the world, but to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are set, uprooting the evil in the fields that we know, so that those who live after may have clean earth to till. What weather they shall have is not ours to rule. (Gandalf in J. R. R. Tolkien, The Return of the King [New York: Ballantine Books, 1965], p. 190.)

A few brave disciples, in rare circumstances, are permitted to seal their testimonies with their blood. All of us, however, can witness, though less dramatically, by both how well we live and how well we die. By enduring well any deprivations and sufferings we can quietly but firmly seal our testimonies using the wax in our spiritual submissiveness.

As to how essential such submissiveness is, Gilbert Meilaender appropriately reminded us recently that C. S. Lewis, in The Pilgrim's Regress, spoke of how developmental discipleship always involves the "tether and pang of the particular." Concluding of Lewis's insights, Meilaender wrote: "We live with this duality of our being, with our hearts both tied to what is local and unique and drawn toward the universal. Living within that tension, as the Lewis poem puts it, 'we pay dearly.'" ("The Everyday C. S. Lewis," First Things, August/September 1998, p. 31.)

Yet my cross is comparatively light even now. It is surely less rough-hewn, compared to so many heavier crosses borne longer by others. Of course, only Jesus can accurately compare crosses. But whatever the ruggedness and weight, His grace is sufficient to help each of us carry his own cross (2 Cor. 12:9; see also Ether 12:26-27; Moro. 10:32; D&C 17:8). Furthermore, whatever the weight of these tutorial challenges, if we emulate Job we won't "charge God foolishly" either (Job 1:22).

Among the lessons learned and, yes, re-learned, for which praise of the Master is surely given, were the following:

Â Suffering accounts for some of the sweat that goes with the process of working out our salvation.

Â Customized tutorials are the extra tuition we pay for our continuing, graduate education as Jesus' dis- ciples.

Â Some blessings clearly come in the form of bracings. Therefore, both recesses and brief reveries are of necessity quickly interrupted because of life's compressed curriculum.

Â Since smugness stifles the process of spiritual growth, smugness is likely to be shattered, too, and not just arrogance, an obvious candidate for shattering. More especially, bracings can interrupt any tendency to be gliding along, like a hydrofoil, too unfeeling of and unresponsive to the shaping bumps and waves of the sea of life.

Â It is best if we can be humble because of the word and not solely because circumstances compel us to be humble, but, if necessary, the latter will do.

Â In discipleship, we learn of suffering that there are no exemptions, only variations.

Â We continue to feel that we would still prefer to suffer ourselves rather than to see our children or grandchildren suffer. Yet this choice is sometimes not given to us.

Â We learn that we can "take" more than we first imagined, yet we fervently hope such a response will also prove true of how we handle any encores.

Â We learn much more about the Holy Ghost's role as the Comforter, including how He so helpfully preaches to us from the pulpit of memory in order to help us cope with our present and future.

Â We learn that, while others can sincerely comfort and help us, even so, our cross is finally ours alone to bear.

Â Prayers, after all, are the most effective thing others can do for us! These constitute an outpouring that, for me, has become and continues to be such a real and sustaining factor.

Â Heavenly Father not only expects but also encourages us to plead with Him over our challenges. Our pleading is not a sign of weakness, but can reflect thoughtful submissiveness. Indeed, Jesus, who knew clearly what He faced in Gethsemane and on Calvary, nevertheless pleaded with the Lord for the cup to be removed from Him. Therefore it is what we do, during and after the pleading, that matters, especially as to our submissiveness to the Lord. But pleadings are appropriate.

I feel unworthy of the many incoming prayers, letters, and phone calls, yet surely not unappreciative! Being thus remembered by so many is truly an overwhelming experience; one simply cannot imagine, beforehand, the real metes and bounds or the deep tenderness and gratitude that this outreach by others evokes.

Clearly there are different individual exit routes from life. Some people go suddenly and quickly, leaving survivors in a state of shock and with almost no time to prepare. Others die only after prolonged suffering. It is best that we leave to the Lord the variations in both the timing and the exit routes. He and He alone can make those decisions, and He does so out of His individualized perfect love and mercy.

Thanks to Jesus, however, whether we go suddenly and easily or agonizingly and slowly, His glorious latter-day Restoration is part of His helping grace, being so full of nurturing doctrines and reassuring truths. The fundamental purposes of the Restoration included "to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men," two supernal fundamentals (Moses 7:62). Other restored realities are clearly a vital part of the grace of it all, but Jesus' atonement and the resurrection are at the very center of it all.

By means of this mortal reality, the resplendent and reassuring Restoration, so many other things that constitute the "tether and pang of the particular" can be put in a proper perspective. Praise be to God, because the gospel permits us to see even more clearly "things as they really are, and . . . things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13). If things are not seen with such gospel clarity, so many mortal lives end up being consumed by such puny purposes. Otherwise, too, without gospel perspectives human capacity can be so under-employed and improperly focused that it is like using the huge telescope on Mt. Palomar merely to study nearby Catalina Island. The grand Restoration is not only a crucial and needed restitution of "plain and precious things" but it is also a refutation of various prevailing and incorrect views of life, including the view that life is merely a meaningless brevity.

Therefore, matching life's strategic purposes to our local discipleship and its daily tasks by using gospel perspectives becomes vital. In this process, adversity can both clean the lens and sharpen life's focus while blending the doctrinal and the personal.

Father's plan comprehends and is inlaid with His personal plans for each of us, including our individual trajectories of trial. Happily, therefore, we can rightly sing in praise and of exemplifying Jesus:

He marked the path and led the way, And ev'ry point defines . . . Redemption's grand design, Where justice, love, and mercy meet In harmony divine! (Eliza R. Snow, "How Great the Wisdom and the Love," Hymns, no. 195.)

Thus recent events in my life have helped me to try more valiantly to "prolong" these and other grateful notes of praise for the Lord, since these are part of the music of discipleship.

Besides, our shared uncertainty as to proximate things simply goes with the mortal territory. Only a few people seem to have known something of their longevity and personal timetables. The Prophet Joseph Smith knew his life would not be a long one and that he would never see forty. President Brigham Young, who visited Joseph in Liberty Jail, said, "I heard Joseph say many a time, 'I shall not live until I am forty years of age'" (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widstoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], p. 467). President Wilford Woodruff's journal records that Lyman Wight "said that Joseph told him, while in Liberty jail, Missouri, in 1839, he would not live to see forty years" (History of the Church 7:212). Most of us do not know our spans. Nevertheless, though these are unrevealed, "all things must come to pass in their time" (D&C 64:32).

Therefore, as to our personal timing, the rest of us as are asked to live in what someone has called "cheerful insecurity." We trust in the timing of the Lord, and, meanwhile, know that the days and years of righteous individuals will not be numbered less. But it is up to us "to be content with the things which the Lord hath allotted unto [us]," including the time allotted (Alma 29:3-4).

Meanwhile, we surely experience the varied but real limitations in the ranges of our "tether" and the customized "pang" of our "particular" and allotted challenges (see Alma 29). Meanwhile, too, we experience the reality that there are different types of tears: tears of sheer joy; tears of sadness, including over those who suffer because of sin or who have no hope for a glorious resurrection. But there are also the tears that are shed out of sheer empathy, as when tenderness responds to tenderness and empathy evokes empathy. Such occurred in the case of the death of Lazarus. Jesus did not go at once, as requested, to bless sick Lazarus, but instead arrived only after Lazarus had died. (See John chapters 11 and 12.) Jesus knew beforehand, of course, that Lazarus would rise again; He knew the impending outcome. But even so, when upon His arrival He saw the tears of faith-filled Mary and others, Jesus nevertheless wept. Yes, He surely loved Lazarus. Yes, He was about to raise him dramatically from the grave. Yet seeing the tears of others evoked His own empathic tears.

Such reciprocal evocations have been part of my experience many times in recent months. Empathic tears, therefore, do not reflect a fear of death, but instead a precious sharing of emotions, as when others are touched and are so kindly expressive to us.

In any case, uncertainty as to longevity leaves a balance to be struck by us all. We are to salute the Lord for the gift of life, for as long as it lasts, and yet, at the same time, to be spiritually submissive as it ends. This is a delicate balance we do not always fully and gracefully achieve.

Several scriptures have proved to be relevant and reassuring in this regard. When these have been shared aloud with many who also suffer from cancer they have been far better than anything I could say, especially to those valiants who reach that point where they are sick of being sick.

And I said unto him: I know that [God] loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things (1 Ne. 11:17).

We need not "know the meaning of all things," if we know God loves us! In the same way our appreciativeness for the role of submissiveness needs to grow, as one strives to

[become] a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and [become] as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father (Mosiah 3:19).

Use of the word inflict suggests customized challenges and tutoring that require an added and special submissiveness.

Similarly, our appreciativeness of Jesus' supernal empathy will greatly help us to endure.

And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people.

And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities. (Alma 7:11-12.)

Jesus fully understands! His empathy is perfect!

No wonder it is intellectually dishonest not to inventory all of one's blessings great and small. No wonder there is a reminding scriptural theme all about how God has mercifully blessed mankind—and for such a long time:

Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down unto the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts (Moro. 10:3).

The vast sweep of divine oversight of human history includes God's many mercies to us individually. Of course, when death comes to all of us, as a result thereof some things will be clearly missed. But these are small dunes of deprivation when placed alongside that vast Himalayan range of all our past and present blessings.

It is significant that the very first verse in the Book of Mormon reflects Nephi's own experiential gratitude for the goodness of God.["[H]aving seen many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless [I was] highly favored of the Lord in all my days" (1 Ne. 1:1). Yet, he continued, he had a "great knowledge" of the "goodness . . . of God." This knowledge was something on which Nephi repeatedly relied during his life to sustain him through so much adversity. (See 1 Ne. 1:1.)

Even so, unless we are on guard it is easy to slip quickly into self-pity. For me, however, there was the helpfulness of those who have gone before, including my parents, who have modeled so well for me the process of dying.

In any case, the "delay en route" granted me has been a special blessing for which I praise God, and I have been reasonably busy trying to use the allotted mortal time for the purposes of eternity.

So now, as in my past efforts to write about discipleship, I give prime attention to doctrinal matters and to gospel principles. These informing and emancipating elements are crucial in order for us all to function within the "tethers and pangs" of our individual lives and times.

So many doctrines could have been selected and illustrated. Those to follow—being of good cheer, Jesus' redemptive role as our advocate, God's mercy, the need for personal purification, the blessings and challenges of moral agency, and the counting of my blessings—all these have a poignancy and relevancy for this sunset period of my dis-cipleship.

Having ultimate gospel "gladness," therefore, not only is possible but also can finally, if not constantly, swallow up any proximate sadness. Thus the music of faith not only deserves to be prolonged but also should include lively "songs of gladness" such as those that follow.
