Neal A. Maxwell, One More Strain of Praise ( 1999)

Chapter Two

"Songs of Gladness"

In exulting over the gloriousness and expansiveness of the Restoration, the much-persecuted Prophet Joseph Smith exclaimed, "shall we not go on in so great a cause?" (D&C 128:22.) The gospel's "gladness" actually is so enlivening. It can help us to be of good cheer in a time when other things could dominate, globally and personally, with their dampening pervasiveness. God is deserving of our praise for providing us with much-needed precious perspective. Of necessity there are sunsets in our individual lives, yet so far as gospel perspectives are concerned it is always "the morning breaks" (Hymns, no. 1). This light grows ever "brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:24).

In such a climactic time as the last days, we shall see things both wonderful and awful. Joel and Zephaniah prophesied that the last times would be a "day of gloominess" (Joel 2:2; Zeph. 1:15). Even so, this is all the more reason for us to "shine as lights in the world" (Philip. 2:15). So illuminated, we can better help to gather the Lord's flock in "the last days" from wherever they have been scattered in the "cloudy and dark day" (Ezek. 30:3; 34:12).

Yet even as some things clearly worsen in the world, the true Saints will simply get better. Furthermore, letting our lights shine includes a measure of wise public and community service by doing what we can do to better our small portion of the world. We of all people can thus be, to borrow a phrase, "idealists without illusions" by contributing to and by being "anxiously engaged" in good causes.

Gloom and despair will nevertheless grow almost ratio-like, because "despair cometh because of iniquity" (Moro. 10:22). Consider this latter-day overlay foreseen by President Brigham Young:

It was revealed to me in the commencement of this Church, that the Church would spread, prosper, grow and extend, and that in proportion to the spread of the Gospel among the nations of the earth, so would the power of Satan rise (in Journal of Discourses 13:280).

Hence there is no way that we and our posterity can be a part of the last days and expect overall conditions to be otherwise. Such despair will inexorably accelerate the various ways in which "love will wax cold" (Matt. 24:12).

Likewise accelerating the latter-day developments is our heightened collective awareness of the global human condition, an awareness now made possible by unprecedented technology. Technology brings an almost daily awareness of global inhumanities and tragedies that were once remote. Consider, for instance, the highly different "coverage" given at the time to two dissimilar but shaping conflicts: The battle of Waterloo and the Gulf War. (Not just the delay in reporting Waterloo versus the immediacy of the Gulf War, but mere paper and word of mouth versus graphic films and television viewed by millions.)

Just what is the human capacity today for absorbing such a steady flow of a diet of gloomy and tragic news? We do not know, but the impact is real, and it can add subtly and directly to the despair. Nevertheless, will we still sincerely sing songs of individual gladness amid such gloom?

President Joseph F. Smith wisely counseled:

The leaders of the people should never disseminate a spirit of gloom in the hearts of the people. If men standing in high places sometimes feel the weight and anxiety of momentous times, they should be all the firmer and all the more resolute in those convictions which come from a God-fearing conscience and pure lives. . . . It is a matter of the greatest importance that the people be educated to appreciate and cultivate the bright side of life rather than to permit its darkness and shadows to hover over them. (Gospel Doctrine, [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], p. 155.)

Thus Jesus, the greatest leader of all, in spite of the most ominous challenges He faced, consistently admonished His disciples to "be of good cheer" (Matt. 14:27).

Another way is to lighten the load and do what Paul noted: "that ye have put off the old man with his deeds" (Col. 3:9). King Benjamin preceded what was later preserved from Paul by elaborating:

For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father (Mosiah 3:19).

Brigham Young, a careful student of the Book of Mormon, was likewise quick to see and to use the same metaphor in his teachings concerning "the natural man":

How difficult it is to teach the natural man, who comprehends nothing more than that which he sees with the natural eye! . . . Talk to him about angels, heavens, God, immortality, and eternal lives, and it is like sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal to his ears; it has no music to him; there is nothing in it that charms his senses, soothes his feelings, attracts his attention, or engages his affections, in the least. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widstoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], p. 260.)

Brigham thus understood about the natural man, as did Paul, how to the natural man the things of the Spirit "are foolishness" (1 Cor. 2:14).

Even given our challenging context, however, we are instructed by our Lord and Exemplar, Jesus Christ, to "be of good cheer" (D&C 61:36; 78:18). How can this be achieved?

For one thing, discernment is vital. The eminent historian Will Durant wrote of the human need for perspective and proportion in order "to know that the little things are little, and the big things big, before it is too late; we want to see things now as they will seem forever—'in the light of eternity'" (The Story of Philosophy [New York: Simon and Schuster, 1927], p. 1).

Scriptural illustrations are especially instructive. Jesus told the original Twelve to be of good cheer when at that time, on the roiling surface of circumstance, there was nothing to be cheerful about (John 16:33). How could Jesus expect the Twelve to be of good cheer? Because, the Savior explained, "in the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world" (John 16:33). His impending triumph was to become the central fact of human history!

Thus it is vital that we not let grim prophecies "weigh [us] down," but, rather, we are to let Christ and all He accomplished lift us up. This will occur if the Atonement["[rests] in [our minds] forever," said Mormon in his counsel to Moroni amid their own very difficult conditions back then. (Moro. 9:25.)

The reasons for "good cheer" are strategic, therefore, whereas life's vexations, though real, are actually tactical. This distinction between the strategic and the tactical is enormously important for us to understand, lest the daily drumbeat of the tactical "weigh" us down. Of course, discipleship is focused instead on the ultimate "there and then," on the glorious and eternal things. But the daily "here and now" vexations and challenges are nevertheless so specific.

For the original Twelve, therefore, it was crucial to know these grand facts: Christ had overcome the world; the Atonement was about to be accomplished; death would be irrevocably defeated; and all mankind would be given—through the grace of God—immortality! Satan, with all his sound and fury, had failed to prevent the accomplishment of the centerpiece in the plan of salvation! And for those of deep faith, because of the same emancipating atonement, there would be the added richness of God's greatest gift, eternal life! (D&C 6:13; 14:7.) Immortality plus!

These resplendent realities and fundamental facts thus justified the Twelve's being of good cheer. Never mind their grim, temporary circumstances, including how the Mortal Messiah's disheartened followers would be temporarily scattered like sheep. (Matt. 26:31).

If inventoried, Jesus' urgings regarding good cheer are always connected with, lead to, or illustrate transcending things. For instance, Jesus told one individual to be of good cheer because his sins had been forgiven (Matt. 12:9). What good news! Again, gospel proportion can help us to be of good cheer, especially about things that matter.

The same words, "be of good cheer," were used when the disciples were terrified as they saw Jesus walking on the stormy waters of Galilee. This dramatic demonstration of Christ's divinity was one of many, but the summary words, "Be of good cheer; it is I," surely evoked a grateful and reassuring response then (Matt. 14:27.) Moreover, how often must this memory and these words have evoked special and nurturing memories in the times that followed Jesus' ascension?

To latter-day disciples in the midst of tribulation, Christ has urged that we be of good cheer, "for I will lead you along" (D&C 78:18). Anciently, Enoch's joy came about over similar reassuring fundamental facts. Speaking of the Lord, Enoch exclaimed reassuringly, "Yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30). One's current, local context is undeniably significant, but the Lord's purposes will finally triumph, for He is surely "there."

Of pleading Enoch, Hugh Nibley wrote:

Enoch is the great advocate, the champion of the human race, pleading with God to spare the wicked and "refusing to be comforted" until he is shown just how that is to be done. He feels for all and is concerned for all. He is the passionate and compassionate, the magnanimous one who cannot rest knowing that others are miserable. He is the wise and obedient servant, the friend and helper of all, hence the perfect leader and ruler. (Enoch the Prophet, vol. 2 of The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley [Salt Lake City and Provo, Utah: Deseret Book Co. and Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1986], p. 21.)

Though Enoch was permitted to see the human misery caused by human wickedness in Noah's time and "refused to be comforted" (Moses 7:44), what finally comforted him were the revelations and the assurances given to him about Jesus' role as Redeemer and the eventual Restoration in the latter days.

The same fundamentals can comfort us even when our tactical situations may be grim, providing us with gospel gladness even amid momentary sadness. Hence, the pressing and vexing things of the moment should not be allowed to obscure the later things of eternity, "things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13).

The trouble is that, unless careful, we still tend to let some obscuring occur, don't we? It is only through our own Spirit-led experience that we can come to savor the distinction between the things of eternity and the things of the moment. The things of the moment can be so real and intense. In fact, they are designed to get our attention!

This same precious perspective was needed on another occasion when at night the resurrected Jesus stood by an imprisoned Paul, instructing Paul to be of good cheer (Acts 23:11). Once again, the circumstances of the moment hardly favored cheer. They included Paul's having been humiliatingly and publicly struck on the mouth by order of Ananias, the high priest. Forty individuals were plotting Paul's death. He faced a trial for sedition. Why, therefore, should he be of good cheer? Because, Jesus announced, Paul, though then in depressing circumstances, would soon take the "glad tidings," the good news of the gospel, to Rome! Never mind either that martyrdom also awaited Paul there.

Church members in another age were held as virtual hostages until certain prophecies were fulfilled. Their lives would be forfeited if those prophecies about Jesus' birth were not fulfilled precisely on time. (3 Ne. 1:5-13.) They were nevertheless told by the Lord to be of good cheer. Why? Because, said Jesus, "on the morrow come I into the world" (3 Ne. 1:13). With His birth, "on the morrow," the mortal ministry of the Messiah would, at last, begin, and the emancipating atonement would be soon achieved. Therefore, what were a mere thirty or so additional years, when some had awaited the resurrection for centuries?

Even so, in the midst of "all these things [which] give [us] experience," do we sometimes get discouraged? Of course! Consider how in the late 1820s Brigham Young, as yet untouched by the restored gospel, was apparently a somewhat discouraged young man. He found himself disapproving of much of what he saw in the world, and he wondered whether he had a work to do. His loving brother, Phineas, gave Brigham prescient, personal counsel: "Hang on, for I know the Lord is agoing to do some thing for us." (Sermon of Heber C. Kimball, in Minutes, 8 January 1845, Brigham Young Papers, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.) What later happened is Moses-like history.

We, too, can "hang on" when we know who we are, and when we trust God's purposes. We, too, can truly be trusting and be of good cheer even when the swirling circumstances of the moment still toss us about.

Therefore we should not let murmuring—even clever murmuring—undercut good cheer by our half-suppressed resentments or muttered complaints. We all remember in Fiddler on the Roof Tevye's verbal asides to God. Since the ultimate "Addressee" of some of our murmuring is clearly the Lord, as when the people complained against Moses, at least Tevye honestly acknowledged to Whom he addressed his complaints. (See Ex. 16:8; 1 Ne. 16:20.)

Instead of gladness, murmuring seems to come so naturally to the natural man. It crosses the spectrum of complaints. We need bread. We need water. (See Num. 21:5.) The needed military reinforcements did not arrive (see Alma 60). "Why did we ever leave Egypt?" (See Num. 11:20.) "Why did we ever leave Jerusalem?" (See 1 Ne. 2:11.) On and on goes our murmuring, and, it is significant that it almost always focuses on our tactical frustrations.

One underlying and fundamental fact best explains our failing to be of good cheer: "And thus Laman and Lemuel . . . did murmur because they knew not the dealings of that God who had created them" (1 Ne. 2:12). Like Laman and Lemuel, we too sometimes fail to understand the dealings of our God in our lives and in our times. (See also 1 Ne. 17:22.)

Too many of us seem to expect that life will flow ever smoothly, featuring an unbroken chain of green lights with empty parking places just in front of our destinations.

In its extremity, despair not only reflects immediate discontentment but also incorporates feelings of very deep ambivalence and/or confusion about the nature of life: "Their sorrowing was . . . the sorrowing of the damned, because [they could not] take happiness in sin" (Morm. 2:13, 14).

By knowing that the everlasting and ultimate things are firmly in place, can we not then better endure irritations such as a dislocated travel schedule? Besides, how can it rain on the just and the unjust alike without occasionally raining on our personal parades? (See Matt. 5:45.)

Knowing who we are surely helps, along with knowing about the "dealings" of God with His children (1 Ne. 2:12; 17:22).

In the midst of this mortal experience we will even see the unrighteous succeed—at least temporarily and in worldly terms. On occasion we might be tempted to complain, as some did anciently, that the wicked seem to get away with it (see Mal. 3).

Such conditions in our days thus call for spiritual spunk in each of us. Spiritual spunk can actually break up frustrating stumbling blocks, turning them into stepping stones, just as weaknesses can be transformed into strengths (see Ether 12:27).

Besides, others are counting on us to be of good cheer. Otherwise, an irony can occur—one application of which Malcolm Muggeridge expressed as follows:

I see it as one of the greatest ironies of this ironical time, that the Christian message should be withdrawn for consideration just when it is most desperately needed to save men's reason, if not their souls. It is as though a Salvation Army band, valiantly and patiently waiting through the long years for Judgment Day, should, when it comes at last, and the heavens do veritably begin to unfold like a scroll, throw away their instruments and flee in terror. (Quoted by William F. Buckley Jr., "Christianize Dartmouth?" in National Review, March 23, 1998, p. 46.)

Remember how, momentarily, the disciples on a storm-tossed sea were frightened by their approaching Deliverer. (see Matt. 14:22-36.) Within this context of the opposites, cheer and despair, there is another ongoing and inner drama for all those who are serious disciples. From its personal affects we cannot be spared. Indeed, upon serious reflection we would not really wish to be spared from the divine discontent which is a necessary part of developing discipleship. This should not be confused, however, with the global gloom and despair previously noted.

This very process of spiritual isometrics commences when we rightly heed the beckoning call, "Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness" (Moro. 10:32). When we answer that call, something else happens, however, cheek-by-jowl: "And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness . . ." Then comes a special promise: "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

This process is painful. It is unavoidable. It is repetitive. It is relentless! As to our repeated need to be taught one lesson all the time, Brigham Young observed:

Men are organized to be independent in their sphere, . . . yet they have, as soldiers term it, to run the gauntlet all the time. . . . but that independency . . . must be proved and tried while in this state of existence, [it] must be operated upon by the good and the evil. (In Journal of Discourses, 3:316.)

It is vital, therefore, for us to distinguish between, on the one hand, the growth pains inevitably felt during the process of discipleship and, on the other hand, the general, disoriented despair described earlier. Since the gospel lets us know the difference between proximate and ultimate things, we need not be confused. There can be proximate tribulation, but with ultimate salvation. There can be proximate disappointment but with ultimate joy. There can be local cloud cover but without general and lasting darkness!

Will we, therefore, have faith in God's hand—not only as to the grand plan of salvation but also in our specific, individual portion of the plan? In the midst of our troubles, trials, and afflictions will we trust in God that things will finally work out "all right"? Hence trusting is part of having faith in Him, in His plan, and in His timing, just as President Brigham Young conveyed, as noted earlier:

When the Latter-day Saints make up their minds to endure, for the kingdom of God's sake, whatsoever shall come, whether poverty or riches, whether sickness or to be driven by mobs, they will say it is all right, and will honor the hand of the Lord in it, and in all things, and serve Him to the end of their lives (in Journal of Discourses 1:338; emphasis added).

The best way to acknowledge and confess God's hand is to reach out and take it. And so we should trust God as He works with us even in our weakness. "Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is by his grace, and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things" (Jacob 4:7).

Being of good cheer, therefore, is a matter of spiritual perspective. Clearly it really takes faith. However, this faith must be fixed on "Jesus, our Redeemer," knowing, as we do, of His and the Father's perfections in all their attributes of character. They will not let us down—either now or "at the last day." (See Mosiah 23:22.) It is Their perfections that make genuine worship of Them possible, given the preeminence of the first commandment. Their ultimate character makes our proximate faith possible.

They are truly special, so we can gladly, as well as safely, praise Them!

This glorifying of God means that we should exult in and praise Him for His ultimate distinctiveness, worshiping Him without reservation or hesitation. The same reverence should flow to "Jesus, our Redeemer," for "there is none other name given whereby man can be saved" (2 Ne. 25:20; D&C 18:23).

How awful the human predicament would be if They were really only a little better than we!
