Neal A. Maxwell, One More Strain of Praise ( 1999)

Chapter Three

"Jesus, Our Redeemer"

Multiple revelations teach us that redeeming Jesus is uniquely our "advocate with the Father," that He pleads for us, and that He makes intercession for us (see 1 Jn. 2:1; 2 Ne. 2:9; Mosiah 5:8; D&C 32:3; 45:3; 62:1; 110:4). Without this grand reality we would be helpless, and all would be truly and finally hopeless.

Jesus' personal role is unique in yet another way: "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son" ( John 5:22). "Jesus, our Redeemer," has earned this special standing, entitling Him not only to plead for us but also to judge us, which His unique suffering made possible by virtue of His agonies during the Atonement (see Mosiah 15:8; D&C 45:35). Thus, by His suffering and by divine investiture, in one sense Jesus is both advocate and judge!

Only an omniscient, all-loving God could have both roles of advocate (pleading for the petitioner) and judge (deciding the ultimate fate of the petitioner). This is because He possesses a perfect balance of the qualities of justice and mercy and all other divine attributes that make Him perfect, or complete, in all the Godly virtues.

First, to illustrate the unique role of Jesus as our Advocate, consider the following beautiful expression, using His very words, as He pleaded for the members of His infant, latter-day Church:

Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—

Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified;

Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life (D&C 45:3-5; emphasis added.)

Thus what is very fundamental and doctrinal becomes very personal in its application. The satisfying of the requirements of divine justice by means of Jesus' great atonement is central to the Father's plan of salvation, a plan which clearly reflects and is sustained by Jesus' character and atonement, an atonement made possible by Jesus' character. In this happy and merciful situation, the Lord can forgive our sins, yet He "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance," hence the unclean and unrepentant, though resurrected, will not be exalted (Alma 45:16; D&C 1:31).

Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God.

And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence. . . .

What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God. (Alma 42:13-14, 25; see also D&C 88:40.)

Even divine mercy cannot rob justice! Such, therefore, is the very basic need to satisfy the requirements of divine justice, which are "affixed," and thus "answer the ends of the atonement" (2 Ne. 2:10).

In God's plan of happiness the atoning Christ paid a debt He personally did not owe and at a costly price that we could not possibly pay by ourselves. Unlike the Father's plan, in today's context of indulgent secularism, however, too many insist that mercy "rob justice," and much more than "one whit." C. S. Lewis saw the modern trend coming well before it became more fully blown:

The Humanitarian theory wants simply to abolish Justice and substitute Mercy for it. . . . Mercy, detached from Justice, grows unmerciful. That is the important paradox. As there are plants which flourish only in mountain soil, so it appears that Mercy will flower only when it grows in the crannies of the rock of Justice: transplanted to the marshlands of mere Humanitarianism, it becomes a man-eating weed, all the more dangerous because it is still called by the same name as the mountain variety. ("The Humanitarian Theory of Punishment" [1949], in God in the Dock: Essays on Theology and Ethics, ed. Walter Hooper [Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1970], p. 294.)

Christ's atonement, first of all, blesses all mortals by conferring upon all of us the unearned gift of the universal resurrection: "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). Christ was thereby empowered by the Father to make intercession to authorize the resurrection for all: "And thus God breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men" (Mosiah 15:8; emphasis added).

As to the second and most glorious blessing flowing from the Atonement, however, namely eternal life, Christ's intercession is conditional: "If any man sin [AND REPENT], we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous" (1 Jn. 2:1, emphasis added; important JST addition in caps).

This great blessing of additional intercession clearly depends on the adequacy of our personal faith and repentance, if we are also to receive God's greatest gift, eternal life (D&C 6:13; 14:7).

The entirety of Jesus' unique role as advocate cannot be understood if approached only legalistically and adversarily, such as when one mortal lawyer jousts with another lawyer before an impassive judge. In the sense here intended, an advocate seeks to plead, to persuade, to intercede, and to mediate in order to aid another's cause. This is surely part of what Jesus does for us. But He is, once again, both the advocate and the judge! No mortal lawyer has such a dual role.

When commencing the agonies of the Atonement, Jesus declared of His atoning purpose, "For this cause came I into the world" (John 18:37).

In calling upon the mercy available in Father's plan, Jesus thereby truly "advocateth the cause of the children of men" (Moro. 7:28). It is significant that He so pleads for us out of His full, personal knowledge and understanding of each of us, including our individual experiences and shortfalls set amid the shared general human condition. "Behold, and hearken, . . . saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, your advocate, who knoweth the weakness of man and how to succor them who are tempted" (D&C 62:1).

He can succor us in any form of the human condition because, as He reminded Joseph in the Liberty jail: "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.) No person, therefore, who comes before Him can exclaim, "You don't understand what I have been through!"

How like the tender words cited earlier (D&C 45:3-5) are the following and amplifying words recorded in Alma, attesting to Jesus' personal knowledge of our individual and personal sufferings and sicknesses:

And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people.

And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities. (Alma 7:11-12. See also Matt. 8:17.)

Hence Jesus not only bore our sins personally in order to atone for them, but He also bore our pains, infirmities, and afflictions. Thereby ensured is the precious fact that Jesus' mercy would be full, because He knows how to succor us in a unique, merciful, and personal way—amid all of that through which we mortals individually pass. Having so purchased us once, His glad and great investment in us continues (see Acts 20:28).

For example, many in various illnesses have measured their recovery in such small degrees and over so many days—like the hand-over-hand climb out of a steep gravel pit. But Jesus' empathy is not merely a matter of detached intellectual familiarity. He helps us, hand over hand, because He understands personally that through which we pass. No wonder we should acknowledge his law.

Therefore, beyond ensuring general immortality if, as to our sins, we are adequately and truly repentant, He likewise specifically succors and pleads for us as only He can. He does this out of His perfect love, a love which is fully informed by His perfect, personal familiarity with our individual situations. No wonder He is the wondrous Keeper of the entering gate to eternal life, and in His loving empathy He "employeth no servant there" (see 2 Ne. 9:41).

However, for our own good, and since terms are "affixed," He does not exempt us entirely from experiencing justice (see 2 Ne. 2:10). Instead, given the role of judgment, which the Father has delegated to Him, Christ balances the twin considerations of mercy and justice in each of our cases (see John 5:22). Besides, we must come to understand personally the twin and eternal principles of justice and mercy if we are to help Him with His work in eternity, which is "one eternal round" (see 1 Ne. 10:19).

His empathy for us is expansive because He understands with a fulness of knowledge that we did not bring about our own fallen condition; thus He unconditionally redeems us from physical death and provides the opportunity for our eventual redemption. Though we do not understand the end from the beginning, He does; therefore our shortcomings are too often caused by our short-sightedness and "blindness of minds."

Divine justice assures that there are no loopholes through which the not-fully-worthy would slip undeservedly into the celestial kingdom, where they would not be fully happy anyway. The plan of happiness is carefully gauged, blessing all, but especially those who have "faith unto repentance."

For the repentant righteous, a fulness of divine mercy as to the celestial kingdom finally prevails:

And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance (Alma 34:15; emphasis added.)

Without the overriding and glorious assurance in Father's plan, it would be difficult, indeed, for us to have the personal capacity to develop "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:16). Unlike fatalism ("Why bother to repent?"), such faith moves us to the needed personal contrition. Therefore, so far as drawing upon Jesus' atonement is concerned, those most valiant in their testimonies of Jesus will clearly be those who benefit the most by having the most "faith unto repentance," sufficient in order to become more like Him. (See Alma 34:15-17; Hel. 15:7; D&C 19:31; 53:3.)

Jesus knows and takes into account, personally and perfectly, the highly individualized situations of our "tether and pang," including the innermost desires and intents of our hearts, and including the comparative constraints within which we function. In a unique way, therefore, Jesus' ongoing and authentic pleadings are received by a loving Father with His own perfect and especially "tender mercies" (see 1 Ne. 1:20; D&C 45:3-5).

Even so, as already noted, the bestowal of full divine mercy necessary for the celestial kingdom is conditional: "But behold, I, Nephi, will show unto you that the tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom he hath chosen, because of their faith, to make them mighty even unto the power of deliverance" (1 Ne. 1:20; emphasis added).

One of the great examples of His intercessory role on behalf of all those who believe on the words of the Apostles is that they can have the same reward as the original and witnessing Twelve received (see John 17; see also D&C 93).

Thus, as can be seen, Jesus' pleading in our behalf constitutes anything but a ritualistic brush-by. In order for Christ to be able to plead fully and justifiably, we are to be fully repentant. In Heavenly Father's plan, real repentance thus satisfies the divine requirement of justice and likewise entitles us to His divine mercy. Hence the Son's advocacy, performed with perfect empathy, both satisfies justice and evokes perfect mercy. Jesus' full comprehension thus brought to pass a fully comprehensive atonement, indeed, an "infinite atonement" (2 Ne. 25:16; 9:7; Alma 34:12).

Hence we see how Jesus is our advocate in the most unique way. After all, if all this were analogous to mere mortal advocacy, how many advocates know their clients perfectly? For example, how many mortal advocates have actually suffered deeply, physically and mentally, for their clients? Besides all this, we are not mere clients. We are Christ's spirit brothers and sisters!

No wonder the Savior's advocacy is so uniquely persuasive, powerful, and pleading. No wonder both justice and mercy will be so uniquely balanced by the Father and the Son.

Of Their divine roles, President Harold B. Lee wisely said:

The apostle Paul in his writings to the Corinthians taught that "there be gods many, and lords many," and then he added, "But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him." (1 Cor. 8:5-6. Italics added.)

I would have you note particularly the use of the preposition "of," in reference to the Father, and the preposition "by," in reference to our Lord, Jesus Christ. In this statement is clearly defined the role of each, the Lord to do the bidding of the Father, in the execution of the whole plan of salvation for all mankind. (See Ab. 4.) ("Time to Prepare to Meet God," Improvement Era, December 1970, p. 29.)

Therefore, as has been said, "In [Christ] all things hold together" (RSV, Col. 1:17).

Christ's accomplishment of the Atonement was a glorious, one-time, supernal event! Of His atonement, He declared in past tense, "I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men" (D&C 19:19). In confirmation there was His conclusive cry on the cross: "It is finished" (John 19:30).

However, unlike the "finished" act of the Atonement achieved in that axis of atoning agony—Gethsemane and on Calvary—across an additional time frame Jesus' continuing advocacy for us mortals is spread. It continues in a special, ongoing process as we, individually, access and apply His atoning blood. (See Mosiah 4:1-4.) Having paid the price for us, the Grand Atoner is also the apparent judge as to our entitlement to access further His atonement, as we repent and become "the children of Christ" (Mosiah 5:7).

Jesus did not retire to some corner of the universe for a well-earned vacation after performing the great Atonement, but He has remained constantly vigilant and vigorous, personally mindful of all of us.

Before the world was, Jesus clearly knew the Father's plan of redemption would be necessary. Jesus volunteered to be the Redeemer, while pledging to give all the glory to the Father (Moses 4:2). The real question, back then, was not "Is a Savior needed?" Rather, it was "Who will be the Savior?" Who would submissively carry out the Father's plan in full accordance with the Father's will? Jesus, being sinless and being the Firstborn of the Eternal Father in the spirit world, was utterly and uniquely qualified to perform the Atonement. No one else was qualified in full conformance with the Father's will; "there was no other good enough" ("There Is a Green Hill Far Away," Hymns, no. 194).

Christ's role of advocacy was evident long before the atoning agonies of Gethsemane and Calvary in the meridian of time. Consider this illustrative revelation, indicating His premortal pleading as the Messiah in behalf of the wicked of Noah's time:

And That which I have chosen hath pled before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment (Moses 7:39; emphasis added).

The people of Noah's time were not alone in receiving Jesus' particularized advocacy, being joined by those much later Saints of 1831.

Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—

Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified;

Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life (D&C 45:3-5; emphasis added).

Others can and do plead, too, of course, but not in the unique way of our Perfect Redeemer.

On how many other occasions before and after the great Atonement has Jesus pleaded? We do not know, but His was surely an "infinite atonement"!

Jesus, who knows our weaknesses, is thus our perfectly empathetic Advocate with the Father, judging who among us is qualified to receive the necessary divine mercy. It is significant that mercy can bring to us a very much needed and precious personal blessing and assurance: our knowing of a certainty that we have been forgiven! Thereby we are enabled to continue our spiritual progress, instead of allowing our souls to "droop" forever in sin, including by experiencing, as some do, the immobilizing and disabling "sorrowing of the damned" (Morm. 2:13).

It is not only we spiritual lessers who need to know we have been forgiven, but also such spiritual luminaries as Peter, Paul, and Alma the Younger, all of whom needed to know they were forgiven by Jesus of their frailties in order to better carry out their significant and special ministries. How full of praise we should be for this grand gift of divine forgiveness!

While the scriptures relevant to Jesus' advocacy are abundant, verb tenses vary, as already noted, suggesting something significant. For further examples consider the post-atonement scriptures, such as Heb. 7:25, which declares that "Jesus ever liveth to make intercession," suggesting a continuousness. Heb. 9:24 speaks of how He is to appear to make intercession for us, perhaps at the day of judgment. The Apostle John wrote that if we sin, we have an advocate with the Father, likewise suggesting an ongoingness to Jesus' advocacy and to our accessing and applying His atonement (1 Jn. 2:1). Moro. 7:28 notes Christ's atonement and declares that He "advocateth the cause of the children of men." D&C 45:3-5, as noted earlier, indicates that He "is pleading" in our behalf, again the indication of an ongoingness.

Hence His pleading apparently continues for all specific and worthy individuals until the final judgment. Hear Elder Bruce R. McConkie as to Christ's "interceding petitions."

Jesus pleads the cause of the Twelve—and all the saints—in the courts above. He is their Mediator, Advocate, and Intercessor. He makes intercession for them, because they have forsaken the world and come unto him; he advocates their cause, for their cause is his cause and they have received his gospel; he performs a divine service of mediation, reconciling fallen man to his Maker, because the fallen ones choose now to associate with those who are not of this world. Jesus prays, thus, not for the world, but for those who have kept his commandments; who have reconciled themselves to God through faith and repentance; who are preparing themselves for an abode with him and his Father. And his interceding petitions are always available for all men, if they will but believe his word and obey his law. (The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81], 4:111; emphasis added.)

Not only are we to renounce sin and to cease sinning, but also we are to become more like Him, further entitling us to His advocacy. To His disciples Jesus gave a "new commandment"—to love one another as He had loved them (John 13:34). This was and is a high standard, more than loving others as oneself. Is not having such serious discipleship, which helps us to come unto Christ, the predicate for His mediation?

Hence Jesus' advocacy appears to be a continuing process, as we struggle individually to overcome our weakness and thereby to "apply the atoning blood of Christ" by becoming more like Him (Mosiah 4:2).

Thus while the act of the great and glorious Atonement itself is over, including Jesus' immense Gethsemane-Calvary suffering, our individual suffering will be ongoing unless we regularly access the awaiting benefits of the great Atonement (Mosiah 4:2; see also Mosiah 3:11, 15, 16; Alma 21:9; Hel. 5:9). This further indication of ongoingness is seen in Jesus' truly promising us that if we repent we need not suffer as He suffered (D&C 19:17). It is Jesus, therefore, who in an ongoing way advocates our cause with the Father. Jesus emancipates us not only from everlasting death but from needless, present suffering from sin, too.

Christ purchased us with His blood, and thereby we have become His. Thus He became our lawgiver and the terms setter, the terms being non-negotiable. What mercy we receive, proximately and ultimately, will be based on our degree of compliance with His commandments. Surely, therefore, Jesus—advocate and judge—is not disinterested in applying justice, for if we were not thereby improved adequately, we could not truly feel we belonged to the Father and to Him as the children of Christ, obedient to His will. (See Mosiah 5:2-7.)

Jesus' premortal and ongoing willingness to be our advocate will be joined by His final attestation at the final judgment, verifying in behalf of all the worthy.

And these things doth the Spirit manifest unto me; therefore I write unto you all. And for this cause I write unto you, that ye may know that ye must all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, yea, every soul who belongs to the whole human family of Adam; and ye must stand to be judged of your works, whether they be good or evil. (Morm. 3:20; emphasis added.)

Not only was Jesus' atonement highly personal, because of our burdens that He bore in that grand moment in the meridian of time, but His further advocacy is likewise highly personal. We do not know the details of that ongoing process, but it is precious and personal, too. Recall, again, that the Father has "committed all judgment" to the Son to effect this unparalleled emancipation and the great gift of eternal life! (John 5:22.)

Of course, the Father knew beforehand of all human wickedness. He knew beforehand of mankind's need of a Savior. He knows the past, present, and future, since all their dimensions are continually before Him, said the Prophet Joseph Smith, constituting "one eternal 'now'" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], p. 220; see also 1 Ne. 10:19; D&C 3:2; 35:1). Therefore, mortal sins previously committed and those yet to be committed were atoned for retroactively and prospectively in Gethsemane and on Calvary. For us of the last dispensation, it was "paid in advance," as it were. However, the individual sinner is still left with his own need to claim that divine payment by meeting the conditions set by Christ, thus working through those sins, as prescribed, by currently applying the atoning blood of Jesus.

Drenched with meaning, that phrase "committed all judgment" implies that Jesus, Himself, is doing His Father's will in the balancing of both justice and mercy. After having done so, He can then advocate and certify to the Father at the final judgment that the process required of Him is complete—especially advocating for those whose personal wills have, by then, been sufficiently "swallowed up" in the will of the Father (Mosiah 15:7).

So it is that "after all we can do," we still depend on the glorious, glad fact that, finally, "mercy overpowereth justice" (Alma 34:15). No wonder we should "praise Him for His mercy" and do so unceasingly! Besides, none of us is so constantly error-free that we do not constantly need to ask for divine mercy and forgiveness.
