Neal A. Maxwell, One More Strain of Praise ( 1999)

Chapter Five

"Save Us, Lord, from Error"

"Jesus, our Redeemer, now our praises hear" should include our worshipful gratitude for His purity, which purity, of necessity, underwrote His glorious and stunning atonement. Since we are to become a pure people, the need for our own ever-greater personal purity thus comes boldly to the fore, as we "liken all scriptures unto us" (1 Ne. 19:23).

On the Western Hemisphere, centuries ago, Jesus asked, "Behold, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.)

Jesus sacrificed His Perfect Self so that we could be redeemed. This was His to do, because, as we sing, "There was no other good enough to pay the price of sin" ("There Is a Green Hill Far Away," Hymns, no. 194).

Since Christ gave Himself in all His perfection for the expiation of our imperfections, we can at least "give away all [our] sins" (Alma 22:18). It is this process, the discarding of our errors that is so much a part of the losing of our old selves, by means of which we actually find ourselves! What a tight and hard knot our sins and weaknesses can become, however. Vices as well as virtues are interactive. It was George MacDonald who observed, "The self is given to us that we may sacrifice it . . . that we, like Christ, may have somewhat to offer" (George MacDonald: An Anthology, ed. C. S. Lewis [New York: Macmillan], 1947, p. 69). Letting our wills be swallowed up in God's pure will is the essence of this yielding (Mosiah 15:7).

In order to become "even as Jesus is," we should strive to develop what Paul called "the mind of Christ," which is perfectly pure (1 Cor. 2:16). Though Jesus suffered "temptations of every kind," He "gave unto them no heed" (D&C 20:22; Mosiah 3:7; Alma 7:11-12). Therefore, to become "even as [He is]" requires that "virtue garnish [our] thoughts unceasingly" (D&C 121:45). The demanding word, unceasingly, is clearly related to Jesus' regularly and dismissively giving temptation "no heed." These two conditions constitute the great "How to's" so essential to cleanliness of mind and purity of soul. They signify "a mighty change of heart" (see Alma 5:12). They can bring us to a point where we lose the desire for sin and have no more disposition to do evil (Mosiah 5:2).

Grossness in conduct is preceded by grossness of mind. Ironic though it is, ultimately those so warped by pleasing the carnal mind and by wrongfully celebrating their capacity to feel soon lose their capacity to feel, finally becoming "past feeling" (1 Ne. 17:45; Moro. 9:20).

Our Exemplar shows the way, for without Jesus' infinite purity there could have been no "infinite atonement" (2 Ne. 9:7). In fact, the gift of our resurrection depended upon His purity.

In our time, as in Lot's of old, we are vexed by many things, including profane and filthy conversation (2 Pet. 2:7). We hear intrusive things we wish we would not hear and which we must dismiss and deflect in order to give "no heed." Sometimes giving rebuke or actually leaving such company are clearly called for.

Avoidance of those things that distance us from Jesus and that disqualify us from having His Spirit include the improper use of videos, music, Internet, and printed filth—all these are "off limits" for us. Pornography can not only lead to child and spouse abuse, but it steadily sucks out one's spiritual bone marrow. The adversary gets some individuals to rationalize concerning their privacy, agency, and individuality by lessening their sense of accountability for their wrongful indulging. Then there is the multiplier as to consequences, for sin hurts at least one soul and almost always more. Especially when the toll from the sins of omission is tallied. If only such withheld time and talent had not been "omitted" but otherwise used! (See Matt. 23:23.)

My second mission president, Floyed G. Eyre, advised us that while a person may not always be able to keep an impure thought from entering his mind, he needn't offer it a chair and invite it to sit down. This is an initial dimension of giving "no heed," which can be so useful and practical. If there is no first step toward the "gulf of misery," there will never be a second or third.

A searching interrogatory by Benjamin occurs in his superb sermon, and it is eloquently expressed: "For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13.)

Discipleship really does require extensive thinking about, praying to, and serving the Lord. Otherwise, distance develops; and distance deprives us. There can be no deep discipleship if we do not have heartfelt intentions concerning Him; otherwise, the estrangement will engulf us. Instead, it should be, "Jesus, the very thought of thee with sweetness fills my breast" ("Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee," Hymns, no. 141).

Thus, if one["mind[s] the things of the flesh," he simply cannot "have the mind of Christ" (Rom. 8:5; 1 Cor. 2:16). Errant thought patterns cause us to stray "far from" Jesus; irrelevant thought patterns do too, though less far.

In multiple scriptures, a dual assignment is given to the Church members. We are to both "build up" the Church and kingdom, and also to "establish the [Lord's] righteousness" (JST, Matt. 6:38). Society may be becoming more decadent, but nevertheless we can further "establish" the Lord's patterns and standards of righteousness, including purity in our own individual lives. We can help do likewise in our families, and even help in our neighborhoods and wards. Without adequate individual moral cleanliness, however, there can be no personal righteousness, no little family Zions, and none of the much-needed clusters of the "pure in heart."

One major reason why "the love of many will wax cold" in our time is uncleanliness (Matt. 24:12). Charity and purity go together more than we realize. In Sodom and Gomorrah the poor and the needy were neglected. (Ezek. 16:49.) Why? Because those self-centered people were so preoccupied with pleasing themselves, including with inordinate filth. If we mind too much the things of the flesh, then our own flesh and blood will mean less to us. Furthermore, the needs of neighbors will not easily occur to carnally-filled minds.

One of the first messages given to the first prophet in this last dispensation included the warning about how some would "teach for doctrines the commandments of men" arising out of the "persuasions of men" (D&C 46:7; 3:7; Matt. 15:9; Mark 7:7; Joseph Smith—History 1:19). Even when the commandments of men are not necessarily evil, they are lesser laws. Moreover, the in lieu commandments of men usually spawn many secular regulations, thereby multiplying and reflecting the lower ways of a lower world. (D&C 46:7; Col. 2:22.)

One important way, therefore, in which the Church is to be "independent" involves distancing ourselves from the philosophies and persuasions of men, and from the encompassing and enveloping ways of secular societies (D&C 78:14). Secularism recruits so easily, because so many mortals "will not endure sound doctrine," but come to prefer the easier and more fashionable "commandments of men" (2 Tim. 4:3). But, of course, the fashions of the world will pass away. (See Matt. 15:9.) It will be interesting to see, for instance, how long America can sustain an inspired and constraining Constitution, if more of the people it governs become persistently permissive. Will what is now the "lesser part" reach a critical, negative mass? (See Mosiah 29.)

Coming to have "the mind of Christ" clearly requires our putting off the mind of the natural man, which is a carnal and sensual mind. Dismissing unclean things and also replacing them with clean actions—like worshiping the Lord, and doing good to others—reflects the keeping of the first and second great commandments. The natural man has no such inclinations to hinder his selfish acting out.

We are told in connection with the beguilement of Eve that Satan "knew not the mind of God" (Moses 4:6). How so, when he is otherwise so bright and clever? Besides, he has been around for so long too! One major reason for that cosmic ignorance is that the adversary is both unmeek and is a promoter of that which is unclean! Let us, therefore, strive for "the mind of Christ," by thinking more and more as He thinks but also by thinking of what He thinks.

The rewards of cleanliness are many, including receiving its own clear and sustaining witness of its efficacy. In that same master revelation, exhorting us to "let virtue garnish [our] thoughts unceasingly," is the promise "then shall [our] confidence wax strong in the presence of God." We could not have confidence in the Lord's presence or, meanwhile, "always have His Spirit to be with us" (as is regularly prayed for in the sacramental prayer on the bread), without having clean minds. Such are needed to make us feel genuinely at home in His kingdom and confident in His house. Then and only then can we have the Holy Ghost as our "constant companion," not merely as an occasional influence.

Furthermore, our purity also hastens our submissiveness to Jesus. Therefore, in our diverse, and sometimes trying, individual circumstances, if we basically are pure and we submissively acknowledge His hand in our lives now, we will feel the clasp of His welcoming arms later at the entrance to His kingdom, when our confidence will truly wax strong in the presence of God—for the caveat reminds that "no unclean thing" can dwell with God (1 Ne. 10:21).

It is not surprising that today's surrounding secularism has firmly partnered with relativism in an alliance of dalliance. Secularism sincerely practices what it preaches. Centuries ago there occurred an episode which parallels some of the secular trendiness in our own time. Opinion leaders back then proclaimed:

. . . there could be no atonement made for the sins of men, but every man fared in this life according to the management of the creature; therefore every man prospered according to his genius, and that every man conquered according to his strength; and whatsoever a man did was no crime.

And thus he did preach unto them, leading away the hearts of many, causing them to lift up their heads in their wickedness, yea, leading away many women, and also men, to commit whoredoms—telling them that when a man was dead, that was the end thereof. (Alma 30:17-18.)

Such is ethical relativism at the end of its journey, and it is similar in each era! Nothing is really wrong. Therefore, it is all right to conquer and prosper by one's strength and genius as we witness an indulgent individualism instead of real brotherhood.

Strange, isn't it, how once people stop believing in God they want to start playing God. Or is it? In any case, some so misread their circumstances because they do not see "things as they really are" (Jacob 4:13).

Illustrative of poor perspective of another type is the fact that, after jealously slaying Abel, Cain cried out in a pathetic outburst of self-deception, "I am free," but he was never less so! (Moses 5:33.) Like Pilate's trying to wash his hands in vain, and like Hitler's careful efforts to keep his name off certain Holocaust documents, so today many do not really want the consequences of what they want. But in God's inexorable ecology consequences do come, accompanied by severe individual accountability. Steep costs are levied on a declining people!

Being kept increasingly from error also facilitates our access to that great blessing of hope, something not available if we continue to be saturated in sin. This kind of hope means much more than our everyday usage of the word hope in which we "hope" to arrive at a certain destination by a certain time. We "hope" the world economy will improve. We "hope" for the visit of a loved one. Such typify our sincere but proximate hopes. No wonder life's disappointments make up so much of the debris of our proximate hopes.

Ultimate hope, however, is a very different matter. It is tied to Jesus and the blessings of the great Atonement, blessings resulting in the universal resurrection and the precious opportunity thereby provided for us to practice emancipating repentance, realizing eventually what the scriptures call "a perfect brightness of hope" (2 Ne. 31:20).

Moroni confirmed, "What is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ." (Moro. 7:40-41; see also Alma 27:28.) Real hope, therefore, is not associated with things mercurial, but rather with things immortal and eternal!

Again it does not surprise us that hope is intertwined with other gospel doctrines, especially faith and patience. Just as doubt, despair, and desensitization go together, so do faith, hope, charity, and patience. The "bottom line" of Mormon's marvelous sermon is "charity." Charity, he teaches, is a manifestation of our inner meekness. And meekness sustains faith and hope. (See Moro. 7:43-45.)

These latter four qualities must be carefully and constantly nurtured by preeminent charity, however, whereas doubt and despair, like dandelions, need little encouragement in order to sprout and spread. Alas, despair comes so naturally to the natural man unconnected with the great realities of the universe! This includes what Arthur Henry King has called "the sobbing of a deserted soul." (Arm the Children: Faith's Response to a Violent World, [Provo, Utah: BYU Studies, Brigham Young University, 1998] p. 238).

Faith and hope are constantly interactive and are not always easily or precisely distinguished. Nevertheless, ultimate hope's expectations are "with surety" true. (Ether 12:4; see also Rom. 8:24; Heb. 11:1; Alma 32:21.) Yet, in the geometry of the restored theology, hope corresponds to faith but sometimes has a greater circumference. Faith, in turn, constitutes "the assurance of things hoped for" and the proof of "things not seen" (JST, Heb. 11:1; see also Ether 12:6). Thus hope sometimes reconnoiters beyond the present boundaries of faith, but it always radiates from faith in Jesus.

No wonder souls can be stirred and rallied by real hope's "reveille" as by no other music. Even if a few comrades slumber or desert, "lively hope" is still there "smiling brightly before us" ("We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," Hymns, no. 19; see 1 Pet. 1:3). Hope caused downcast disciples to go quickly and expectantly to an empty garden tomb (see Mark 16:1-8; Luke 24:8-12). Hope helped a prophet to see rescuing rain in a distant cloud that appeared to be no larger than a man's hand (see 1 Kgs. 18:41-46).

Such ultimate hope constitutes the "anchor of the soul" and is retained through the gift of the Holy Ghost and faith in Christ (Heb. 6:19; see also Alma 25:16; Ether 12:9). In contrast, viewing life without the prospect of immortality can diminish not only hope but also the sense of personal accountability (see 1 Corinthians. 6:19; Alma 30:18).

When hope is stripped away, however, Paul notes the tendency for some to eat and drink cavalierly, reasoning that "for tomorrow we die," some no doubt driven by the erroneous conclusion that "when a man [is] dead, that [is] the end thereof" (1 Cor. 15:32; Alma 30:18).

Real hope, instead, keeps us "anxiously engaged" in good causes even when these appear to be losing causes on the mortal scoreboard (see D&C 58:27). Likewise, real hope is much more than wishful musing. It stiffens, not slackens, the spiritual spine. Hope is serene, not giddy, eager without being naive, and pleasantly steady without being smug. Hope is realistic anticipation that takes the form of a determination—not only to survive adversity but, moreover, to "endure . . . well" to the end (D&C 121:8).

Though otherwise a "lively" attribute, hope stands quietly with us at funerals. Our tears are just as wet, but not because of despair. Rather, they are tears of heightened appreciation evoked by poignant separation. Those tears of separation change, erelong, becoming tears of glorious anticipation.

Genuine, ultimate hope helps us to be more loving even while the love of many others waxes cold (Matt. 24:12). We are to be more holy, even as the world ripens in iniquity; more courteous and patient in a rage-filled, coarsening, and curt world; and to be strong of heart even when the hearts of others fail them (see Moro. 10:22). By so striving, we will have more reason to praise the Giver of these gifts.

Hope can be contagious, especially if we are to be "ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh . . . a reason of the hope that is in [us]" (1 Pet. 3:15).

Said President Brigham Young, if we do not so impart knowledge to others and do good, we "will become contracted" in our views and feelings (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widstoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], p. 335). Therefore, we should pray earnestly to God, "Help us now to serve Thee," amid the challenges of using our moral agency wisely, as we strive to become more error free.
