Neal A. Maxwell, One More Strain of Praise ( 1999)

Chapter Seven

"For Unnumbered Blessings"

So often, among so many other praiseworthy blessings, life features intertwinings of our lives that we can scarcely number. Yet why should we be surprised? Do we not sometimes use phrases such as "instant friends" and "kindred spirits"? After all, those within our individual circles of influence definitely constitute our particular portion of humanity—those whom God expects us in particular to love and to serve. Within our intersecting circles, whatever their size and extent, lie many unused opportunities for service, "enough and to spare" (D&C 104:17). These intersectings mercifully provide multiple opportunities, and they can bring "unnumbered blessings."

As close associates can readily testify, I have long since entered my "anecdotage," yet I hope this chapter is more than that. In noting several examples of my own intertwinings, while hoping memory does not unintentionally distort, my sole purpose is to express humble gratitude by means of this small sample of recollections; these remembrances that bless me even today. These recollections reflect instructions and important tutorings.

As a boy I lived in Salt Lake City near Nibley Park golf course, where very occasionally I saw President Heber J. Grant play. When erring golfers would sometimes hit balls over the fence, we boys would scamper to bring them back. If lucky, we would usually get a nickel in return. Unfortunately, at least for us boys, President Heber J. Grant tended to go straight down the fairway; he rarely hit any balls over the fence. But one time when he did, he gave a quarter to the lucky retriever!

As I saw President Grant playing golf, I could not know then that I would be blessed, about fifty years later, to sit in the same upper room of the temple where he sat for so many decades and even presided. In that same room President Grant's portrait, along with those of all the other past and present presidents, continues to look down each Thursday upon today's assembled First Presidency and Twelve and upon periodic meetings for all the General Authorities. I have thought several times of seeing President Grant play golf and of that generous quarter. I have reflected even more on President Grant's much more important gift to all of us of a long and prophetic span of leadership. Yet this span was preceded by his hard, tutoring apostolic years in Japan, where his diligent missionary work seemed so unproductive at the time.

While I was living later in East Mill Creek as a boy, a friend of mine and I would occasionally ride his horse over to the low-lying hills surrounding the Country Club golf course. We would find a few lost, but relatively new, golf balls on the hillsides and sell them to passing foursomes, all of whom seemed to the two of us, back then, to be very rich. Foreshadowing intertwinings to come, one such business foursome included banker Orval W. Adams, who once generously bought two thirsty and sweaty boys a soda pop. Later came other unforeseen intertwinings. In about ten years' time I was to serve in the Canadian Mission with Orval's youngest son, Web, a friend then and ever since. Thirty years after the soda pop, I was named to, but could scarcely fill, the place on the board of directors of Mountain Fuel Supply just vacated by financier Orval Adams. Today Orval Adams's great-grandson, Jeff, and his great-granddaughter, Christina, live in our ward. It is interesting that these two fine children also stand in that same relationship to President David O. McKay.

Life is best measured not in days but in defining moments, not in weeks but in works. My defining moments—like yours—have often been unexpected, uninvited, and were often unappreciated at the time. One such moment occurred when (at about age sixteen) I was coasting lazily along academically. An English teacher at Granite High School, Mary Mason, gave me a low grade, a D. It was, she said, a jolt to stimulate me. She thereby quickened my interest in English, though too late to get a decent, final grade from her. Though I wish I could sit anew with Mary Mason to thank her, I was privileged to thank her several times, years later, and to bless Miss Mason when, after her retirement, she was ill with cancer. Still later, I was privileged to praise her at her funeral.

I again publicly express my gratitude for Miss Mason's discipline and teaching, including how to diagram sentences. She helped my sense of grammar which, in turn, helped me to communicate at least somewhat better the grammar of the gospel while writing some twenty-five books. Even so, I could still use Mary Mason's crisp editing, and, significantly, I still crave her approval.

Correction can be such a blessing in life! Sometimes, however, it comes as a very well-disguised blessing.

As with many of you, I was born "of goodly parents," which provided a series of defining moments. What was immediately ingested in that home was not fully digested until much later. For instance, several times, though unheard by them, I remember hearing vocal, parental prayers in which my sisters and I were pled for by name. My father's patriarchal blessing said his voice would often be "raised in mighty prayer." It was, and I and my sisters were both witnesses and beneficiaries.

I remember, too, watching that convert father, as a ward clerk, carefully counting tithing and offerings on our round dining table after a fast day. Silver dollars and even pennies were carefully stacked and counted. It seemed like so much money, especially when we, along with everyone else living around us, were poor together, but we didn't know it. But these were sacred funds. I did not doubt my father knew it! Besides, in that imperfect but humble home, we were nevertheless rich in the things that really mattered.

Like our fathers and mothers, you and I, as parents and grandparents, do some of our best teaching when we are unaware of observing eyes and listening ears.

I vividly remember seeing my six-week-old sister, Carol, near death with whooping cough when no antibiotics were available. At crisis point, when she appeared to me to have stopped breathing, she was placed on that same round dining table and was quickly blessed to survive by my father and a neighbor high priest. I thus witnessed, firsthand, the power of the priesthood. By the way, this pivotal experience occurred well before I'd read and received my own witness of the Book of Mormon or knew of so many other key things in the Restoration. We learn line upon line, and experience by experience.

Belief can grow into faith in each of us. Faith can become personal knowledge. Usually it happens incrementally, however, just as Alma taught (see Alma 32). Validation thus occurs episodically and personally, experiment by experiment and experience by experience. In this way, we come to know a particular truth "in that thing," and then["[our minds] begin to expand" (Alma 32:34).

Our home was one in which there was a lively, parental interest in gospel doctrines, especially as parents prepared various lessons for their classes. Though otherwise quite shy, in his enthusiasm Dad even used to write, way back then, occasional letters of gospel inquiry to Church leaders such as then Elder Joseph Fielding Smith and President David O. McKay and later to Elder Bruce McConkie. He would let me read the inquiring letters and the kind and patient answers. It is no surprise that more intertwinings and touching points were to occur subsequently, such as being privileged to introduce a by then unsteady, but warm, President McKay to the eminent historian Arnold Toynbee. President McKay's quick, scriptural quip concerning his slight swaying, because of very advanced age, was, "I stagger, but not with strong drink." (Isa. 29:9).

Years after his replies to Dad, President Joseph Fielding Smith was in the head chair in the First Presidency's board room on the June morning in 1970 when I was called as Church Commissioner of Education. Two special mentors, President Harold B. Lee and President N. Eldon Tanner, sat on President Smith's right and left, respectively. Furthermore, in 1981 Elder Bruce R. McConkie welcomed me especially warmly as a colleague in the Quorum of the Twelve.

So many have mentored me and are so deserving of mention. Of those now deceased, President Harold B. Lee, President Spencer W. Kimball, President N. Eldon Tanner, and President Marion G. Romney come quickly and firmly to mind especially. I have praised President Gordon B. Hinckley, President Thomas S. Monson, and President James E. Faust more recently in a general conference address.

For the purposes of this volume, however, I seek to focus a few sentences on President Lee, who was so kind to me over a decade of close association. His special tutoring of me was accompanied by a special trusting of me. Since he sensed my keen need for his wisdom and experience, even his candor was a kindness. As a young Regional Representative, I watched him select a stake president and a patriarch in Malad, Idaho, which struck me then, as it does now, as having been done by sheer revelation. He was very warm and relaxed, but he was very clear about what was to be done then.

President Lee seemed to me to be ever teaching. Would that I had been ever learning! I felt his love as well as his counsel, again and again.

His daughter, Helen Lee Goates, "adds her own personal witness and tribute to her spiritually powerful and loving father and her angelic mother."

. . . I realize that I had the ideal combination of parents: a father who was gentle beneath his firmness, and a mother who was firm beneath her gentleness. (L. Brent Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet & Seer [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985], p. 139.)

I feel privileged to have seen and experienced President Lee's gentleness a number of times. His son-in-law, Brent Goates, observed in his dedicatory, graveside prayer that President Lee had a pattern of being "early," such as coming into the Twelve at such an early age and being "early" in developing the modern welfare plan. His many and needed talents and gifts were "drafted" by the Lord, causing what seemed to us his "early" release as President of the Church.

For me, he was always there. When I was approached and was somewhat tempted over a quarter of a century ago to reach for the laurel wreath in politics, he was gentle and non-directive in his counsel, leaving the decision to me. Upon hearing my views, however, he seemed to be pleased with my declining such possibilities.

The periodic intersectings of our lives are marked, of course, by interruptions and resumptions. God clearly makes "multiple use" of these shared learning situations. What do these intertwinings signify? To be sure, God is in the details of each of our lives especially to the extent we allow. Hence, not only in the cosmos do "all things bear record of [the Lord]," but likewise in our lives, "all things denote there is a God." No wonder we are to confess His hand in all things. (Moses 6:63; Alma 30:44; D&C 59:21.)

Surprises and coincidences are the words we provincial mortals often use to describe such experiences. But these are scarcely appropriate words to describe the workings of an omniscient and loving God!

God has categorically assured us of His stunning capacity, saying, "I am able to do mine own work" (2 Ne. 27:20-21). Being omniscient, He sees the end from the beginning. Furthermore, He has made "ample provision" for all contingencies that result from the misuses of our moral agency and is still able to bring to pass His purposes. (See Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], p. 220.) God's hand, somehow, is in things, including the intertwinings, yet He does so without compromising our precious agency.

However, back to this small litany of remembrances. Sequentially, next came World War II, and, erelong, it was off to war! So many of us looked to Church leaders for certain assurances in those troubled and strange times. From the World War II serviceman's handbook I remember reading reassuringly:

When, therefore, constitutional law, obedient to these principles, calls the manhood of the Church into the armed service of any country to which they owe allegiance, their highest civic duty requires that they meet that call. If, harkening to that call and obeying those in command over them, they shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers, nor subject them to the penalty that God has prescribed for those who kill, beyond the principle to be mentioned shortly. For it would be a cruel God that would punish His children as moral sinners for acts done by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom He had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist. (A message of the First Presidency dated April 6, 1942, in Gordon B. Hinckley, A Brief Statement of Principles of the Gospel. . . . [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1943], p. 252.)

Involvement in World War II brought more intertwinings.

Unknown to me then was how the ravages of the battle on Okinawa were affecting an eight-year-old Okinawan boy, Kensei Nagamine. His father and brother were killed in the Battle of Shuri, and his pregnant mother was able to take her five children, including this youthful son, to the north end of the island and comparative safety, even as they were repeatedly machine gunned by fighter planes many times. Though unaware, an eighteen- and eight-year-old were then only miles apart. Many years later we met; by then he was the president of the Okinawa Stake. It was my privilege later on (after his tour as stake president) to call him as patriarch to the Okinawa Stake. He is now President Nagamine of the Tokyo temple! Surely the Lord had His eyes upon him long ago! I have been greatly blessed to come to know him and his missionary-minded family.

Among my Okinawa "buddies" is one nonmember for whose grandson I was able to perform a recent sealing in the Salt Lake Temple. These happy intertwinings seem to go on and on, including very recently my being privileged to offer a prayer at the graveside service for my Catholic and foxhole buddy, Paul Montrone.

Having been trained and ordained at home, I blessed my sacrament several times in foxholes on Okinawa in May of 1945. As a reflex action I abstained from the coffee brought up to those of us "on the line." The army, in its typical inefficiency, sometimes did not bring up any water at all. However, my complying with the Word of Wisdom was no big deal. Yet thirty years later I learned that one foxhole buddy apparently had been watching this small act of compliance. As noted earlier, for us to be unaware does not mean we are unobserved.

The foxhole buddy, Chris Seil of California, did some observing. Over three decades later, the shared experience on Okinawa, though Chris was not a Church member, caused his member-wife, Barbara, to write a touching letter from California inquiring with these lines:

I am a member of the Church, but my husband is a non member, however, he has supported our two sons on their missions. . . .

In May or June of 1945 my husband was serving in the Army in the 77th Infantry Div. . . . During this two-week period my husband (Chris) shared fox holes with a Mormon boy who really lived his religion. The boy gave Chris all of his beer, coffee and cigarette rations in exchange for my husband's water. . . . The boy did not preach Mormonism to Chris, but he lived his religion as he should. My husband was not only grateful, but was really impressed with this boy, and loved and admired him, . . .

After this period . . . Each boy went his own way, and Chris doesn't ever remember seeing him again. . . .

I have heard the story of the Mormon boy many times during the years but no name was ever mentioned, . . .

The other night a strange thing happened. My husband and I were talking about the change in the U.S. Presidency. I mentioned that I hoped the new administration would not get us into another war as our boys would certainly be in it. My husband said, "That's right, the Mormons don't believe in being conscientious objectors do they?" Then he again told me the story of the Mormon boy and how hard he had fought even though he was very religious, and as Chris talked about it, he mentioned the boy's last name, and he was so startled that he said, "Quick, write that name down before I forget it." . . . [then] he had a very strong urge to get in touch with this man and express his appreciation to him personally.

The fellow's last name was Maxwell, and the only Maxwell I know in the Church is you, and I figured you would be a good person to start with.

We realize you are very busy, but perhaps you could give us some information: Are you that person?

A voice from the past which was to affect the future!

In further intertwinings I was blessed later to perform sealings for Chris and Barbara's sons. Barbara has been serving for several years as a worker in the Los Angeles Temple.

Once again, the joys of these intertwinings are so clear. Some day, in my opinion, we shall see that these intertwinings are not simply a function of mortality but went on before in our first estate, and surely they will continue in our third and final estate! If this is true, what seem to be friendships of initiation here are actually friendships of resumption.

Only about two years ago I learned from my aunt, Arlene Ash Turner, something precious of which I was completely unaware. It occurred back in May of 1945—the Okinawa period, where I was serving as a frightened infantryman in a mortar squad. Arlene told me that one day my mother had told her that the night before she and Dad had had their parental prayers and had prayed over me and my sisters. When abed they were nearly asleep, Mother reportedly said, "Clarence, we need to get out of bed and pray again. Neal is in grave danger!" They did, pleading for me afresh. I do not know the precise date, but the time zones are such that their late night prayer would match mid-afternoon or early evening on Okinawa. The Japanese had been trying to hit our mortar squad position but were unable to do so because of some low, intervening hills. They must have moved their artillery pieces, because soon a round of artillery came squarely in between two of our foxholes. Shaken, I prayed most earnestly (doubtless along with others), naively promising to pay the Lord back. Relief came! Now, of course, I am much more in His debt.

I do not know the date of the parental prayer, but in the words of some other young men who had special mothers and who also went off to war, I "did not doubt [my mother] knew it" (see Alma 56:48).

Having such prayerful parents was a great inspiration to all of us in the family, and to learn so many years later of that simple but powerful act has been a great source of joy to me; and it has caused me to weep with appreciation more than once.

I had saved money during those twenty-plus months overseas in order to go on a mission, which was part of keeping my promise to the Lord made in May of 1945. When discharged, I wanted to go on a mission right away. But our bishop did not call me at once. Finally, somewhat audaciously, I went to his home one night and told him I wanted to go on a mission, had the money, and didn't want to wait. He then proceeded to process the call. I wondered back then why he seemed slow. Only decades later did I learn (from a good man who was then his ward clerk) that the bishop had felt, since I had been overseas for a while, I shouldn't be rushed into the mission field. Oh, how quick we are to judge, and sometimes with so little data!

Just prior to going into the mission field I was set apart as a full-time missionary for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by Elder Matthew Cowley, whom I had never met before. During the course of the setting apart, Elder Cowley said, in effect, "Elder Maxwell, you are going to Eastern Canada to preach the gospel. Please stay out of political discussions." Those who know me know of my keen and long-standing interest in things political. Elder Cowley's counsel, therefore, was laser-like in its precision. He also gave me wise, precise, and personal counsel several years later when he performed the sealing for Colleen and me in the Salt Lake Temple for our eternal marriage. My two times with this Apostle gave clear evidence of his capacity to receive personal revelation for the benefit of those he blessed and counseled.

I was particularly blessed during the defining season, which the mission field surely constituted, with two wonderful mission presidents, President Octave W. Ursenbach and President Floyed G. Eyre, along with their special wives. Each of them tutored, loved, and taught me, though differently.

Upon my release, President Eyre, in his excellent script, inscribed a praise-filled "P.S." on his letter of my release to the Wandamere Ward bishop. A little praise can be such a large motivator. In a way, I have been running for fifty years on a post-script that was written in fifty seconds! If only you and I do not become too busy with so many earthly cares that we fail to give a little heavenly praise! I have never shared that letter except with Colleen and our children. In recent intertwining, I have felt humbly grateful for the privilege of sealing several of President and Sister Eyre's grandchildren in the holy temple.

In 1947, our mission, by the way, had no study plan. Study plans in missions back then were rare and random. No wonder we didn't baptize as many as today. Out of my frustration, I developed a study plan which was very immodestly entitled, "The Sword of Truth." It was a good-faith effort but contained many typographical errors. Fortunately much better plans soon came along.

Later on, Colleen, who counseled me wisely as to my career path, encouraged me to accept an offer in 1956 of a job at the University of Utah after working for Senator Wallace F. Bennett in Washington, D.C. She said to me, insightfully: "I think you should work at the `U.' Maybe you may have some influence on students." I scoffed gently. This didn't seem very likely to happen to an assistant director of Public Relations busily preparing news releases. But through the blessings of the Lord I soon ended up, over time, teaching hundreds of students political science, serving as a counselor in a bishopric to Oscar W. McConkie, Jr., then bishop of one of the first student wards, and served still later as Dean of Students.

I am blessed to have known and learned from many wonderful University students. Their lives keep intersecting with my own—all over the world! Now, sparked by several former students and generous friends, a professorial chair has been named in my honor at the "U." Its occupants can bless other generations of students! Colleen was "spot on," once again!

Though the foregoing samples are but few, I hope to be worthy not only of the individuals named but of all of my many friends, and especially of Him who "condescends" to call us His friends.

The blessings of our Heavenly Father to all of us are surely those of a very generous God. Even the much lesser telestial kingdom will be a place "which surpasses all understanding" (D&C 76:89). God is quick to give us large blessings for our small obedience! Geometrically, if little gears were to represent our obedience and large gears God's generous blessings for us all, as they do, we could grasp even further insights into God's character!

This generous pattern of intertwinings and blessings should fill us all with anticipation concerning the divine promise about how "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Cor. 2:9). Such generosity is consistent, too, with the statement that, "I, the Lord, . . . delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end" (D&C 76:5). The word delight is much more than God's routinely making good on a promise! Delight describes the feelings of a Perfect Father.

One other reason for my citing the foregoing and intertwining samples is to make a record of them for my and Colleen's posterity. These individuals see my weaknesses. Hence, for them, my wish parallels that of Moroni:

Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, . . . but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been. (Morm. 9:31)

It will please me greatly if our children, their spouses, and their children, though imperfect, too, become "more wise than [I] have been."

God has been so generous to me! I, like Nephi, have a personal knowledge of His goodness. His longsuffering has provided me, again and again, with much-needed chances to improve—for which there has been and still is so much room!
