The Lamanites obeyed God’s commandments. They became more righteous than the Nephites. Hel. 13:1

Samuel, a Lamanite prophet, went to Zarahemla to preach to the wicked Nephites. He told them to repent. Hel. 13:2

The Nephites threw Samuel out of Zarahemla. He started to go back to his own land. Hel. 13:2

The Lord told Samuel to return to Zarahemla and tell the people the things that the Lord would put into his heart. Hel. 13:3

The Nephites would not let Samuel back into their city, so he climbed up on its wall and spoke loudly to the people. Hel. 13:4

He prophesied that in 400 years the Nephites would be destroyed unless they repented and had faith in Jesus Christ. Hel. 13:5–6

Samuel told the Nephites that Jesus Christ would be born in five years, that he would save all those who believed in him. Hel. 14:2

Samuel told them the signs of Christ’s birth: There would be a day, a night, and a day with no darkness. And a new star would appear. Hel. 14:3–6

Then Samuel told them the signs of Jesus’ death: There would be three days of total darkness. The sun, the moon, and the stars would not shine. Hel. 14:20

There would be thunder and lightning and earthquakes. Mountains would crumble, and many cities would be destroyed. Hel. 14:21–24

Some Nephites believed Samuel, repented of their sins, and went to find Nephi, a righteous Nephite, so that he could baptize them. Hel. 16:1

Other Nephites did not believe Samuel. They threw rocks and shot arrows at him. Because the Lord protected him, none of the rocks or arrows hit him. Hel. 16:2

When the people saw that he could not be hit, many more believed his words and went to Nephi to be baptized. Hel. 16:3

Nephi also taught the Nephites about Jesus. Nephi wanted them to believe in Jesus, to repent, and to be baptized. Hel. 16:4–5

Most Nephites, however, did not believe Samuel. When they saw that he could not be hit with their stones and arrows, they tried to capture him. Hel. 16:6

Samuel leaped down from the wall and fled to his own country. Hel. 16:7

Samuel the Lamanite began to teach his own people. He was never again heard of among the Nephites. Hel. 16:7–8
