Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

REPENTANCE.

The Nephite prophet, Alma, gives a very comprehensive idea of the importance of repentance. "Yea, I would that ye would come forth and harden not your hearts any longer; for behold, now is the time, and the day of your salvation; and therefore, if ye will repent and harden not your hearts, immediately shall the great plan of redemption be brought about unto you. For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors. And now as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness, wherein there can be no labor performed. Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world. For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance, even until death, behold, ye have become subject to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked." Alma 34. 31-35.

"For Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death;" 2 Cor. 7. 10. Of the sorrow that worketh death was that of Judas; Matt. 27. 3-5 In some passages of the Scriptures repentance signifies a change of purpose in man, as in the case of the son who refused to work in his father's vineyard, but afterwards repented and went; 21. 28, 29.

Again, it expresses the sympathy of the Lord for the sufferings of his people: "For the Lord hearkened because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them;" Judges 2. 18. It sometimes expresses sympathy in man for the sufferings of others: "And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the Lord had made a breach in the tribes of Israel;" 21. 15.

In the history of the deliverance of Israel from Egypt, we are informed that Pharaoh's heart was hardened, so that he would not let the people go. We are evidently to understand by this, that on account of the great wickedness of the Egyptians, the Lord did not soften their hearts by the gentle influences of his Spirit, but permitted them to pursue their own chosen way and suffer the consequences.

We read in the Revelations of St. John: "And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands;" 9. 20. "And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds;" 16. 11. These, like the Egyptians, had passed the day of repentance, and were left to reap the reward of their wickedness.

On account of their former wickedness, it was all the converted Lamanites could do to repent; Alma 24. 11.

Repentance is a gift of God: "Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life;" Acts 11. 18. "If God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth;" 2 Tim. 2. 25. "Not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth them to repentance;" Rom. 2. 4. That is, the Lord grants to men of his Holy Spirit to soften their hearts and enlighten their understandings, that they may see and receive the truth, if they will; but his Spirit will not always strive with man. Confession of sin, and restitution to the injured party, was early made a standing law in Israel; Num. 5. 6, 7.

Confession is one of the outward evidences of a godly sorrow for sin: "For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation;" Rom. 10. 10. "Confess your faults one to another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed;" James 5. 16.

On account of the magnitude of sins committed, repentance is not always followed by forgiveness and restoration. For instance, when Peter was preaching to the Jews, who had slain Jesus and taken his blood on themselves and their children, he did not say, repent and be baptized for the remission of sins; but "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and (when) he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive until the times of the restitution of all things;" Acts 3. 19-21. That is, repent now, and believe in Jesus Christ, that you may be forgiven when he whom you have slain shall come again in the days of the restitution of all things; and prescribe to you the terms on which you may be saved.

Bible.

1 Kings 8. 47 if they repent in the land of their captivity.

Job 42. 6 I abhor myself and repent in dust and ashes.

Psalm 106. 45 repented according to the multitude of his mercies.

Ezk. 14. 6 repent and turn from your idols. Chap. 18, 30,

Matt. 3. 2 repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Chap. 4. 17.

8 bring forth fruit meet for repentance. Luke 3. 8.

Mark 1. 15 repent ye and believe the Gospel.

Luke 13. 3 except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. 5.

Acts 17. 30 times of ignorance God winked at but now commands men to repent.

Rom. 2. 4 not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance.

2 Cor. 7. 9 but that ye sorrowed to repentance.

10 Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation, not to be repented of.

Heb. 6. 1 not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works. 6.

2 Peter 3. 9 that any should perish, but all should come to repentance.

Rev. 3. 8 remember how thou hast received; hold fast and repent.

19 those I love I chasten; be zealous, therefore, and repent.

Book of Mormon.

1 Nephi 10. 18 the way is prepared for all men if they will repent.

2 Nephi 2. 21 he gave commandment that all men should repent.

Jacob 3. 3 except ye repent the land is cursed for your sakes.

Mos. 4. 10 believe that you must repent of your sins, and forsake them. 18.

20 he commanded they should preach nothing but repentance and faith.

Alma 5. 31-33 repentance necessary to salvation. 49-56.

24 this life a probationary state for repentance.

16 repentance could not come unto men except there was a punishment.

Hel. 5. 11 he hath power to redeem them from their sins because of repentance.

19-24, 28 the Nephites warned of great destruction, unless they would repent.

3 Nephi 9. 2 wo to the inhabitants of the earth unless they repent. 13, 22.

Mormon 2. 8 although destruction hung over the Nephites they would not repent. 10-13.

Ether 2. 11 may repent and not continue in your iniquities, until the fulness come.

Moroni 6. 7 if they repented not their names were blotted out. 8.

Doctrine and Cobenants.

Sec. 1. 32, 33 from him that repents not shall be taken the light he has received. Sec. 5. 21.

44 they cannot be redeemed because they repented not. 49.

50 that wicked mob may repent, if repentance can be found. 53.

Pearl of Great Price.

Page 9. said to Adam, thou shalt repent and call upon God.

History of Joseph Smith, Sept. 1, 1835.

A Pamphlet by O. Pratt, on Repentance.
