Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

REMISSION OF SINS.

This subject is closely connected with the fall of man and the atonement of our Savior. The fall was brought about by a law being given to him, in the Garden of Eden. He broke that law, and the fall was the penalty of transgression.

The atonement opens up the way for the removal of that penalty; and also for the removal of the effects of men's individual sins through repentance. It is through obedience to certain laws and ordinances, deriving their efficacy from the atonement of Christ, that men's sins are remitted.

Man, in his weak and fallen state, is ever prone to sin. God, in his great love and mercy, has provided a way through which his sins may be forgiven. Besides the outward ordinances of the Gospel, there are three general conditions which the sinner must fulfil, in order to have his sins remitted. He must confess them and ask forgiveness; Doc. & Cov., 64. 7. He must forgive others of their trespasses. Christ taught his disciples, "For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Heavenly Father forgive your trespasses;" Matt. 6. 14, 15.

The Lord said to his prophet Joseph, "Ye ought to forgive one another, for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses, standeth condemned before the Lord, for there remaineth in him the greater sin;" Doc. & Cov, 64. 9. The third condition is, men must continually bear in mind the atonement of Christ. The Nephite Saints continually looked forward to the atonement of Christ, "Thus retaining a remission of their sins;" Alma 4. 13, 14. We are often taught in the sacred writings to make our supplications to the Father, in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, who has become a propitiation for sin. The works necessary to attain to a remission of sins, and the results of that remission, are well expressed by the Nephite prophet, Moroni:

"And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith, unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; and the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart, and because of meekness and lowliness of heart, cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the Saints shall dwell with God;" Moroni 8. 25, 26.

Bible.

Exo. 23. 21 provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions.

Josh. 24. 19 is a holy a jealous God, he will not forgive your sins.

1 Kings 8. 30 hear thou in heaven, and when thou hearest forgive.

2 Chron. 7. 14 then will I hear from heaven and will forgive their sin.

Neh. 9. 17 thou art a God ready to pardon, slow to anger.

Psalm 32. 1 blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered Rom. 4. 7.

Ser. 31. 34 for I will forgive their iniquity and remember their sin no more.

Dan. 9. 9 to the Lord belong mercies and forgiveness. 19.

Mic. 7. 18 who is a God like unto thee that pardoneth iniquity.

Matt. 6. 12 forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors. Luke 11. 4.

35 if ye forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

Mark 2. 7 who can forgive sins but God only?

Luke 6. 37 condemn not; forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.

John 20. 23 whosesoever sins ye remit they are remitted.

Acts 26. 18 turn them from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins.

Eph. 4. 32 forgiving one another as God hath forgiven you.

Heb. 9. 22 without shedding of blood there is no remission.

1 John 2. 12 because your sins are forgiven, for his name's sake

Book of Mormon.

Mos. 26. 30 as often as my people repent will I forgive them. 31.

Moroni 10. 33 shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins.

Doctrine and Cobenants.

Sec. 62. 3 angels rejoice over you and your sins are forgiven.

8 the former-day disciples were afflicted because they forgave not one another. 9.

10 I forgive whom I will, but of you it is required to forgive all men.
