Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

LAYING ON OF HANDS.

FOR ORDINATION.

Ordinations to offices in the holy Priesthood are sometimes mentioned in both the Old and New Testaments, when it is not stated in the context that it was by the imposition of hands. The apostle Paul exhorted Timothy, "Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery;" 1 Tim. 4. 14. The inference is reasonable, that Paul here refers to an ordination to some office in the Priesthood.

Paul again said to Timothy, "Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands;" 2 Tim. 1. 6.

The Lord revealed to Joseph the prophet, that the Priesthood descended from Adam to Noah under the HANDS OF THE FATHERS; Doc & Cov. 107. 40-52.

We are further informed that "Abraham received the Priesthood from Melchisedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah;" 84. 14. Esaias, who lived in the days of Abraham, "received it under the hands of God;" from him it descended under the hands of the fathers to Moses; 6-13.

In this dispensation all the offices and authority of the Priesthood are conferred by the laying on of hands. The first ordination to the Priesthood, in this dispensation, was under the hands of John the Baptist; Doc. & Cov., sec. 13. The angel, John the Baptist, commanded Joseph Smith and O. Cowdery to baptize each other. The prophet says: "Accordingly we went and were baptized, I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me, after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood—for so were we commanded;" His. of J. Smith, May 15, 1829.

The same order as was observed in the ordination to the Aaronic Priesthood, was also observed by Joseph Smith and O. Cowdery in their ordination to the Melchisedek Priesthood; Doc. & Cov. 20. 3, 4, sec. 21. 10-12.

FOR THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.

The laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, characterized the primitive Gospel dispensation, as recorded in the New Testament. Peter and John laid their hands on the people of Samaria, who had been baptized, and they received the Holy Ghost; Acts 8. 17.

Ananias laid hands on Saul, by special commandment, before he was baptized, that he might receive his sight and be filled with the Holy Ghost; 9. 17.

Paul found some people at Ephesus, that claimed to be disciples of John the Baptist, who had not even heard of the Holy Ghost. When he had baptized them, "and when he had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues and prophesied;" 19. 2-6.

The laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost characterized both the Mosaic and Gospel dispensations among the Nephites. "Now it came to pass that when Alma had said these words, that he clapped his hands upon all them who were with him. And behold, as he clapped his hands upon them, they were filled with the Holy Spirit;" Alma 31. 36. We are informed that the Nephites, at this time, were very strict in observing the ordinances of God according to the law of Moses; 30. 3.

When our Savior organized the Council of Twelve Apostles among the Nephites, he touched them with his hand and gave them power to give the Holy Ghost. "And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of these sayings, he touched with his hand the disciples whom he had chosen, one by one, even until he had touched them all, and spake unto them as he touched them; and the multitude heard not the words which he spake, therefore they did not bear record; but the disciples bear record that he gave them power to give the Holy Ghost;" 3 Nephi 18. 36, 37.

The Apostles of this dispensation are especially instructed to lay hands on those who have been baptized into the church, "For the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, according to the scriptures;" Doc. & Cov. 20. 41.

When the few who had received the Gospel first met to organize the church, the prophet Joseph laid his hands on O. Cowdery and ordained him an elder in the church, after which O. Cowdery ordained the prophet Joseph to the same office. They then administered the sacrament to the Saints. Afterwards they laid their hands "on each individual member of the church present, that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ;" His. of J. Smith, April 6, 1830. This was the first time in this dispensation that hands were publicly laid on for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, and for confirmation.

FOR HEALING THE SICK.

Jesus Christ has left us his example for laying hands on the sick, that they might be healed. He touched the hand of Peter's wife's mother, and the fever left her; Matt. 8. 15. "He laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them;" Mark 6. 5.

About the close of his earthly mission, Jesus said to his disciples, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature;" and promised them that if they would lay hands on the sick, they should recover; 16. 15, 18.

"By the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people;" Acts 5. 12.

The Lord, through his prophet, Joseph, has commanded his people to administer to the sick by the laying on of hands. "And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nursed with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy. And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me;" Doc. & Cov., 42. 43, 44.

The ordinance of laying on of hands for the bestowal of authority, power and blessing has characterized all the dispensations of the holy Priesthood. But it does not necessarily follow that the Creator may not bestow these favors in other ways.

Before the flood, the Lord said to Enoch, "Anoint thine eyes with clay, and wash them, and thou shalt see;" and the spiritual creations were opened to his vision; P. of G. P., p. 15.

Naaman, the Syrian, was cleansed of his leprosy by washing seven times in Jordan; 2 Kings 5. 10-14.

The blind man, after Jesus had anointed his eyes with clay, received his sight by washing them in the pool of Siloam; John 9. 7. Contrary to the usual custom, Ananias laid hands on Saul, before he was baptized, that he might be filled with the Holy Ghost; Acts 9. 17.

Bible.

Num. 27. 18 take thee Joshua, the son of Nun, and lay thine hand upon him.

2 Kings 5. 11 I thought he would strike his hand over the place.

Mark 7. 33 put his finger into his ears, and touched his tongue.

Acts 4. 30 stretching forth thy hand to heal, that signs and wonders be done.

Doctrine and Cobenants.

Sec. 20. 58 teachers and deacons have no authority to lay on hands.

27 and their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

See Mil. Star, Vol. 3, page 59.

History of J. Smith, March 20, 1842.
