Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

CHRIST'S FIRST COMING.

The oldest Bible prophecy, of the coming of Christ, is in Jacob's blessing on Judah: "The scep. tre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come;" Gen. 49. 10.

When Christ was born, the sceptre had not wholly departed from Judah, for Herod the king, who reigned at the time of his birth, was virtually king of Judea. Christ was condemned to be crucified by Pontius Pilate, a Roman governor. The Shiloh had come and the sceptre had entirely departed, for Judah was under Gentile rule.

The records of three dispensations assert that Christ came to his own, and they did not receive him; John 1. 11. 3 Nephi 9. 16. Doc. & Cov. 6. 21. He came to his own covenant people, the house of Israel, and, though they still retained most of the forms of the Mosaic ritual, they had apostatized from the faith of their fathers, had drank deep into pagan philosophy, had become wicked and corrupt, and, when the Shiloh came, they new him not, rejected him, and were the means of his death.

The numerous prophecies of the first coming of Christ, in both the Jewish and Nephite records, had a veritable fulfilment in his birth, life, sufferings, death and resurrection, and furnish overwhelming testimony of the Divine inspiration of those records. That Jesus Christ was the same being who called Abraham from his native country, who led Israel out of the land of Egypt with mighty miracles and wonders, who made known to them his law amid the thunderings of Sinai, who delivered them from their enemies, who chastened them for their disobedience, who inspired their prophets, and whose glory filled Solomon's temple, is evident from all the inspired writings, and in none more so than in the Bible.

His lamentation over Jerusalem evidences that, in his humanity, he had not forgotten his former exalted position: "O Jersualem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, * * and ye would not;" Matt. 23. 37. It was this creator of the world, this mighty ruler, this controller of the destinies of the human family, who, in his last moments, cried out in the agony of his soul, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Mark 15. 34.

He was the great sacrifice for the world's redemption. It was a sacrifice worthy of Deity. How grandly, how nobly it was made! It was made in the meridian of time, and it changed the character of dispensations. Israel ceased to be a nation, and the Gentile rule was ushered in, to continue for many long centuries, in which God's chosen people were to suffer terrible persecutions. We must look at Jesus Christ in his true character of God and Savior, in order to form a proper conception of the great sacrifice which has opened, to the human family, the way to immortality.

Bible.

Deut. 18. 15-19 a prophet to be raised up in Israel like unto Moses.

Psalm 22. several prophecies concerning Christ.

Isa. 7. 14 a virgin shall conceive and bear a son.

Mic. 5. 2 of thee shall he come forth that is to be ruler in Israel.

Zech. 9. 9 just and lowly and sitting on an ass. 10.

Acts 3. 22, 23 he that will not hear that prophet shall be cut off.

Book of Mormon...

1 Nephi 10. 4, 5 six hundred years after Lehi left Jerusalem Messiah should come.

11, 12 at his death Christ shall manifest himself to the house of Israel.

2 Nephi 9. 5 he suffered himself to become subject to men in the flesh, that all men might be subject to him.

Mos. 3. 5-10 the Lord came among the children of men, was crucified and rose from the dead, that a righteous judgment might come on them. 13, 15.

Alma 39. 18, 19 as necessary that the plan of salvation should be known before, as well as after the coming of Christ.

Hel. 14. 12 Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Creator of heaven and earth.

3 Nephi 1. 9-14 Christ made known to Nephi, that, on the morrow he would come into the world.

Ether 3. 16 Christ said to the brother of Jared, as I appear to thee in the spirit, so will I appear to my people in the flesh.

Doctrine and Cobenants.

Sec. 20. 26, 27 not only those who believe after he comes, but all those from the beginning, as well as those who shall come after.
