Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

JOSEPH SMITH, JUN., AS A FULFILLER OF BIBLE PROPHECIES.

The mission of Joseph Smith, Jun., is the key of the dispensation of the fulness of times. If he was not sent of God, the pretentions of the Latter-day Saints to be the true Gospel church are without foundation, and their labors for the redemption of the world must prove a failure.

If, in his life's labors, and their results, the predictions of the ancient prophets are being fulfilled it should be satisfactory evidence of the divinity of his mission. For unless a man have the spirit of the prophets, he can neither understand their predictions, nor the nature of the events that would fulfil them.

John, the Revelator, in his vision of the latter times, saw another "Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue;" Rev. 14. 6.

On page 49, P. of G. P., Joseph Smith, Jun., states that a glorious personage appeared to him and said that his name was Moroni. This angel told Mr. Smith one thing concerning his own future, that, since that time, 1823, has had a remarkable fulfilment. This was that his name "should be had for good or evil among all nations, kindreds and tongues."

He also informed him that there was a record on gold plates, deposited in the earth, which gave an account of the ancient inhabitants of this continent, and of the source from which they sprang.

A book containing such information, as the angel said, was engraven on the plates, was produced by Mr. Smith, with competent witnesses that it was a translation from certain plates of gold which were shown to them by an angel. (See Book of Mormon for the historical account, and the third page for the testimony of the witnesses.)

The angel Moroni further stated, that the record contained the fulness of the everlasting Gospel. Here we have all the conditions necessary for the fulfilment of the prophetic vison of St. John, regarding the restoration of the Gospel in the latter times.

The angel repeated to Mr. Smith the fifth verse of the last chapter of Malachi, thus: "Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." In Doc. & Cov., 110. 13, 14, we find an account of the fulfilment of this prophecy, by the appearance of Elijah to Mr. Smith. He stated that he had come in fulfilment of this preliction of Malachi's.

The angel Moroni quoted the sixth verse as follows: "And he shall plant in the hearts of the children, the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers; if it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming." "Therefore," said the prophet Elijah to Joseph Smith, "The keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands."

After receiving authority from the prophet Elijah, Mr. Smith made it the business of his life to lay the foundation for accomplishing the great work committed to him. He has left the world most important instructions on this subject, in Doc. & Cov. sec. 128.

After referring to the prophecy of Malachi, he says "It is sufficient to know, in this case, that the earth will be smitten with a curse, unless there is a welding link of some kind or other, between the fathers and the children, upon some subject or other, and behold, what is that subject? It is baptism for the dead. For we without them cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect. Neither can they nor we, be made perfect, without those who have died in the Gospel also;" verse 18. It is necessary that all things be connected and welded together in one glorious and complete union, from Adam down to the present time.

To accomplish this it is necessary that the hearts of the fathers and children be turned towards each other, by understanding the promises made in the Gospel. We have no information that the Christian world has had any knowledge of these glorious principles for the universal redemption of man, from the time of the primitive church until they were revealed through Joseph Smith, Jun.

In the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon, through the agency of an angel, we find the fulfilment of Psalm 85. 11, "Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven;" and also of a parallel prophecy of Enoch's, P. of G. P. page 21. "Righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth." What for? "To bear testimony of mine Only Begotten."

Truth came forth out of the earth, in the Book of Mormon, through the ministration of the angel Moroni, and righteousness came down out of heaven through the blessings and ordinances of the holy Priesthood, as restored to the earth by John the Baptist, when he appeared to J. Smith, Jun., and O. Cowdery, and conferred upon them the Priesthood of Aaron, "Which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins;" Doc. & Cov. 13.

And by Peter, James and John, who were sent to Jos. Smith, Jun., and others, and who ordained them to be apostles and especial witnesses of Christ. 27. 12. Through these ordinances and blessings came the power to work righteousness on the earth.

Here we have all the conditions for the fulfilment of the prophecies of Enoch and David, through the agency of Mr. Smith. We find, by comparison, that there is no antagonism in doctrine between the Book of Mormon and Bible. Christ said, "This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come;" Matt. 24. 14.

Joseph Smith, Jun., reiterates this prediction of our Savior's nearly 1800 years after its utterance: "For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men;" Doc. & Cov. 1. 2; "And the voice of warning shall be unto all people;" verse 4. "Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth;" verse 11.

Joseph Smith, Jun., spent the labors of his life, for the accomplishment of the great work of preaching the Gospel to all the world, and it has been the great object of the labors of the Latter-day Saints for more than fifty years. Considering the magnitude of the work it is being rapidly accomplished.

Jesus called the Gospel, the "Gospel of the kingdom." Of what kingdom did he speak, unless of a kingdom of God on the earth which this Gospel was to establish? Even the kingdom which Daniel speaks of: "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: * * and it shall stand forever;" Dan. 2. 44. "And there was given him (the Son of Man) dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him;" 7. 14; "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the Most High;" verse 27. The kingdom which this Gospel was to build up, is the great object for which all Latter-day Saints labor.

One of the great burdens of the ancient prophets was the gathering of Israel in the latter days, that Jerusalem might be established, and Zion built up, that the law might go forth from Zion, "And the word of the Lord from Jerusalem;" Isa. 2. 3.

It is evident from the tenor of the inspired writings, that this kingdom is to consist of gathered Israel, and therefore the gathering of Israel must be a part of "This Gospel of the kingdom." Some one must receive authority to organize the means for accomplishing this great gathering of the latter days.

The former great gatherer and deliverer of Israel was Moses, and he, very naturally, was the one to restore that authority to the earth after the fulness of the Gentiles should come in.

Through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, Jos. Smith, Jun., understood this, and had the faith to receive the administrations of Moses, and he has left the fact on record. "And Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north;" Doc. & Cov. 110. 11.

He preached "This Gospel of the kingdom," the obedient received the Holy Ghost, and it moved them to gather together, and Israel, for over fifty years, has been gathering to form that kingdom in fulfilment of the predictions of the ancient prophets.

Joseph Smith, Jun., is the first man of whom we have any record, for some 1800 years, that has labored for the fulfilment of the predictions of the ancient prophets; Doc. & Cov. 1. 18.

The Lord said, through his prophet Micah, "In the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; * * and many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem;" Mic. 4. 1, 2.

For many years there has been a "House of the Lord" in Salt Lake City, in the top of the mountains, and for more than thirty years, the people of many nations have been saying, "Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord."

That there will be a place called Zion from which "The law shall go forth," distinct from Jerusalem, is evident from Isaiah, "When the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem;" 24. 23.

How is it that Joseph Smith, Jun., first organized the means for the partial fulfilment of this prophecy, and left, at his death, the authority and instructions necessary to complete its fulfilment, by the building of a great city to be called Zion, in the state of Missouri, which in fulfilment of the prophecy, shall become the capital of this western hemisphere, if he did not obtain his knowledge of the whole matter through Divine inspiration?

The Jaredite prophet, Ether, some 2500 years ago, foretold "That a New Jerusalem should be built up upon this land (America), unto the seed of Joseph;" Ether 13. 4, 6.

There is a wonderful connection between this passage in the Book of Mormon, and the prophecies of Isaiah and Micah, the result of one spirit of inspiration, acting upon different men, in countries, long distances apart, and at different periods of time.

It is quite as unaccountable on any other grounds than that of inspiration, that Joseph Smith, Jun., after many centuries had elapsed since these predictions of the prophets, should declare to the world that the time was at hand for their fulfilment, and that he should have the confidence to indicate the identical spot, on this great land of North America, where this city of Zion is to be built. "This is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. * * * Behold, the place which is now called Independence, is the center place, and a spot for the temple is lying westward;" Doc. & Cov. 57. 2, 3.

JOSEPH SMITH AS A FULFILLER OF BOOK OF MORMON PROPHECIES.

The first Nephi, 2400 years before the days of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, had a vision of the discovery and colonization of America by Europeans He also saw the record of the Jews (the Bible) come forth from the Gentiles to the remnant of the seed of his brethren (the American Indians). He says, "After it had come forth unto them, I beheld other books, which came forth by the power of the Lamb, from the Gentiles unto them:" 1 Nephi 13. 38, 39.

Admitting that this prophecy has been partly fulfilled, by Christian denominations who have sent missionaries and the Bible among the Indians, it remained for Joseph Smith, Jun., to initiate the fulfilment of the second part of the prophecy, that other books, besides the Bible, should come forth to the children of Lehi, which should bear testimony of the truth of the Bible.

The Book of Mormon was the first of this series of books, which were to be carried forth among the American Indians, after the Bible. It has been followed by the book of Doctrine and Covenants, containing revelations and instructions concerning the latter-day work, and by inspired translations from the writings of Enoch, Abraham and Moses, which all bear record of the truth of the Jewish prophets, and of the teachings of Jesus and his apostles, as foretold they would do by the prophet Nephi.

This same prophet further says, "There is nothing which is secret, save it shall be revealed; * * * there is nothing which is sealed upon the earth, save it shall be loosed. Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the children of men, shall at that day be revealed;" 2 Nephi 30. 17, 18. The context of this passage shows that it speaks of the latter days.

The following is nearly a parallel passage in meaning: "And he shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began;" Acts 3. 20, 21.

That is, all the knowledge that has ever been revealed to man will be restored to the earth. All that was revealed to Adam and the ante-diluvian prophets; to Noah and the Jaredite prophets; to Abraham; to Moses and the Jewish prophets; to the Nephite prophets; to the primitive apostles of our Savior, and many others, to whom the Lord has shewn all things from the beginning of the world to the end thereof.

After many centuries had passed, in which man's wisdom had failed to comprehend the meaning of the phrase, "The restitution of all things," or the grand fulfilment of prophecy comprehended in a "Dispensation of the fulness of times"—a time in which all the knowledge and power of all times will be gathered into one—Jos. Smith, Jun., appears in the United States of America, and claims that the Lord has authorized him to open up this grand dispensation of a fulness, and that for this purpose he has bestowed upon him first, and then through him upon others, all the keys and powers of the Priesthood which had been held in former dispensations.

"For unto you, (the twelve) and those (the first presidency) who are appointed with you, to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this Priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times, which power you hold in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of creation;" Doc. & Cov. 112. 30-32.

In sec. 110 we are informed that Jesus Christ Elias, Moses, and Elijah the prophet, appeared to Jos. Smith, Jun., and others, and bestowed upon them the keys of the holy Priesthood, held in other dispensations, that they might be concentrated in this.

In these last two quotations, from Doc. & Cov., we have an account of the bestowal of the necessary authority upon certain persons, for the opening up of the gathering dispensation of the latter times, that is perfectly consistent with the Book of Mormon and the Bible.

No man, unless endowed by Divine inspiration, could have conceived of such a sacramental feast as is represented in the following, to which will be gathered in the latter times, the great dignitaries of all dispensations, with Jesus Christ at their head, together holding all the keys, authority and powers of the holy Priesthood, pertaining to the redemption of man and of the earth.

"For the hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth, and with Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting Gospel, * * * and also with Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things," and with John the Baptist, "whom I have sent unto you, my servants, Jos. Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, to ordain you unto this first Priesthood which you have received. * *

"And also Elijah, unto whom I have committed the keys of the power of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, * * * and also with Joseph and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, your fathers, * * and also with Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days.

"And also with Peter, and James, and John, * * * by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be Apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry, and of the same things which I have revealed unto them: unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the Gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth;" 27. 5-13.

On a certain occasion, when the Nephite disciples of our Savior were engaged "in mighty prayer and fasting," he appeared in their midst and asked them, "What will ye that I shall give unto you? And they said unto him, Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call this church; for there are disputations among the people concerning this matter.

"And the Lord said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, why is it that the people should murmur and dispute because of this thing? Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day. * * * Therefore whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name;" 3 Nephi 27. 2-7.

In the above Jesus plainly told his disciples that his name was Christ, and that his church should be called Christ's Church, not Christian, Catholic, Campbellite or Episcopalian.

When Jos. Smith, Jun., organized this church, on the 6th of April, 1830, it was organized as the Church of Jesus Christ, in obedience to the instructions of Jesus Christ, some 1800 years before.

The prophet Nephi, speaking of the gathering of Israel, says, that the Lord "Will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity, and out of darkness;" 1 Nephi 22. 12.

The Book of Mormon, brought forth through the agency of Jos. Smith, Jun., reveals to the world the fact that the millions of aboriginal Americans scattered over the American continent, from Cape Horn to the Arctic Ocean, are of the house of Israel.

The keys of the Patriarchial Priesthood enable those on whom they are bestowed, to know, by revelation, the lineage of the Latter-day Saints, and tens of thousands of Ephraim, and thousands of Manasseh, are being gathered, who were not known before the days of Jos. Smith, Jun., as portions of the house of Israel. Thus the great work of bringing the tribes of Israel, out of obscurity and darkness, and of developing their existence to themselves, and to the world, has been inaugurated by Jos. Smith, Jun. The work must continue until they are gathered from all parts of the earth, in fulfilment of the words of the prophets, and of the promises made to their fathers.

The following promise was made to Joseph who was sold into Egypt, "The fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write;" and that which shall be written, "Shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines, and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter-days; and also the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord;" 2 Nephi 3. 12. Jos. Smith, Jun., has brought forth the Book of Mormon, the writing of the fruit of the loins of Joseph through Ephraim and Manasseh, and has placed it, side by side, with the writing of the fruit of the loins of Judah—the Bible—the one establishing the truth of the other, and thus has literally fulfilled this prophecy.

The Lord further said to Joseph who was sold into Egypt, "I will raise up unto the fruit of thy loins; and I will make for him a spokesman. And I, behold, I will give unto him, that he shall write the writing of the fruit of thy loins (the Nephites), unto the fruit of thy loins (the American Indians); and the spokesman of thy loins shall declare it;" verse 18.

In Doc. & Cov., we are informed of the fulfilment of this prophecy. The Lord said to Joseph the prophet and S. Rigdon, "It is expedient in me that you, my servant Sidney, should be a spokesman unto this people; yea, verily, I will ordain you unto this calling, even to be a spokesman unto my servant Joseph;" 100. 9.

"And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried unto them from the dust;" 2 Nephi 3. 19. Jos. Smith, Jun., was of the lineage of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, to whom these promises were made The Nephites were also his descendants, and they wrote and hid up the plates of the Book of Mormon, with the assurance that, in after years, the writing should be brought forth to their descendants and others of the house of Israel; Mormon 8. 14-16. The record was engraved on plates in a language known only to the Nephites; Mormon 9. 34.

Of necessity there were some means provided for interpreting and re-writing the record in a modern language, before it could benefit those for whom it was designed. With the plates of the Book of Mormon was found a Urim and Thummim, by means of which, through the power of God, Jos. Smith, Jun., was enabled to translate the Nephite record for the benefit of the descendants of Lehi, and any others of the human family who would receive it; Doc. & Cov. 10. 1. "And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried to them from the dust," was fulfilled in taking the writing out of the earth, where it had been deposited for 1400 years.

In Mormon 8. 13, 14, we are informed that the record was hid up in the earth by Moroni, the son of Mormon, and it remained under his care until he delivered it to Joseph Smith, Jun., P. of G. P. page 49. The Lord said, "And it shall come to pass that my people which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one;" 2 Nephi 29. 14.

In fulfilment of this prophecy, Jos. Smith, Jun., during the short period of his ministry, not only inaugurated the great work of gathering Israel, but also of gathering together sacred writings, which at this time consist of the unsealed portion of the record of Mormon; the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and of important portions of the writings of Enoch, of Abraham, and of Moses. He also declared that more sacred writings would come forth, as fast as the people were prepared to receive them.

Moroni, who completed and hid up the record of Mormon in the earth, says, of the plates, "Unto three shall they be shown by the power of God; wherefore they shall know of a surety that these things are true. And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established;" Ether 5. 3, 4. We find that the Lord repeated this prediction to Jos. Smith, Jun.; Doc. & Cov. 5. 11-15. On the second page, after the title page of the Book of Mormon, we find the testimony of three men, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, that an angel appeared to them and showed them the plates, "Which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower" of Babel.

It was made manifest to them that they had been translated by the gift and power of God, and the voice of the Lord commanded that they should bear record of the things that had been shown them.

JOSEPH SMITH, JUN., AS A PROPHET, AND FULFILLER OF HIS OWN PROPHECIES.

"And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days;" Doc. & Cov. 1. 4. This was one of the first prophetic commandments given to the Latter-day Saints, through Jos. Smith, Jun.

Many hundreds of the Elders of the Church have traveled to and fro in the earth, regardless of exposure to the elements, of fatigue, or of percuniary considerations, warning the people to repent of their sins, for the day of the Lord was near.

There are now but few nations who are prepared to receive the word, that have not had the Gospel of this dispensation preached to them. With a constantly increasing number of Elders, the labor will continue until the Gospel is preached "as a witness to all nations." The quorums of the Priesthood were organized and set in order, by Jos. Smith, Jun., with this great work especially in view.

In sec. 3. 16-20, it is predicted that a knowledge of the Savior, and also of their fathers, should come to the descendants of Lehi, the American Indians. Through the ministry and teachings of Jos. Smith, Jun., thousands of the Lamanites have come to a knowledge of their fathers, and many "Believe the Gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ," of which many of the Latter-day Saints are witnesses.

"Behold, a marvellous work is about to come forth among the children of men;" 4. 1. This declaration was made in February, 1829; before the organization of the Church. The organization of the Church, the teachings, unity, energy, and progress of the Latter-day Saints, have ever been a marvel to the world, and are daily becoming more so, in fulfilment of this often repeated prediction in the book of Doc. & Cov.

In March, 1829, the Lord said to Jos. Smith, Jun., "For hereafter you shall be ordained and go forth and deliver my words unto the children of men;" 5. 6. On the 15th of May following, John the Baptist laid his hands upon the heads of Jos. Smith, Jun., and O. Cowdery, and ordained them to "The Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins;" sec. 13.

It is evident that, previous to this time, Jos. Smith, Jun., had foreseen by the spirit of prophecy, that it was necessary he should be called of God as was Aaron, and for this reason was prepared to receive a proper ordination by the hands of an authorized messenger from God. We have no record of such previous ordination to the Priesthood, since the days of the primitive apostles.

The Lord said to Joseph Smith, Jun., "There are many that lie in wait to destroy thee from off the face of the earth;" 5. 33. The whole life of Jos. Smith, Jun., and his death, evidence the truthfulness of this prophecy. Some forty times was he brought before the courts by his enemies, and they failed to substantiate the charges preferred against him, and, on the 27th of June, 1844, he, and his brother Hyrum, were assassinated in Carthage jail, by a mob, when under the pledged protection of the Executive of the state of Illinois.

"And the poor and the meek shall have the Gospel preached unto them, and they shall be looking forth for the time of my coming;" 35. 15. Not only has the Gospel been preached to the poor and the meek, but they are the ones who have received it, and are looking and preparing for the coming of our Lord, "For it is nigh at hand."

"Inasmuch as my people shall assemble themselves to the (state of) Ohio, I have kept in store a blessing such as is not known among the children of men, and it shall be poured forth upon their heads;" 39. 15. This prophetic promise was given through Joseph Smith, Jun., in Fayette, New York, January 5, 1831. In 1836, a temple was completed in the town of Kirtland, Ohio. It was the first temple of modern times, dedicated to that Priesthood of which Jesus Christ is the acknowledged head.

In this temple the Elders of the Church received endowments and great blessings, of which the world generally were entirely ignorant: The Lord said through J. Smith, Jun., "The sound must go forth from this place into all the world, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth—the Gospel must be preached unto every creature, with signs following them that believe;" 58. 64.

This prophecy was literally fulfilled by the Elders scattering from Kirtland, after receiving their endowments, to all parts of the United States and the Canadas, and by the first European Mission being established soon after.

At this time thousands of Latter-day Saints can testify that the Gospel has been preached in a large portion of the world, and that the signs of faith, gift of tongues, healing, etc., have followed the believer.

The following remarkable prophecy was delivered Dec. 25th, 1832. "Thus saith the Lord, concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls. The days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at that place; * * and it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshalled and disciplined for war;"

In 1861, twenty-nine years after this prophecy was recorded, the war between the North and South commenced in South Carolina. It continued for several years and was very destructive. In the latter part of it many thousands of slaves deserted their masters and were marshalled and disciplined for war, and formed a part of the armies of the Northern States.

During the contest the Southern States called upon the nation of Great Britain for assistance. "And it shall come to pass also, that the remnants who are left of the land (the Indians) will marshal themselves, and shall become exceeding angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation;" Sec. 87.

Never before, since the United States have been a nation, has the Indian question been so complicated and vexatious as now. That a part of this prophecy has been so literally fulfilled would seem a guarantee that the whole will be realized.

The delivery of the keys of the holy Priesthood unto the Prophet Joseph Smith, by Elias, by Moses, by Elijah, their ordination to the Priesthood of Aaron by John the Baptist, to the Melchisedek Priesthood by Peter, James and John, the building of temples, the ordinances and endowments for the living and for the dead, received in them; the preaching of the Gospel to all the world, the gathering of Israel; and all the varied labors of the Latter-day Saints in order to establish a veritable kingdom of God on the earth, and to prepare for the coming of our Savior in his glory, are the direct results of the personal labors and inspired teachings of Joseph Smith, Jun.

He stands forth, pre-eminently, as the Divinely inspired prophetic leader of the "Dispensation of the fulness of times;" as God's agent for the "Restitution of all things spoken by all holy prophets since the world began." As the great fulfiller of numerous prophecies of both the ancient Jewish and Nephite prophets, as recorded in the Bible and Book of Mormon; as the great prophet of the nineteenth century, and the fulfiller of his own prophecies, showing that he was Divinely inspired to both prophesy and to fulfil.

See a pamphlet by O. Pratt, entitled, "Divine Authority, or, was Joseph Smith sent of God."

A pamphlet entitled, "A Public Discussion, between J. Taylor and C. W. Cleeve, J. Robertson and P. Cater."

"Joseph Smith's Prophetic Calling," Mil. Star, Vol. 42, pages 164, 187, 195, 227.

Epistle of D. W. Patten, History of J. Smith, July 31, 1838.

O. Spencer's Letters to Rev. Wm. Crowel, No. 1.
