Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

PRE-EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS.

In the first chapter of Genesis, we have an account of six days, or periods of time, which God occupied in the creation of this earth. According to the traditions of many centuries, it is considered by the Christian world a history of the creation of this earth, as it appears now, naturally to men who dwell upon it.

From the first and second chapters of Genesis, taken together, this view of the subject is evidently erroneous. In the first verse of the second chapter we read; "Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them." This creation is evidently in a very unfinished condition, for myriads of animal and vegetable life are coming upon it and going to decay.

The sacred writings not only testify that it is in a very imperfect condition, but that it must pass away and be changed into a more perfect earth.

In the second and third verses of the second chapter, we learn that there was a period of time called the seventh day, and that the Lord sanctified it as a day of rest. If there has ever been a period of time in which this earth, or its inhabitants, have had universal peace and rest, since the progenitors of the race partook of the forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden, we have no account of it. "These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens;" verse 4. This passage certainly states, that everything had been completed in the period of time stated in the previous account. Verse five very plainly states, in connection with the previous verse, that every plant of the field was created, "Before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew." During all this long period of time it had not rained upon the earth. What is still more singular, it says, "And there was not a man to till the ground."

This Mosaic history of the creation was written for men in their present temporal condition, and it is evident that these two verses give us to understand, that these things had not taken place naturally upon the earth, as they do now. As a sequence, when they did take place, they would indicate a great change in the condition of the earth. The first indication of this change is given in the sixth verse, "There went up a mist from the earth and watered the whole face of the ground."

Before the event mentioned in the seventh verse, the earth must have been fitted up for the abode of man, in this his natural or temporal condition. "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life." That is, the ground furnished the elements for the growth of the body of this first temporal man, from its first conception, or germ, until it matured into perfect manhood by a universal law

It should be noticed, that, in the first chapter, verse 27, it says, "God created man." That is he organized from the spiritual elements, the living, acting spiritual man. In the seventh verse of the second chapter, it only states that he formed man out of the ground. That is out of earthly elements he formed a tabernacle, a dwelling place for the man whom he had before created. The prophet Joseph Smith, in his translation of the Mosaic account of creation, fills up this gap, which is so evident in the Bible Genesis, between the seventh day of rest, and the formation of man from the dust of the ground.

"For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth; neither in the water, neither in the air; but I, the Lord God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground. And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were before created; but, spiritually, were they created and made according to my word;" P. of G. P. page 6.

This account of the creation, plainly sets forth the comprehensive fact, that all temporal organizations, pertaining to this earth, are animated by spiritual pre-existent organizations. The following is a very comprehensive passage on this subject: "When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel," Deut. 32. 8. This passage certainly refers to a very early period, when the heritage of the nations was given in proportion to the numbers of Israel. It is difficult to conceive how their numbers were then known unless there was a spiritual Israel, of which the temporal is but the counterpart.

The sacred writings abound with evidences that Jesus Christ controlled the earth and ministered to man, as an organized spiritual intelligence before he came in the flesh in the meridian of time. The first chapter of John is very pointed on this subject: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;" verse 1. "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us;" verse 14.

Bible.

Num. 16. 22 the God of the spirits of all flesh. Chap. 27. 16.

Job 12. 10 in whose hand is the soul of every living thing.

Eccl. 12. 7 the spirit shall return to God who gave it.

Jer. 1. 5 before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee.

John 6. 62 if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before.

28 I came forth from the Father. 30.

Heb 1. 6 when he bringeth the First Begotten into the world.

Rev. 12. 7-12 the devil and his angels cast out of heaven.

Book of Mormon.

1 Nephi 13. 33- 37 many sayings of the Lamb of God, concerning the future of Israel, repeated to Nephi by an angel—600 B. C.

2 Nephi 6. 18 know that I, the Lord, am thy Savior and Redeemer

7 but there is a God, and he is Christ.

Mos. 3. 5 the Lord omnipotent shall come down from heaven among men.

8 he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Creator of all things from the beginning.

Hel. 14. 12 Jesus Christ the Father of heaven and earth. Chap. 16. 18.

3 Nephi 1. 12-14 this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world.

Ether 2. 12 if they will serve Christ, who is the God of the land.

Doctrine and Cobenants.

Sec. 10. 57 I came to my own and they received me not.

24 by him, of him, through him, the worlds were made.

See Sermon by O. Pratt, J. of D., Vol, 14, page 233

" " " " " 15, " 241
