Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

PASSOVER OR SACRAMENT.

"This word (passover) comes from the Hebrew verb, pasach, which signifies to pass, to leap, or skip over. They gave the name of Passover to the feast which was established in commemoration of the coming forth out of Egypt, because the night before their departure, the destroying angel, who slew the first-born of the Egyptians, passed over the Israelites, because they were marked with the blood of the lamb which was killed the evening before; and which for this reason was called the Paschal Lamb;" Cruden's Con.

We have an account of the institution of the Passover in the twelth chapter of Exodus. The Lord commanded Israel, saying, "And the day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever:" verse 14. This command rather implies that there might be a change in the manner and time of keeping this passover, by the house of Israel. The essential part of it is that it shall be kept by a feast forever.

That the passover, as instituted the evening before the departure of Israel out of Egypt, was typical of the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, appears to be the generally received opinion of all who have faith in the Bible and its institutions. It is evident that the apostle Paul entertained this view of the subject when he made the following assertion, "For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us;" 1 Cor. 5. 7.

That our Savior considered the ordinance of the passover a part of the Mosaic law which was to be done away in his sufferings and death, is evident from the wish, which he expressed to his disciples, while keeping the passover with them the evening before his death, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer;" Luke 22. 15. The type was no longer needed and the ordinance was changed to commemorate the great sacrifice he was about to make. Hence, he commanded his disciples to partake of the bread and wine in remembrance of him.

We cannot do better than to insert here, verbatim, the account of the first administration of the sacrament among the Nephites, by our Savior. "And it came to pass that Jesus commanded his disciples that they should bring forth some bread and wine unto him. And while they were gone for bread and wine, he commanded the multitude that they should sit themselves down upon the earth."

"And when the disciples had come with bread and wine, he took of the bread, and brake and blessed it; and he gave unto the disciples, and commanded that they should eat. And when they had eat, and were filled, he commanded that they should give unto the multitude. And when the multitude had eaten and were filled, he said unto the disciples, behold there shall one be ordained among you, and to him will I give power that he shall break bread, and bless it, and give it unto the people of my church, unto all those who shall believe and be baptized in my name.

"And this shall ye always observe to do, even as I have done, even as I have broken bread, and blessed it, and gave it unto you. And this shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have shewn unto you. And it shall be a testimony unto the Father, that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me, ye shall have my Spirit to be with you.

"And it came to pass that when he said these words, he commanded his disciples that they should take of the wine of the cup, and drink of it, and that they should also give unto the multitude, that they might drink of it. And it came to pass that they did so, and did drink of it, and were filled; and they gave unto the multitude, and they did drink, and they were filled. And when the disciples had done this Jesus said unto them, Blessed are ye for this thing which ye have done, for this is fulfilling my commandment, and this doth witness unto the Father that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded you. And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me, ye shall have my Spirit to be with you. And I give unto you a commandment that ye shall do these things. And if ye shall always do these things, blessed are ye, for ye are built upon my rock;" 3 Nephi 18. 1-12.

Bible.

Lev. 23. 5 the fourteenth day of the first month is the Lord's passover.

Num. 9. 5 they kept the passover at even. Josh. 5. 10.

Deut. 16. 2 place the Lord should choose, Israel was to sacrifice the passover. 5.

2 Kings 23. 22 not holden such a passover from the days of the Judges.

2 Chron. 35. 1-19 a description of the solemn passover of Josiah.

Ezra 6. 19, 20 the children of the captivity kept the passover.

Ezek. 45. 21 ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven days.

Matt. 26. 17-29 Christ kept the passover, with his disciples, the evening before his death. Mark 14. 12-25. Luke 22. 8-38.

Luke 24. 30, 31 Christ made himself known to his disciples by the breaking of bread.

John 2. 13 and the Jews' passover was at hand.

Acts 2. 46 they continued daily in breaking bread. 20. 7.

1 Cor. 11. 23-30 the same night in which he was betrayed took bread.

Heb. 11. 28 through faith he kept the passover.

Book of Mormon.

3 Nephi 18. 27-30 none to eat and drink unworthily.

Moroni 4. 5 the manner of administering the sacrament.

Doctrine and Cobenants.

Sec. 20. 75 expedient that the church meet together oft, to partake of bread and wine.

77-79 the form of administering the sacrament.

See Sermon by Jos. F. Smith, J. of D., Vol. 15, page 324.

Article by J. G. B., Mil. Star, Vol. 34, page 520.
