Franklin D. Richards, James A. Little, Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel ( 1857)

CHURCH CHRONOLOGY.

This Compendium being designed for the elucidation of theo logical rather than of historical subjects, we have only given the dates of a few important events in the development of the great latter-day work.

1805.—Joseph Smith, Jun., was born on the 23d of December, in Sharon, Windsor Co., Vermont.

1820.—Early in the Spring, Joseph Smith, Jun., had his first vision.

1823.—September 21; Joseph Smith, Jun., had his second vision, in which the existence of the Plates of the Book of Mormon was revealed to him. The following day he opened the place where the Plates were deposited, and saw them.

1827.—September 22. Joseph Smith, Jun., obtained the Plates of the Book of Mormon, the Urim and Thummim, and Breastplate.

1828.—February; Martin Harris showed some of the characters transcribed from the Plates, and the translation of them to Professor Anthon and Dr. Mitchell, of New York.

1829.—May 15; Joseph Smith, Jun., and O. Cowdery were ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood, by John the Baptist, and were baptized by each other.

1830.—April 6. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, Elders were ordained, the Sacrament was administered, and, for the first time in the Church, hands were laid on for the reception of the Holy Ghost.

June 1. The Church held its first Conference, in Fayette, Seneca County, New York. In October the first missionaries to the Lamanites were appointed.

1831.—January. Joseph Smith, Jun., moved to Kirtland, Ohio where he arrived about the first of February.

August 2. The land of Zion was consecrated and dedicated by prayer for the gathering of the Saints.

August 4. The first Conference of the Church in the land of Zion was held.

1832.—April 26. Joseph Smith, Jun., was acknowledged President of the High Priesthood, at a General Council of the Church.

May 1. At a Council held at Independence, it was decided to publish the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

June. The first periodical, "The Evening and Morning Star," was published by the Church in Independence.

1833.—February 2. Joseph Smith, Jun., completed the translation of the New Testament.

March 18. The Quorum of High Priests was first organized in Kirtland.

July 2. Joseph Smith, Jun., finished the translation of the Bible.

July 23. The corner stones of the Lord's house in Kirtland were laid.

September 11. It was decided to publish a paper in Kirtland, entitled "The Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate." Bishop Edward Partridge was acknowledged head of the Church in Zion.

December 18. Joseph Smith, Sen., was ordained Patriarch.

1834.—February 17. A First Presidency of three and a High Council of twelve were first organized.

May 3. At a Conference of Elders in Kirtland, the Church was first named "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

May 5. Zion's Camp left Kirtland for Missouri.

1835.—February 28. The organization of the Quorums of Seventies commenced.

May 3. The Twelve left Kirtland on their first mission.

July. In the early part of this month the rolls of Egyptian papyrus, which contained the writings of Abraham and Joseph in Egypt, were obtained.

August 17. At a general assembly at Kirtland, the Book of Doctrine and Covenants was accepted as a rule of faith and practice

1836.—January 21. The authorities of the Church attended to the ordinances of anointing and blessing each other in the Kirtland Temple.

March 27. The House of the Lord in Kirtland was dedicated.

April 3. In the House of the Lord in Kirtland, the Savior. Moses, Elias and Elijah appeared to Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery.

1837.—June. In this month Heber C. Kimball, O. Hyde and W. Richards were set apart for a mission to England. This was the first foreign mission of the Church.

July 1. The mission for England sailed from New York on the ship Garrick.

July 20. The English mission landed in Liverpool, England.

July 30. The first baptism in England, by divine authority took place in the River Ribble.

August 4. The first confirmation of members in the Church took place in England, in Walkerfold, Chaidgley.

September 27. Joseph Smith, Jun., left Kirtland to visit the Saints in Missouri and establish gathering places. He arrived in Far West about the last of October, or first of November.

December 10. About this time Joseph Smith, Jun., arrived in Kirtland from Missouri.

December 25. The first Conference of the Latter-day Saints in England was held in the Cock Pit, Preston. During this month a somewhat extensive apostacy took place in Kirtland.

1838.—March 14. Joseph Smith, Jun., and family arrived at Far West.

July 6. 515 Saints left Kirtland for Missouri.

October 27. Governor Boggs' exterminating order was issued.

October 30. The massacre at Haun's Mill took place,

October 31. Joseph Smith, Jun., and others were betrayed by G. M. Hinckle.

November 1. Joseph Smith, Jun., and others condemned to be shot. Far West plundered.

1839.—February 14. Brigham Young fled from Far West to Illinois.

April 15. Joseph Smith, Jun., and his companions in bonds, left Davies for Broome County, and on their way made their escape from the guard.

April 26 The Saints commenced evacuating Far West.

April 22. Joseph Smith, Jun., arrived in Quincy, Illinois.

June 11. The first house was put up by the Saints in Commerce, afterward named Nauvoo.

September 18. Elder Brigham Young, accompanied by H. C. Kimball, left Nauvoo on his first mission to England.

October 29. Joseph Smith, Jun., and others left Nauvoo for Washington, D.C., as delegates from the Church to the general government.

November 28. Joseph Smith, Jun., arrived in Washington.

1840—March 4. Joseph Smith, Jun., arrived in Nauvoo from Washington.

1840.—April 15. Elder O. Hyde left Commerce, on his mission to Jerusalem.

May 27. The first number of "The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star" was published at Manchester, England.

June 6. The first company of emigrating Saints, from Europe, sailed from Liverpool for New York.

July 20. The company of Saints who left Liverpool in June arrived in New York.

About the first of this month, the first English edition of the Latter-day Saints' Hymn Book was published.

September 14. Joseph Smith, Sen., died in Nauvoo.

December 16. The charter of the city of Nauvoo became a law.

1841.—January. During this month the first English edition of the Book of Mormon was published.

November 8. The Baptismal Font in the Nauvoo Temple was dedicated.

1842.—December 7. Elder O. Hyde returned from his mission to Jerusalem.

1844.—June 27. Joseph and Hyrum Smith were assassinated in Carthage jail.

1845.—September 24. The authorities of the Church made a treaty with the mob, to evacuate Nauvoo the following spring

1846.—February. In the beginning of this month, the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo commenced.

May 16. The Pioneer camp of the Saints arrived at Mount Pisgah. Iowa Territory.

June. A call was made, by the general government, for the Mormon Battalion.

September 10, 11, 12. Battles took place between the citizens of Nauvoo and the mob.

September 16. The Trustees of the Church, in Nauvoo, made a treaty with the mob for the surrender of the city, and its immediate evacuation by the remnant of the Saints.

1847.—April 14. The Pioneers left Winter Quarters for the Rocky Mountains.

July 24. The Pioneers entered Great Salt Lake Valley.

December 23. The Twelve sent forth an epistle to the Saints to recommence the gathering.

1848.—May. Presidents B. Young and Heber C. Kimball left Winter Quarters, the second time, for Great Salt Lake Valley.

September 20. Presidents B. Young and H. C. Kimball arrived, the second time, in Great Salt Lake Valley.

November 19. The Nauvoo Temple was burned.

1849.—October 6. The organization of the P. E. Fund Company was commenced.

1850.—June 14. The first missionaries to Scandinavia landed in Copenhagen, Denmark.

June 15. The first number of the "Deseret News" was published.

August 12. The first baptisms in Denmark, by legal authority, in this dispensation, took place.

September 9. The "Act" for organizing the Territory of Utah became a law.

October 13. The first company of P. E. Fund emigrants arrived in Salt Lake City, from the United States.

December 7. The first branch of the Church, in France, was organized at Paris.

1851.—January 9. Salt Lake City was incorporated.

January 13. The first settlers of Iron County, U. T., arrived on Centre Creek, near where the city of Parowan now stands.

1852.—August 29. The revelation on the law of Celestial Marriage was first made public.

September 3. The first company of P. E. Fund emigrants from Europe arrived in Utah.

December 13. The Legislative Assembly of Utah Territory met, for the first time.

1853.—January 25. Elders O. Spencer and J. Houtz, missionaries, arrived in Berlin, Prussia, and were banished from there on the second of February following.

February 14. The Temple Block in Salt Lake City was consecrated.

March 7. The first missionaries to Gibraltar arrived there.

November 1. The first number of the "Journal of Discourses" was published in England.

1854.—May 23. Patriarch John Smith died.

June 28. John Smith, son of Hyrum Smith, was appointed Patriarch over the Church.

1855.—May 5. The Endowment House in Salt Lake City was dedicated.

October. A branch of the Church was organized in Dresden, Germany.

During this year grasshoppers and drouth caused a great failure of crops in Utah.

October 29. The First Presidency of the Church, in their Gen eral Epistle, proposed, for the Saints who should emigrate by the P. E. Fund, to cross the plains with handcarts.

1856.—During this year the practice of paying tithing was generally introduced among the Saints in Europe. During the winter and spring there was a great scarcity of food in Utah, and many domestic animals perished.

September 26. The first company of Saints, who crossed the plains with handcarts, arrived.

1857.—April 23. A company of about seventy missionary elders left Salt Lake City to cross the plains with handcarts.

July 11. A. Cumming, of Georgia, was appointed governor of Utah.

July 23. Messrs. J. Stoddard and A. O. Smoot arrived from Independence without the mails, the postmaster there having received orders not to forward them. They brought the news that General Harney, with over 2000 men, was ordered to Utah

Near the close of the year, the U. S. army, under General Johnson, took possession of Fort Bridger.

1858.—March 21. The citizens of Utah, living north of Utah County, agreed to abandon their homes and move south. This was deemed advisable as a defensive measure.

In the meantime Col. Thos. L. Kane had arrived in Salt Lake City, via California, for the purpose of bringing about a peaceful solution of the difficulties between the U. S. and Utah.

April 19. Gov. Cumming and Col. Kane visited the Utah library, where they were shown the records and seal of the U. S. court, which was said to have been destroyed.

June 7. Messrs. Powell and McCullough, sent out as peace commissioners, by the general government, arrived in Salt Lake City.

June 26. The "Army of Utah," under Col. Johnson, passed through Salt Lake City and camped on the west side of the river Jordan.

June 30. The people who had moved south began to return to their homes.

October 28. Jacob Hamblin, with eleven men, left Southern Utah to open intercourse with the Indians on the east side of the river Colorado.

1861.—April 23. Two hundred wagons, with four yoke of cattle each, carrying 15,000 pounds of flour, started for the Missouri river, to bring the poor of the Saints to Utah.

October 18. President B. Young sent the first message over the overland wire to the U. S.

October 24. The first telegram was sent to San Francisco. In the autumn of this year a large colony of Saints was sent to southern Utah.

1862.—October 24. Camp Douglas, near Salt Lake City, was located by Col. P. E. Connor.

1863.—Col. P. E. Connor defeated a band of the Shoshone Indians near Bear river.

March 3. Great mass meeting held in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, to protest against the infamous course of U. S. officials.

1864.—April 10. Moves were made for building a telegraph line in Utah.

1866.—January 1. The first number of the "Juvenile Instructor" was issued in Salt Lake City.

1867.—The Deseret Telegraph Company was organized.

1868.—June 19.—Ground was broken in Weber Canyon, on the U. P. Railroad.

October 16. Co-operative Mercantile Institution was organized. B. Young. president.

March 8.—U. S. Land Office opened in Salt Lake City.

March 15. A company was partially organized for building a railroad between Ogden and Salt Lake City.

May 9. The last rail was laid connecting the U. P. and C. P. railroads, thus completing the first railroad across the continent.

May 17. The first ground was broken for the Utah Central Railroad.

June 25. The first company of Latter-day Saint emigrants reached Ogden, per U. P. R. R.

December 24. In the evening street lamps were first used in Salt Lake City.

1870.—January 10. The last rail of the Utah Central Railroad was laid.

January 13. General mass meeting of the ladies of Salt Lake City, to protest against the passage of the Cullom bill.

February 12. "An act conferring the elective franchise upon women," became a law of Utah Territory.

April 27, An abandoned child was left at the door of Mrs The first circumstance of the kind known in Salt Lake City.

August 12. A discussion commenced, in Salt Lake City, between Professor O. Pratt and Dr. J. P. Newman, chaplain of the U. S. Senate. Question, "Does the Bible sanction polygamy?"

September 15. Gov. J. W. Shafer issued a proclamation, forbidding the assembly of the militia of Utah Territory for any purpose except by his orders.

1871.—May 1. Ground was first broken for the Utah Southern Railroad.

June 30. Acting-Governor of Utah, George A. Black, issued a proclamation forbidding any of the militia of the Territory to assemble for the purpose of celebrating the ninety-fifth anniversary of American Independence.

October 10. President B. Young was arrested by U. S. Marshal on an indictment founded on a charge of "lascivious cohabitation."

1872.—June 1. The first number of the "Woman's Exponent' was issued in Salt Lake City.

September 3 Ground was dedicated and broken for the Salt Lake City water works.

October 14. President G. A. Smith and others left Salt Lake City on their Palestine tour.

1873.—February 24. President Smith and party arrived in Jerusalem.

June 18. President Smith arrived in Salt Lake City.
