Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Preface

In Salt Lake City, on Temple Square, is a visitors' center with a beautiful oval staircase leading to an upper room. There the universe is depicted on a domed ceiling, which hovers over a magnificent replica of Thorvaldson's sculpture of the Savior, The Christus.

Many visitors to Temple Square are amazed at the reverence Mormons have for Jesus Christ and at their overwhelming gratitude for his sacrifice. Some have been led to believe that Mormons are not Christians but rather are members of a sect not related to Christianity. To Mormons, this is astonishing and perplexing. From the Church's beginnings, the role of Jesus Christ has been central. The stated purpose of the Church is "to invite all to come unto Christ." Even the official name of the Church is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In fact, Mormons believe their religion to be a restoration (not a reformation) of the church established anciently by the Savior himself. But because of controversy and considerable misinformation, many people believe that Mormons are not Christians, in spite of the fact that much readily available and easily understandable information explains otherwise.

Mormons are devout Christians who believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God who came to earth to atone for the sins of all people so that, through faith in him, we might someday return to the presence of God. In fact we, as Mormons, believe in God the Eternal Father, in his Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost—the Spirit sent from God to earth to testify of Christ.

The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ

The term Mormon is a nickname derived from the Book of Mormon, a historical and religious account of early inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere. The Book of Mormon is one of the most widely disseminated books in history. It is available in every country and in almost every library. Its purpose, as stated on its title page, is "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." By reading the Book of Mormon, you will learn of prophets in the Western Hemisphere who knew of the mission of the Savior. They prophesied of Christ, ultimately knew the resurrected Christ, and promised you and me that if we will prayerfully read their record, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truthfulness of it unto us by the power of the Holy Ghost. That is a magnificent promise!

The Book of Mormon is, as its subtitle proclaims, "Another Testament of Jesus Christ." Those who prayerfully read it can gain profound knowledge of the Son of God and his mission. The book is written to people of every faith. It is my hope that by reading it, you will come to understand why Mormons send 50,000 missionaries all over the world to tell about Christ and his gospel.

Latter-day Saints also believe in three other books of scripture: the Bible, the Doctrine and Covenants (a collection of revelations referred to in this book as the D&C), and the Pearl of Great Price (a collection of religious and historical records).

The Purpose of This Book

My own mother converted to Mormonism from Methodism some sixty years ago. She recently passed away at eighty-nine years of age. After she read the manuscript for this book, Mom said, "Orrin, if only I had had the benefit of this book when I was studying the gospel, I wouldn't have taken so much time to join the Church."

Mom was a great student of the scriptures. In addition, although she had no more than eight years of formal education, she was one of the brightest and most inquisitive people I have ever known. She was highly self-educated and, up to the day she died in 1995, she was a voracious reader of the scriptures. Her example is a principal reason I love the scriptures so much.

This book is not intended to be an exhaustive treatise on the gospel of Jesus Christ. Yet it discusses the most basic and important gospel principles. In these principles can be found the answers to three fundamental questions of life: Where did we come from? Why are we here? Where are we going? Those answers alone make this book worthwhile.

Many other important concepts are discussed, including the doctrine of the Godhead, the apostasy following the death of the Savior's apostles, the restoration of the gospel in our day, the true organization of Christ's church, why prophets are necessary today, the Book of Mormon, the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, what happens to those who have never heard the gospel while on the earth, and what happens to us and our families in the life hereafter. The answers to these questions and problems can play a significant role in strengthening ourselves, our families, our communities, and our country.

I hope that as you read this book, you will do so humbly, praying for help from our Father in Heaven. If you will, I know he will help you understand these important doctrines and principles.

The Importance of Personal Prayer

In the Russell Building in Washington, D.C., every senator's office has a bathroom right off the private office. Mine has a little closet cubbyhole before the bathroom. Before I begin my work each day, I kneel in that closet and ask for God's help. I get to the office very early, because this time spent praying for extra help is extremely important to me. I seldom miss this opportunity to petition our Father in Heaven. When I fail to show this deference to God, usually because of tense pressures or meetings before I get to my private office, I don't seem to have the same blessings or results. I consider prayer one of the most important things I can do before beginning these stressful days as a senator.

Throughout each day, I find myself communicating with our Father in Heaven and thanking him for the help he always seems to give when I am in tune with his Spirit. I also spend plenty of time asking him for help.

I am no better than anyone else. Like many in important positions, I know the value of prayer and reliance on a higher power. The good things that happen I always attribute to our Father in Heaven. And each night before retiring to bed, I kneel with my wife, Elaine. At the times when I feel the least close to God, I make it a point to stop and communicate with him.

The joy of understanding the doctrines explained in this brief book will be exciting to you. To ensure that you gain the fullest joy from it, please humble yourself; live Christ's teachings (see John 7:16-17); get on your knees and fervently pray to God for a witness that these scriptural doctrines are true. If you do these things, you will feel the influence of the Holy Ghost, and your spiritual eyes will see the deeper meanings of the doctrines discussed.

One of the exciting messages of this book is that God has raised up modern-day prophets to help us in this complex world. Harold B. Lee, one of these latter-day prophets, once said, "If you want the blessing, don't just kneel down and pray about it. Prepare yourselves in every conceivable way you can in order to make yourselves worthy to receive the blessings you seek." (Stand Ye in Holy Places [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], p. 244.)

Reading this book can prepare you to understand the Lord's work. As you read, pray constantly for help from God that the truth will be revealed to you.

Do not be afraid. God loves you. He listens to the prayers of every humble man, woman, and child.

How do you pray? There is no right or wrong way—but here are some guidelines that may be helpful.

We can learn a lot from our children. They are without guile. I remember one of my own children praying like this: "Dear Heavenly Father. I love my mother and father. Thank you for them. Please bless them and me, in the name of Jesus, amen." In the child's own simple way, the basic steps for good prayer were outlined. Please allow me to make some suggestions so you will feel comfortable with your own prayers, both private and public.

Always address our Father in Heaven at the beginning of your prayer—"Our Father in Heaven," "Dear Heavenly Father," "Dear God," or something similar.

Take time to thank God for your blessings: "We thank thee."

God expects us to ask him for needed further blessings: "We ask thee."

End each prayer "In the name of Jesus Christ, amen."

In summary:

We address our Heavenly Father.

We thank him for our blessings.

We ask for blessings we need.

We end our prayer in the name of Christ.

It is that simple. Once you know these four simple steps, you can pray with confidence anytime, anywhere.

One further thing. It is good to use thee, thou, and similar language when speaking with our Father in Heaven. Doing so shows proper respect and reverence.

With these simple instructions, you are prepared to talk with your Father in Heaven. Do so. He won't let you down: "When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." (Matthew 6:6.)

"As truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you." (Numbers 14:28.)
