Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

PART 1

Where Did We Come From?

Chapter 1

Our Life before Birth

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The soul that rises with us, our life's star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home.

—Wordsworth

Many years ago, while serving a mission for my church, I met a wonderful woman in Ohio who had been diligently praying for answers to life's great questions. One day, while sitting in church, she saw a spiritual messenger who showed her two keys. One key was bronze and the other was silver. The messenger asked her which key she desired. She told him, "Silver, because it stands for redemption." The messenger looked pleased with her answer.

That evening she was sitting in her humble home, reading her church literature, when the same messenger appeared, this time with two coins. Again, one was bronze and the other was silver. When he asked which coin she would take, she gave the same answer. He again looked pleased, and he told her to "cling to the little black book" that would be given her, and she would find the answers to her prayers.

The very next day, my missionary companion and I knocked on her door, taught her a lesson on the gospel, and gave her a copy of the Book of Mormon, which at that time was bound in black.

That first day, she felt that she knew us, even though she had never met us before in this life. She was amazed at her feelings toward us, and when we taught her the gospel plan, she understood why.

How many times have we met people whom we seem to know but can't remember having met before? Isn't that a strange feeling? Probably all of us have had that experience. Why do we have it? I believe it is because we have met, long ago before we were born.

The Premortal Existence of the Human Race

Paul wrote to the Hebrews, "Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." (Hebrews 2:11.) Jesus Christ, of course, is the one who sanctifies, and we who become Christians are the ones who are sanctified. Therefore, Christ is not ashamed to call us his brothers and sisters. But what is the "one" that we are all of? The New International Version of the Bible makes it clear: "Both the one who makes men holy and those who are made holy are of the same family." That is why Jesus calls us his brothers and sisters.

Revelation 3:14 calls Jesus "the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God." If he was the beginning of God's creation, then God must have created others after him.

Paul calls the Savior "the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature." (Colossians 1:15.) Paul also calls Jesus "the firstborn among many brethren." (Romans 8:29.) If Jesus is the firstborn, others must have been born after him, his "brethren" (and sisters).

Since Jesus is the beginning of God's creation, the Firstborn among many brothers (and sisters), and since he identifies those brothers and sisters as us, we must conclude that we, too, are the children of our Heavenly Father.

The Bible teaches these truths in many other places. For example, when Mary went to embrace the Lord after his resurrection, he said to her, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God and your God." (John 20:17.) Similarly, the Savior began the Lord's Prayer with the words "Our Father which art in heaven." (Matthew 6:9.)

Consider Numbers 16:22: "They fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?"

In John 3:13 the Savior taught, "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven." The main point here is that Christ came down from heaven, but neither he nor any of us could return unless we first "came down from heaven." Therefore, we must have been in heaven with our spiritual Father, God, in a premortal existence.

An interesting extension of that argument is found in Ecclesiastes 12:7 (speaking of death): "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." How can we return to a place we have not been? Put another way, how could we return to the God who gave us life if we had not been with him before the world was created?

Paul wrote in Hebrews 12:9, "We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits and live?" Surely God is the Father of our spirits.

Jeremiah wrote, "The word of the Lord came unto me saying, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." (Jeremiah 1:4-5.) How much clearer could it be? How could Jeremiah have been known and preordained by God before he was conceived by his mother? If Jeremiah was ordained a prophet before the world was created, was he there alone, or were we there with him?

On one occasion, Jesus "saw a man which was blind from his birth. And his disciples asked him saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him." (John 9:1-3.) When could the man have sinned if he was "blind from his birth?" The disciples knew of the premortal, spiritual existence where he might have sinned. Otherwise, they would not have asked that question.

Paul, on Mars Hill, preached to the men of Athens who worshiped at a statue dedicated to the "unknown god." He told them that they were superstitious and that he would tell them about the real God: "Whom . . . ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you." (Acts 17:23.) Paul did so, ending his discourse with these words: "As certain . . . of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device." (Verses 28-29.)

We can also learn much from the penetrating questions God asked his servant Job: "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding. Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:4-7.)

Have we met before? I believe we have. Where did we come from? We came from God. We lived with him as brothers and sisters before we were born into this mortal existence. Jesus Christ is our Elder Brother. Our Heavenly Father loves us and cares about us. He cares about you. You are one of his children.
