Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 3

The Antiquity of the Gospel

The scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed.

—Galatians 3:8

I once met a highly educated person who claimed to be agnostic. He said that Christ was a plagiarist because he had borrowed philosophical and moral thoughts from other religions or philosophical systems. He cited the Dead Sea Scrolls as evidence that baptisms were performed before the time of Christ. In addition, he referred to early Buddhist teachings as further evidence that Christ stole his ideas from the past.

The Old Testament chronicles the time from the Creation until approximately 400 B.C. Many Christians love the Old Testament yet feel that the New Testament is the only doctrinal guide necessary for their salvation. Many feel that Christianity began in A.D. 30 when Christ started his ministry in the Holy Land. But what kind of a God would have left generations without any knowledge of his gospel or of his Son, the premortal Jehovah of the Old Testament, the Jesus Christ of the New Testament?

Most Christians believe that the gospel did not reach the earth until Christ brought it during his ministry in the meridian of time (A.D. 30-34). As a result, some have been troubled by the arguments of agnostics who claim that some of the greatest philosophical tenets articulated by Christ and adopted by Christianity were taught on the earth before the advent of Jesus.

For instance, the Buddhists taught a golden rule, "Do as ye would be done by," approximately seven hundred years before Christ came to earth. Did Christ borrow that from the Buddhists?

The Dead Sea Scrolls, written by the Essenes, who predated Christ, show that the Essenes practiced baptism similar to the one John the Baptist practiced when he baptized Jesus. The Essenes also practiced other Christian tenets long before Christ came to the earth.

Consequently, some agnostic critics have accused Christ of plagiarism. Was Christ a plagiarist? Not according to the New Testament. The New Testament confirms that the gospel has been on the earth from the beginning.

The Gospel was Preached Anciently

In Galatians 3:8, speaking about father Abraham in the Old Testament, Paul says, "The scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed." In other words, Abraham knew of the gospel centuries before Christ came to the earth.

In Hebrews 11:24-26 we learn, "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward."

Paul tells us that Moses esteemed the "reproach of Christ" centuries before Christ ever came to the earth. The "reproach of Christ" was Christ's gospel.

Consider 1 Corinthians 10:1-4: "I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that rock was Christ." What were the "spiritual meat" and "spiritual drink" spoken of in these verses? These metaphors refer to the gospel of Jesus Christ. If Moses and the Israelites ate the spiritual meat and drank the spiritual drink, they must have known the gospel many centuries before Christ came to earth. These early prophets were taught the gospel through revelation from Jehovah, much as the apostles were taught the gospel by Christ during his mortal ministry.

In Hebrews 4:2, Paul continues his explanation that the gospel was preached to Moses and the Israelites many centuries before Christ: "Unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it."

Yes, the gospel was preached to the people at the time of Moses. But they didn't accept it or profit from it as they should have. Christ's gospel has been on the earth from the beginning. As explained in the next chapter, he was Jehovah of the Old Testament, and he did speak to the people of that age. He did not leave them without his teachings. Christ was not a plagiarist.

A verse in the Book of Mormon explains these biblical scriptures and enlightens us about the antiquity of the gospel. The Book of Mormon prophet Alma, seventy-six years before the birth of Christ, said, "The Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true." (Alma 29:8.)

Alma makes clear that the Lord may have given some of his gospel to many nations. If that is so, the Buddhists could have borrowed from Christ's teachings.

All these scriptures explain that Christ was not a plagiarist but rather was the one who revealed the gospel from the beginning. Some of the other nations may have aspects of the gospel in their traditions, writings, and beliefs. Perhaps this explains some of the philosophical similarities between Christianity and other religions.

Perhaps if we had all the missing books of scripture mentioned in the Bible, we would have a greater awareness of the spreading of the gospel of Christ from the beginning. There are many scriptures that refer to books of the Bible that have been lost over the years. (See Exodus 24:7; Numbers 21:14; Joshua 10:13; 1 Samuel 10:25; 1 Kings 11:41; 1 Chronicles 29:29; 2 Chronicles 9:29; 12:15; 20:34; 26:21; 33:19; 1 Corinthians 5:9; Ephesians 3:3; Colossians 4:16; Jude 1:3; 1:14.)
