Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 4

Christ and the Old Testament

Other books were given for our information. The Bible was given for our transformation.

—Anonymous

My mother constantly taught me Bible stories out of the Old Testament. I will forever be grateful for our times together, for her counsel, instructions, and testimony of the truthfulness of the Bible. I was twenty years old when I first read the Old Testament from the beginning to the end. Numbers and Leviticus were difficult, but the rest of the Old Testament had a profound impact on me, not only through its beautiful, exemplary stories but also through the doctrines and moral teachings it so elegantly conveys.

As I grew older and had the opportunity to become a more serious student of the Old Testament, I began to realize how profound it is. It is the premier presage for the coming of Christ in the meridian of time and for his later second coming in what Paul referred to as the dispensation of the fulness of times. (Ephesians 1:9-10.)

Many people don't realize that references to Christ and his teachings are found throughout the Old Testament. Christ said in the New Testament, "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.) To what was he referring? The New Testament had not yet been written, so the scriptures to which he referred had to be the Old Testament. Christ made it abundantly clear how important the Old Testament is in testifying of him.

Christ Is Jehovah

In fact, the Jehovah of the Old Testament is our Savior, the Jesus Christ of the New Testament. This can clearly be seen by comparing these verses from the Old and New Testaments. Old Testament passages are on the left; New Testament, on the right.

In Psalm 22:16-18, Jehovah prophesied the Crucifixion. Compare Matthew 27:35, which describes the death of Jesus.

"Dogs have encompassed me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet. I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me. They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.""They crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots." (See also Mark 15:24; Luke 23:33; John 19:23)

In Zechariah 12:10, Jehovah again prophesied the crucifixion. Compare John 19:34-37, where the prophecy is fulfilled.

"I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced.""One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side . . . that the scripture should be fulfilled. . . . They shall look on him whom they pierced."

In Exodus 3:13-14, Jehovah identified himself as "I AM." In John 8:58, Jesus used the same words to refer to himself.

"I AM THAT I AM: . . . Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you."Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am."

In Psalm 41:9 Jehovah prophesied betrayal. In Acts 1:16-18 Paul explained the treachery of Judas.

"Mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.""Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which was the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry. Now this man purchased a field with the reward if iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out."

In Isaiah 12:2, Isaiah called Jehovah "my salvation." In Acts 4:12, Paul explained the source of salvation. He was clearly speaking about Jesus of Nazareth.

"God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation.""Niether is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under ehaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

In Isaiah 45:23, Jehovah explains that all will give him allegiance. Paul wrote in Philippians 2:10-11 that all would acknowledge Jesus as the Savior.

"I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.""At the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth; and things under the earth: and . . . every tongue . . . confess that Jesus Christ is Lord."

In Deuteronomy 32:3-4, Jehovah is described. Then in 1 Corinthians 10:1-4, Paul makes clear that the Rock mentioned in Deuteronomy is Christ.

"I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are a judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.""[The children of Israel] drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ."

Note also Isaiah 26:19: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise." Is Jehovah not speaking here of his future resurrection as Jesus the Christ?

I have selected only a few scriptures on this subject, but clearly the Jehovah of the Old Testament was none other than the premortal Jesus Christ.
