Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

PART 2

Why Are We Here?

Chapter 5

The Fall and the Atonement

Adam ate the apple, and our teeth still ache.

—Hungarian proverb

Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

—Acts 2:21

Why was the gospel preached from the beginning? Why was it necessary for the Savior to come? Because we are born into a fallen world—the result of the transgression of Adam and Eve.

Many churches teach that Adam brought sin into the world by committing sexual transgression with Eve in the Garden of Eden. They say that brought us all into this world as "born in sin." Nothing could be farther from the truth.

In fact, Adam and Eve, our first parents, furthered the work of God in providing the means for us to have our experience in mortality. The teachings of the churches of today arise from a misunderstanding of the scriptures.

The True Nature of the Fall

If Adam had not fallen, he and Eve would have remained in a state of innocence and could not have had children while in the Garden of Eden. The Book of Mormon is especially helpful in explaining this.

In 2 Nephi 2:22-23, the Book of Mormon prophet Lehi speaks of Adam and Eve's premortal state: "If Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end. And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin."

One of the great latter-day apostles, James E. Talmage, in his seminal work Jesus the Christ, discusses this: "The fall was a natural process, resulting through the incorporation into the bodies of our first parents of the things that came from food unfit, through the violation of the command of God regarding what they should eat. Don't go around whispering that the fall consisted in the mother of the race losing her chastity and her virtue. It is not true; the human race is not born of fornication." ([Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1915], p. 30.)

Adam and Eve were given two commandments by God:

These commandments were mutually exclusive. To keep one, they had to break the other. To multiply and replenish the earth, they had to partake of the forbidden fruit. That brought about a transformation in their bodies. It changed them from immortal but imperfect beings to mortal beings capable of conceiving children.

According to Talmage, the fall occurred because Adam and Eve ate food that was unfit for their immortal bodies (the forbidden fruit), which brought about a change that made them mortal and thus subject to death. Remember, we shouted for joy in the premortal existence at the possibility of coming to earth, obtaining a body, and becoming more like our Father in Heaven. (Job 38:4-7.) Adam and Eve had to partake of the forbidden fruit for these things to happen. They are our first parents and have provided us the means of coming to earth to "work out our own salvation with fear and trembling." (Philippians 2:12.)

The human race was not born of fornication. Adam and Eve were not immoral. United in marriage by God, this noble couple chose to bring us into the world. Now, outside the presence of God, we have the opportunity to choose for ourselves whether or not to live God's teachings.

Adam made a conscious choice to be the father of the human race. Adam was not deceived. Eve was beguiled by Satan. (1 Timothy 2:14.) Nevertheless, she did a good thing in partaking of the forbidden fruit. Who can criticize our first mother and father for providing us the opportunity to come into this world?

As a result of Adam and Eve's transgression and the resultant "fall," physical death came upon all people. And, in the sense that we are moved outside the presence of our Father in Heaven (Adam and Eve were banished from the Garden of Eden), spiritual death, or banishment from the presence of God, was the result.

Therefore we needed a Savior to atone for our sins, bring about the resurrection, and return us to the presence of God. Christ's sacrifice made it possible for us to overcome death of both body and spirit. Because of this sacrifice or atonement, we can repent, be forgiven, be strengthened by the Holy Ghost, be spiritually healed, and find peace.

The Atonement of Jesus Christ

Christ's sacrifice was voluntary. He said, "My Father love[s] me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father." (John 10:17-18.)

Again in Matthew 26:53, Christ reaffirmed his power: "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?"

In Hebrews 1:1-3 Paul tells us, "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." Christ's atoning sacrifice can purge us of our sins.

In Hebrews 2:9 Paul says, "Jesus . . . was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man."

In Hebrews 5:9, Christ is called the "author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him."

In 1 Peter 1:18-20, the atonement is described in the following words: "Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you."

Leviticus 17:11 explains that the sacrificial death of Christ was prefigured by the altar sacrifices under the law of Moses of the Old Testament.

The quintessential illustration of the expected atoning sacrifice of the Father and the Son is in Genesis 22. Abraham was told by the Lord, "Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of." (Verse 2.) Abraham, with perfect faith, took his only son, Isaac, "stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son. And the Angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me." (Verses 10-12.)

This was a representation or type of the sacrifice provided by our Father in Heaven. He gave his only begotten son as a sacrifice for all of us—yes, the lamb without blemish and without spot; the firstling of the flock. (1 Peter 1:19-20.)

I have always wondered how Abraham could have tolerated even contemplating sacrificing his son. One of the reasons he was commanded to leave Ur of the Chaldees was because the people of that area were practicing human sacrifice. How could he have proceeded to sacrifice his son without protesting to God about this command? This seemingly blind obedience has bothered many students of the scriptures. But the following scriptures give us explanations.

In James 2:21-23,James asked, "Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect? And the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the Friend of God." So, Abraham, as a prophet of God, had implicit faith in God and in God's commandments to him.

In Hebrews 11:17-19, a grand explanation is given: "By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be called: Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure."

Abraham's faith was called perfect because he believed that God would raise Isaac up even if he had to sacrifice Isaac as a burnt offering on Moriah. Abraham, in his faithful, innocent understanding of Christ's foreordained work, knew there would be a resurrection. He knew that God would not abandon him. Yet, the analogy between Isaac, the only begotten son of Abraham and Sarah, and Christ, the only begotten Son of God in the flesh, was dramatic and a type or symbol for the ages.

In John 3:16-17,John shows the importance of God's love for us: "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved."

In 1 John 4:9, again God's love is expressed: "In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him."

In Romans 3:25, Christ's atonement is critically mentioned: "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God."

In John 11:25-26, Christ himself explained that he had to suffer and then rise from the dead the third day. He said, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."

In 1 Corinthians 15:20-22, Christ's resurrection is explained: "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (See also Acts 26:23.)

Thus Christ's atonement is universally beneficial. All will be made alive and benefit from the resurrection. In other words, we will all be resurrected with perfect bodies of flesh and bones, just like those of God and Christ. And, if we have exercised faith in Christ to the end, we will live forevermore with him and his Father. Thus we will have progressed from a spirit state to a mortal state and finally to an immortal, resurrected state.

In John 5:28-29 we read, "Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (See also Acts 24:15.)

Remember Romans 5:12-18, which explains that the "free gift," the "gift of grace [the resurrection]" shall come "upon all men unto justification of life." This is so even though "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." (Romans 3:23.)

We Must Overcome Our Sins

All people sin and fall short of the glory of God, and "the wages of sin is death." (Romans 6:23.) All people are subject to physical death and, insofar as we are removed from the presence of God, we suffer a temporary spiritual death. Christ, through his death and resurrection, unconditionally overcame the effects of Adam's sin. Christ is the firstfruits of them that slept. He ushered in the resurrection for all. In other words, Christ was the first to be resurrected and, because of him and his great atoning sacrifice, we too shall have the fruits of the resurrection. (1 Corinthians 15:20-22.)

We can overcome our sins, but only on condition that we repent, exercising our faith in Christ. If we do so, Christ's atoning sacrifice for us will absolve our sins and allow us once again to enter God's presence.

The doctrine of the Atonement represents the core of the gospel. The reasons Jesus could make the atoning sacrifice for us are:

Modern Revelation on Christ's Sacrifice

The Book of Mormon is a great source of knowledge of Christ's atoning sacrifice for us.

In 2 Nephi 9:21, the Prophet Jacob stated of Christ: "He cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam. And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day."

We know that God has called prophets in these latter days. Some of their revelations are helpful in understanding the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith, "I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; but if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup and shrink." (D&C 19:15-18.)

Again the Lord said, "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God; for, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance. And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth! Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people. And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D&C 18:10-16.)

The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob expanded the doctrine of the Atonement further: "It behooveth the great Creator that he suffereth himself to become subject unto man in the flesh, and die for all men, that all men might become subject unto him. For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord. Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more. O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more. And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness. O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit." (2 Nephi 9:5-10.)

Had it not been for Jesus Christ and his atoning sacrifice, we would still be cut off from the presence of God. We would not be looking forward to the resurrection. We would have remained in a state of nonprogression, being subject to the devil's wiles. We would be shut out from the presence of God—miserable, with no hope. Through the atonement of Christ, we are enabled to continually progress on the pathway to salvation and thus escape death, hell, and the grasp of Satan.

Again, in 2 Nephi 9:23-27,Jacob proclaims of the Lord: "He commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. And if they will not repent and believe in his name, and be baptized in his name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, has spoken it. Wherefore, he has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him. For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death and hell, and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment; and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of Israel. But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state!"

In 2 Nephi 2:25-29, the Prophet Lehi instructs us: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given. Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself. And now, my sons, I would that ye should look to the great Mediator, and hearken unto his great commandments; and be faithful unto his words, and choose eternal life, according to the will of his Holy Spirit; and not choose eternal death, according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that he may reign over you in his own kingdom."

The Prophet Amulek, in Alma 34:13-15, explains the atonement in beautiful terms: "It is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice, and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away. And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal. And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance."

Through latter-day revelation, we are able to know more about Christ. We thus are able to more fully understand his atoning sacrifice. The Book of Mormon is particularly specific about what a Christian is. Virtually every page of that book testifies of Christ.

The atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ brought full power to repent of our sins. It is frightening to imagine a future without an ability to have "faith unto repentance." If we could not repent of our sins, we would be living lives of degradation, being dragged down each day by our sins. But the atonement of Jesus Christ brings us hope and salvation.
