Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 6

The Nature of Mortality

There is consolation in the assurance that whatever becomes of this husk of a planet, the inner meaning of it, hope itself, God, man's ideal, continually progresses and develops.

—William Faulkner

Free will, though it makes evil possible, is also the only thing that makes possible any love or goodness or joy worth having.

—C. S. Lewis

Many people see no reason for our life on earth. They decry the hardship, travail, sickness, murder, crime, mental illness, war, rumors of war, and various indignities suffered by humanity. They ask: "What is the purpose of life? Why must we go through this experience with all of its ups and downs? Is there real meaning to this existence? Who are we?"

Many years ago, my missionary companion and I were teaching the gospel to a woman who had become, in essence, a recluse. She lived with her brother in a small house in the center of town, and she never left their home.

This woman raised parakeets. Entering her home was an interesting experience, because hundreds of birds were flying free inside.

Somehow, as frightened as this woman was by the outside world, she did allow us to enter her home. There, for many months, we taught her the gospel of Jesus Christ. She was extremely nervous each time we visited her, but she forced herself to listen and talk with us.

Gradually she came to love the gospel, and she diligently studied everything we gave her to read. In time, she could express her belief that the gospel teachings were true. Yet she would never attend church or ask for baptism.

Finally, I asked her why she was not willing to go to church and be baptized. Her response was devastating for her and for us.

She responded, "Elder Hatch, I'm not worthy of Christ's church. You once told me there were two unforgivable sins."

I responded, "Yes, blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, as described in Matthew 12:31, and murder wherein innocent blood is shed. I know that your testimony of Christ is not yet strong enough that you could commit blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. I'm also sure, as sensitive as you are, that you have not killed another human being."

She sighed and said, "Don't be so sure of the latter."

She told us of her marriage to a brutal husband who had abused her. She had become pregnant and, while bedridden, had suffered through a difficult pregnancy.

This woman loved birds. To hurt her, the vicious husband would bring birds home to the bedroom, break their wings, and leave them to flap around on the floor. Then he would let the cat in to kill them in front of his bedridden and sensitive wife. The trauma to this kind woman was emotionally debilitating. She had even felt that she was going out of her mind.

She had begun to hate her husband, and she certainly hadn't wanted to have his child. Then one day he had suggested a way out of their undesirable marriage—he had suggested she have an abortion. She had been so emotionally and physically ill that she had gone through with it. From that day on, she had lived with the dreaded feeling that she could never be forgiven for what she had done.

We carefully explained that, while God frowns on abortion on demand, he does grant us the gift of repentance so we can be forgiven of our sinful acts, including abortion. (See 3 Nephi 30:2.) She was so relieved. She cried tears of joy at God's kindness to her. She had repented for years and now felt that God could forgive her.

I seized the opportunity to tell her that we would pick her up for church the next Sunday. Before she could protest, we left her front porch. As we left, she shook like an autumn leaf about to fall.

My companion berated me all the way back to our apartment. He was afraid that on Sunday we would walk the two miles to her home in the snowy weather and she would not be ready to go. I told him to have faith.

When we arrived the next Sunday morning, she was a nervous wreck but was ready to go with us. At church she was so nervous that the uneven, four-legged chair she sat on in the humble church meetingplace rattled throughout the meeting.

After the meeting I promised her that if she would exert faith and regularly attend church, all of her nervousness and fears would leave her within a year. The next year was difficult for her, but she was faithful. By the end of the year, all of her fears were gone, and she became an active member of the faith and one of the great genealogists of the Church.

Shortly after I left my mission, my wife, Elaine, and I were visiting Brigham Young University when this woman came to Utah and attended the general conference of the Church with eight thousand other people in the Mormon Tabernacle. She was amazingly calm, and I was excited to see the fulfillment of my earlier promise. She was finally at peace with herself, her community, and the world. She had fully embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ and found the purpose of her life.

We lived as spirit children of God before this world was created. We shouted for joy at the opportunity of coming to earth. We knew it would be beneficial for us to have this earthly experience. We can progress here, if we will, through our beliefs and our actions. (See Job 38:4-7.)

Lucifer and His Angels

Lucifer, or Satan, also was a spirit son of God. But, with his followers—other children of God—he rebelled against our Heavenly Father and was cast out from his presence. Because of that, he will not have the opportunity to obtain a body of flesh and bones and become more like God. Nor will he have the opportunity to live again in God's presence.

Isaiah 14:12-15 states: "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most high. Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit."

The Apostle Peter confirms this in 2 Peter 2:4: "God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment."

This is also mentioned in Jude 1:6: "The angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day." By the "first estate," the Bible means our premortal existence.

We who live on earth were supporters of God. We kept our first estate and were therefore qualified to come here, outside the presence of God, where we can make a freewill choice to accept or reject his gospel. Satan and his followers, however, rebelled against this plan. In fact, there was a war in heaven in which the righteous spirit sons and daughters of God fought against Satan and his angels.

In Revelation 12:7-9 we read: "There was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him."

Satan and his angels will never have the opportunity to gain physical bodies and become more like God. They will always remain spirits. They would like bodies but will never enjoy the privilege of having them.

In Matthew 8:28-32, we read that Christ came into the country of the Gergesenes and met two men possessed with devils. The men came out of the tombs, "exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way." The evil spirits immediately recognized Jesus as the Son of God and "cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?" These spirits wanted bodies so much that they "besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine. And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters."

People who think all they must do to be saved is believe in Jesus Christ need to consider this story. The evil spirits believed in Jesus. In fact, they knew he was the Christ. But they were permanently cast out of the presence of God. Thus we see that belief—mere intellectual assent—is not enough for salvation, for even "the devils . . . believe, and tremble." (James 2:19.)

Those who really believe will live Christ's gospel and endure to the end in his service. (Matthew 10:22.)

Reasons for Our Life on Earth

In the premortal war in heaven, we followed God and his eldest Son, Jesus Christ, and we "shouted for joy" (Job 38:7) at the opportunity of coming to earth.

There were two reasons we did these things:

Keep in mind that a veil has been drawn over our minds. We cannot look back and see the great plans in which we participated before the world was created. If we could, this life would not be a freewill test to see whether we will live worthy to be with God forever.

Mortal Bodies

God sent us to earth and gave us bodies of flesh and bones for a divine purpose. This earthly existence gives us the opportunity to work out our salvation with fear and trembling. In gaining bodies of flesh and bones, we are in an eternal process of becoming more like our Father in Heaven.

Ultimately, our bodies will be resurrected like Christ's. (1 Corinthians 15:20-22.) Our bodies are important in God's and in our eyes. Shouldn't we, therefore, keep them clean and unspotted from the world?

Since Christ was resurrected with his body of flesh and bones (Luke 24:36-39), we also will be resurrected with our bodies of flesh and bones. Perhaps that is why Paul, in 1 Corinthians 3:16-17, said, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."

One reason we should not take unclean things into our bodies is because God has compared them to his temple. He wants us to keep them clean from the sins of this world. We must live the rules of health so that we can keep our bodies clean and so we will not be tempted to do the things of the world. How we treat our physical bodies is important. We must keep our temples of God holy and pure by living moral and spiritual laws, as well as the physical laws of health. Through a latter-day revelation called the Word of Wisdom, we are prohibited from drinking alcohol, abusing drugs, using tobacco, drinking tea or coffee, or partaking of anything debilitating to our bodies, minds, and souls. Modern doctors also advocate such wise health concepts.

Even so, we are given our agency to do what we want. But we will naturally pay the price for doing what is not God's will.

Moral Agency

In this day of moral relativism and political correctness, many have difficulty discerning between right and wrong. True religion helps us understand the difference and aids us in our moral choices.

We have had our agency from the beginning. Even Adam and Eve were given the right to choose: "The Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." (Genesis 2:16-17.) And in Deuteronomy 11:26-28 we read, "I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; a blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day: and a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known." (See also Deuteronomy 30:15-19.) We also read, "Choose you this day whom ye will serve; . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Joshua 24:15; see also 1 Kings 18:21; Jonah 1-4; Galatians 6:7-8.)

God's plan of salvation provides us the freedom to choose what we will be and how we will live. We are given this freedom as a test in making our own choices outside the presence of God. Now we are here, to "work out our own salvation with fear and trembling." (Philippians 2:12.) If we do so, following God in word and deed, the day will come when we will return to his presence.
