Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 7

Commandments We Are to Live

He who thinks to reach God by running away from the world, when and where does he expect to meet Him?

—Tagore

To help us return to his presence and teach us how we are to live, God has given us the holy scriptures. The scriptures are a guide to certain gospel laws God expects us to live. If we do so, we will have the privilege of living with him forever. It is up to us. We make the choice by the way we live after we receive the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Law of Moses

Although Christ came to fulfill the law of Moses, he did not ignore the importance of the Old Testament laws, for he said, "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." (Matthew 5:17-18.)

Paul explained in Galatians 3:24-27, "The law was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ." These statements show that the law of Moses was a preparatory law to bring us to Christ—to prepare us for Christ.

In response to the Pharisee's question, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Christ said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:36-39.)

In John 13:34, Christ said, "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another."

In John 14:15, he said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments."

What were the commandments to which Christ was referring?

The Ten Commandments

We begin with the Ten Commandments listed in Exodus 20:3-17. Remember, the Lord wrote, with his own finger, the Ten Commandments on tablets of stone. (Exodus 31:18.) These Ten Commandments represent the basic laws of God, from which come almost all other civil and religious laws. The Ten Commandments form the basis for all ethical human conduct.

Commandment 1: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Exodus 20:3.)

Some people worship politics, wealth, sports, sex, and many other things as their gods. But we cannot afford to place any worldly endeavor or objects above or in place of the true God. We are to worship only the true God who was earlier described in this book. According to Christ, he must be our first priority, above all else: "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Matthew 10:37.) Christ further explained, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness." (Matthew 6:33.) I believe that Clarke's Bible Commentary, 1:402-3, states this principle well: "This commandment prohibits every species of mental idolatry, and all inordinate attachment to earthly and sensible things. . . . God is the foundation of happiness, and no intelligent creature can be happy but through him. . . . The very first commandment of the whole series is divinely calculated to prevent man's misery and promote his happiness, by taking him off from all false dependence, and leading him to God himself, the fountain of all good."

Commandment 2: "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them." (Exodus 20:4-5.)

Many "gods" have been worshiped by mankind—from gods of metal to gods of wood, fabric, chrome, and stone. Modern idols range from businesses to automobiles, clothes, homes, pleasure boats, and numerous other material things. Also, immaterial things like titles, degrees, and worldly honors may constitute idols. We all know people who worship sports, activities, power, prestige, and money.

Regardless of what we desire and admire, we must place God first—above all material or immaterial things, goals, pursuits, activities, or feelings. We must continually work at this; yet, the longer we live, the more we realize that the most important matters center on what God has asked us to do, not on the transitory winnings of the world.

Commandment 3: "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." (Exodus 20:7.)

This commandment has two main aspects: (1) an implication that God's children are expected to have reverence for him and his name, and (2) an integral part of the gospel consisting of oaths and covenants with God.

How many of us have heard others use God's name in vain for emphasis or dramatic effect, or out of frustration, anger, or habit? All false oaths are prohibited by this commandment. Common swearing and using God's name in vain, including all light and irreverent uses of God's name, are forbidden. How can we approach God in prayer after having desecrated his name? Reverence and profanity are inconsistent and incompatible. When we accept baptism, we enter into a covenant with God to take Christ's name upon ourselves. We agree to abide by God's laws in part because he remits our sins.

This commandment also means we should not speak lightly of God or use his name in frivolous ways. He will not hold us guiltless if we do these things.

Commandment 4: "Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy." (Exodus 20:8.)

Here we are commanded to work six days and rest the seventh. This commandment promotes both work and worship. The seventh day is to be set aside to worship God. The Hebrew word Shabbat, from which we get the word Sabbath, means "rest" or "the cessation of labor." The Sabbath began with the creation of the world, wherein the Lord worked for six days and then rested from his labor.

The Sabbath is so important that in Old Testament times, breaking the Sabbath was punishable by death. (See Rushdoony, Institutes of Biblical Law, p. 137.) The Sabbath was so important in pre-Christian times that the Lord called it "a sign between me and you." (Exodus 31:13.)

In ancient Israel, observing the Sabbath applied to servants (employees), family members, and animals. Even the land was subject to the Sabbath and was given rest every seventh year. (Exodus 20:10; Leviticus 25:2-7.)

Commandment 5: "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Exodus 20:12.)

The family rises to the forefront in this commandment. When parents are God-fearing people and live in righteousness, generally children honor and revere them. What about unrighteous parents? One might honor them by living exemplary lives. In Ephesians 6:1 we read, "Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right." The next verse says, "Honour thy father and mother."

To obey one's parents means to obey them in righteousness. We, by our own lives, can honor our parents, whether or not they deserve that honor.

Commandment 6: "Thou shalt not kill." (Exodus 20:13.)

The sin of murder, or the willful destruction of human life, is one of the most serious crimes against God's law. By taking another's life, the murderer takes away another person's opportunity to "work out . . . salvation with fear and trembling." (Philippians 2:12.)

What about killing in war? The Lord understands our obligations to uphold the sovereignty of our nation and to fight against evil and the aggressions of others. We must "render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's." (Matthew 22:21.) The very implications of that statement are rife with philosophical contradictions. We must give obedience to sovereign laws, but we also have the obligation to keep the laws of God, which take precedence. That is most difficult. There were many Christians fighting on all sides during World War II, as well as in most other wars. Naturally, we have to wonder about Christians who carried out the genocidal orders of Hitler and others, which were contrary to this commandment.

Commandment 7: "Thou shalt not commit adultery." (Exodus 20:14.)

Women and men have the power of choice and, with this right, can exercise their impulses for righteous or evil actions. We have always possessed the right of choice. Yet, we need to understand that there are right choices and wrong choices. As the spirit children of God, we have an obligation to make the right choices.

Satan and his minions exercised their right of choice in the premortal existence and rebelled against God's wishes. We exercised ours to come to earth and complete this part of our progression, outside the presence of God but with his influence through the scriptures, the prophets, and inspiration.

God expects us to sanctify the marriage covenant and to honor each other by not committing adultery. The covenant of marriage is a sacred institution given women and men so they can reproduce and give other spirits the opportunity to come to the earth. Christ was very explicit on this subject. (Matthew 5:28.)

Christ extended this law to fornication as well. (Matthew 15:19.) In 1 Corinthians 6:9 the Lord said, "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind."

Adultery is one of the most serious sins because the institution of marriage and family is sacred in the eyes of God. Adultery is considered second only to murder. Sexual intimacy is to be reserved for marriage partners. To breach the solemn obligation to remain true to one's marriage partner is a heinous sin. Adultery splits couples apart, causes children to be raised by only one parent, debilitates the family, spreads disease, and results in the breakdown of civilized society.

Moral fidelity, before and after marriage, exalts the marriage compact, elevates the relationship between man and woman, strengthens the family relationship, and strengthens the community. We believe it is essential to a spiritual relationship with God.

Again, as Paul wrote in Galatians 5:19-21: "The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God."

Adultery consists of stealing another's virtue. In the case of adultery, we cannot give back that person's lost virtue. It is easy to see why adultery and murder are such heinous sins in the eyes of God. No matter how hard we try, we cannot give back another person's life or virtue.

I know of a number of instances where fathers have committed incest with their daughters. It is difficult to understand how that could happen, but it has. In each case, the daughter suffered severe anxiety and emotional difficulties. In a real sense, the daughter's sense of well-being has been stolen by this offensive conduct. It is extremely difficult for these young women ever to feel right again. Their virtue has been stolen under the worst of circumstances—no fault of their own. Their fathers will pay the spiritual price.

Commandment 8: "Thou shalt not steal." (Exodus 20:15.)

This commandment consists of only four words but is profound because it covers many aspects of moral life. Stealing can exist in a great variety of circumstances, not just in taking another's property. The Lord condemns all thievery and dishonesty in the simple command "Thou shalt not steal." Whether it is in the form of shoplifting or of misusing food stamps, it is wrong.

Commandment 9: "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor." (Exodus 20:16.)

This commandment is broken time and time again. It seems not as significant as the commandments forbidding murder, adultery, and stealing, but it is just as important. All it takes to bear false witness is to disseminate false rumors, speculations, insinuations, distortions, or misrepresentations. Murder takes a human life and thus prevents someone from fulfilling his or her destiny on earth. But bearing false witness chips away at a person's character. To ruin another's reputation is also a serious offense.

Commandment 10: "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's." (Exodus 20:17.)

All the other commandments can be broken through the sin of coveting. If we covet material things, we can make them our gods and, in essence, bow down before them. A covetor can be crude, curse, take God's name in vain, desecrate the Sabbath, fail to support his mother and father in need, kill to get gain, lust after a neighbor's wife or husband, steal, and bear false witness to obtain gain. Almost all these commandments are tied together, and breaking one may amount to the breaking of others.

Certainly, we can have the desire to improve our circumstances through honest ambition. We can admire our neighbor's possessions. But we have the obligation to work for good things through honest and lawful means.

Paul once equated coveting with idolatry. In Ephesians 5:5 he said, "No whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God." (See also Colossians 3:5.) If we covet worldly things so much that our allegiance to God and his principles diminishes or vanishes, then we are worshiping material things above God. Then we are idolaters.

In 1 Samuel 15:23, the Prophet Samuel advised King Saul that sin and iniquity amounted to idolatry.

All aspects of moral behavior are covered by the Ten Commandments, which are enduring rules of conduct for us all. All prophets have taught these commandments. I believe they existed even before the world began.

Jesus said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:37-39.) These two great commandments embrace every one of the Ten Commandments.

The Ten Commandments lay the foundation for Christian belief. Mormons subscribe fully to them.

The Ten Commandments are basically negative commandments. Eight out of the ten tell what we should not do rather than what we should do. The Ten Commandments are broad, general principles. In the preface to the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20:2), the Lord said, "I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage." In spite of their negative tone, living the Ten Commandments can keep us free from spiritual and physical bondage.

Paul said the law was "our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ." (Galatians 3:24.) He was referring to the Mosaic law, a broad list of rules and laws to which the children of Israel became subject. When Christ came to earth, he fulfilled the law, and his Christian teachings became the higher law to the Mosaic lower laws of performances and obligations as described in Exodus and Leviticus. Therefore, we are no longer subject to all of the rigid rules, ordinances, and performances required of ancient Israel. But we must study Christ's admonitions to us and, in the process, live Christian lives.

If we live the Ten Commandments, we are doing much to progress back into the presence of God. But as important as the Ten Commandments are, keeping them is only part of what we must do to inherit the kingdom of God.
