Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 8

Faith

Faith is the antiseptic of the soul.

—Walt Whitman

Since we are here on the earth to progress, gain a body, and become more like our Father in Heaven, what steps must we take to go back into his presence? First, we must have faith in God. Faith is the first principle of the gospel; it must be obtained through trust and confidence in a higher being and his plan of salvation as articulated in his scriptures.

We must have faith in God in order to make the right decisions in life. Paul said, "Faith is the substance [that is, confidence] of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.) He also said, "Without faith it is impossible to please [God]: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." (Hebrews 11:6.) Paul further stated: "By faith Noah . . . prepared an ark to the saving of his house"; "By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac"; "By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau"; "By faith Jacob . . . worshiped, leaning upon the top of his staff"; "By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of Israel"; "By faith [Moses] forsook Egypt"; "By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land"; and "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days." (Verses 7-30.)

Paul said in Romans 10:17, "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God."

In Romans 1:16-17 Paul wrote: "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith."

In 2 Corinthians 5:7 he said, "We walk by faith, not by sight."

Jesus stated in Matthew 21:21: "If ye have faith, and doubt not, . . . if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done."

Is Belief Enough to Satisfy the Requisites of Salvation?

Many Christians define faith as simply accepting Jesus as our personal Savior. If we do this, they say, full and complete salvation is assured. They are convinced that mere belief qualifies us to be saved in the kingdom of God. That is a misinterpretation of the scriptures.

For instance, Paul says in Acts 16:30-31 that if we believe on Jesus Christ, we will be saved. Yet later in the same chapter, he makes it clear that baptism is a prerequisite for salvation when the jailer and his whole family are baptized.

John 3:16 says, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." Many interpret this to mean that mere belief is enough to assure salvation in the kingdom of God.

Yet this scriptural interpretation is clarified earlier in John 3:3-5: "Jesus answered and said unto [Nicodemus], Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." These verses make it clear that we must do more than merely believe. We must be baptized both of water and of the Spirit.

Will Only a Select Few Be Saved by Grace Only?

Ephesians 2:8-10 is often cited to show that we are "saved by grace alone" and not by our works. Some have even taught that only a select few are predetermined to be "saved by grace." However, we must look at all of Paul's writings to fully understand what is meant by these scriptures in Ephesians.

In Ephesians 2:8-10 Paul states: "By grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them."

The founder of the Lutheran Church, Martin Luther, interpreted Ephesians 2:8-10 to mean that man is "justified by faith" only.

Calvin, one of the founders of the Presbyterian Church, interpreted these scriptures to mean that only a select few will be saved in the kingdom of God—those to whom God arbitrarily gives his grace.

Really, are only a few of us to be arbitrarily saved by grace?

Paul, the author of the epistle to the Ephesians, clarifies this concept earlier in the Bible in Romans 5:12-18. There he states: "As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: . . . But not as the offence, so also is the free gift. For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. . . . Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life." Note that the language of "grace," "gift of God," "the free gift," "grace of God," and "gift by grace" are the same in Paul's writings in both Ephesians and Romans. Yet Romans makes it clear that this free gift, this gift by grace, not only "aboundeth to many" but is upon "all men." This gift of grace of Jesus Christ will be received by everyone. Not everyone will be saved, so this must not mean salvation in the kingdom of God.

1 Corinthians 15:20-22 establishes what this free gift to all people is: "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."

Clearly, when Paul talked about the grace of Christ or the free gift Christ is going to give to all of us, he was talking about the resurrection. That is the only free gift given to all who come to the earth.

That gift comes because of the grace of Jesus Christ and the atoning sacrifice he made for us. Christ and our Father want us, as resurrected beings, to come back into their presence. However, although we will all have the free gift of resurrection, we must still "work out our own salvation with fear and trembling" (Philippians 2:12) in order to live with our Father (be ultimately saved) for eternity.

There are many other things we must do in mortality in addition to believing. Faith is more than mere belief. Faith is an active belief that motivates us to live the gospel of Jesus Christ.

James 2:14-20 states: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?"

Faith and belief are different. Belief is passive—a person may believe something but not be motivated to do something about that belief. Faith is dynamic. It compels us to do something about our belief.

A farmer may believe that if he plants corn, it will grow and be capable of harvest. But if he never actually plants it, he will reap nothing, no matter how sincere his belief. However, if he has faith in the harvest, he will not only believe but will actually plant his corn and then harvest it.

Faith is an active belief. Faith impels us to action. Faith motivates us to live Christ's gospel—to do what is right. One of the great thinkers and scholars in the Mormon Church was James E. Talmage, a modern member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, who defined faith as "vivified, vitalized, living belief." (Articles of Faith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984], p. 88.)

Some teach that if we merely believe, we will be saved in the kingdom of God. Furthermore, they say that once we are saved, we will go to heaven regardless of what else we may do here on the earth. That surely is not so. Mere belief is not enough.

In Galatians 5:19-21, Paul gives us a litany of things that will keep us out of the kingdom of heaven regardless of how "saved" we think we are: "The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God."

Christ gave us explicit directions about how to know if his doctrine is true: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:16-17.) He also said, "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 7:21.)

In Mark 9:17-29 is the story of a father with a son who could not speak. The father brought his son to Christ. According to the father's description of the son's "dumb spirit" "he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth," he "pineth away." Before the Savior, "he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming." The father said that "ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters, to destroy him." The father finally exclaimed, "If thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us." Christ said, "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth." The humble and believing father cried out, "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." The father was destitute of faith yet terrified of skepticism. Christ then charged the dumb spirit to come out of the boy, rending the boy "sore" to the extent they thought he was dead. "But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose." Christ's disciples wondered why they, having been ordained by Christ, could not cast out this dumb spirit. Christ's simple answer was, "This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting." It took more than the disciples' belief. It took real faith engendered by "prayer and fasting."

Another example is in Matthew 9:20-22 see also Mark5:25-34 and Luke 8:43-48), where "a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind [Jesus], and touched the hem of his garment: for she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour." In Mark's account (Mark 5:30), "Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?" The disciples were amazed he would ask such a question, since he was surrounded by a multitude and many were touching his clothes. However, the Lord recognized the woman's faith and responded to it.

He will do the same for us if we exercise faith in him by believing and living his teachings.

The Power of Faith

A good friend shared with me the story of David Hunter Perkins, a Cary Grant look-alike dry farmer who raised thoroughbred horses in the small southeastern Idaho town of Montpelier.

Dave, as his friends called him, took great pride in showing his city-reared grandchildren the simple joys of the Bear Lake County Fair. Their small hands grasping Grandpa's strong ones, they cherished the annual outing. One particular year, they talked Grandpa into spending a nickel for a handful of colorful balloons tied securely to wooden sticks.

In the evening beside the overgrown rhubarb in his backyard, Dave masterfully crafted bows and arrows from the sticks. It was time that Mike, age six, and Jo, age four, learned the sport of archery. Dave's safety instructions were explicit, so he had no concern when Mike headed into the house to teach Jo how to shoot.

But as quickly as Mike shot the sharp arrow into the bedroom closet, Jo moved to retrieve it, and the arrow penetrated Jo's eye.

Not knowing what else to do, Jo's parents wrapped their tiny daughter in a blanket. Mom held her in the back seat of the car, and Dad headed for Salt Lake City, where an ophthalmologist met them at St. Mark's Hospital.

His diagnosis was devastating. The eye could not be saved. Plans were set for the doctor to remove it the following day.

Jo's parents, devout members of the Church, would not accept the prognosis. They immediately got in contact with a Mormon in the hospital, and within the hour two young elders and Jo's dad placed their hands upon Jo's head. In their blessing they promised in faith that the eye would be saved.

The following morning the doctor removed the patch and exclaimed that he had witnessed a miracle. No surgery would be required.

We all exercise faith daily. We get out of bed, eat our food, go to work, play with our friends and family, attend church, and live by various principles. We would not do these things if we had no faith in them.

The Apostle James defines faith as being made perfect by works. He cites a truism: "Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?" (James 2:19-20.)

As you will recall, in Matthew 8:28-32 Christ came into the country of the Gergesenes, where he met "two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way." The evil spirits cried out: "What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?" They knew Jesus was the Christ. They recognized him. They believed in him. They wanted bodies so badly that they beseeched him to cast them into the bodies of a herd of swine. Christ simply said, "Go," and "they went into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters."

We can learn much from this story. Remember, a third of the hosts of heaven refused to follow God and Christ and were "cast out" with Lucifer the Son of the Morning. They will never have the privilege of obtaining bodies of flesh and bones so as to become like our Father in Heaven and the resurrected Christ. Here, they wanted bodies so badly that they would even have accepted the bodies of pigs. Even so, when they were cast into the swine, their nature took over, and they destroyed the swine, something they would do to us if we made ourselves vulnerable to them. These confessions of the evil spirits that Jesus was the Christ, the Messiah, showed they had actual knowledge and belief. Yet, their knowledge did not bring about a transformation of their evil natures. Thus, knowledge alone may be of no use at all. As James E. Talmage said, "Knowledge is to wisdom what belief is to faith, one an abstract principle, the other a living application. Not possession, but the proper use of knowledge constitutes wisdom." (Articles of Faith, p. 90.)

Christ fervently recognized faith: "They brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee." (Matthew 9:2.) What a revelation—"thy sins be forgiven thee." This is one of the few instances showing that faith is so powerful that even sins can be forgiven through it.

Paul emphasized faith as one of three essential aspects of gospel belief: faith, hope, and charity. (1 Corinthians 13.) He placed all three in the highest category of gospel observance, even though he said that charity—love—is the greatest of the three.

If we wilfully sin, wantonly do wrong, we will not have the sincerity to have faith or pray effectively. Our prayers will not be sincere. Our "faith" will be without the appropriate works, and therefore shallow.

Paul said there is "one Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Ephesians 4:5.) Today, we have many interpretations of what the "Lord" is and what "faith" is, and we have at least eight different forms of "Christian" baptisms. In fact, there are more than eight hundred different Christian churches, all teaching their own doctrines, differing from each other, and, in many cases, contradicting each other. Most claim to be the one true church of Christ. We feel blessed because, through revelation from Christ, we have been given the opportunity to learn the true gospel of Jesus Christ and are led and counseled by those holding the priesthood of God.

The Apostle James stated: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed." (James 1:5-6.)

We can pray for faith by asking "in faith." Faith is the gift of God to us, and God will not hesitate to strengthen our faith if we do the things he has commanded.
