Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 9

Repentance

He who has committed a sin and has repented, is freed from that sin, but he is purified only by the resolution of ceasing to sin and thinking "I will do so no more."

—Code of Manu (between 1200 and 500 B.C.)

Sometimes we do not do the things God has commanded. All of us sin from time to time. That is why one of the greatest principles of Christianity is the principle of repentance. Without the opportunity for forgiveness, we would all be in a constant state of depression. There would be no hope. Certainly I work at repentance all the time. We all should. I have many failings and, realizing that God will forgive and accept me, it is worth the effort to overcome these personal failings.

A few years ago, when I served as a bishop in my church, a man came to me in total depression over sins he had committed. He had been unfaithful to his wife and family. He felt there was no hope for him and was about to commit suicide. He was thrilled when I explained to him that the Lord understands our difficulties and has provided a means for us to repent. I told him, "You must have the faith to begin that sometimes long process of repentance. If you will, the Lord will forgive you, and you can start anew to reach the spiritual heights you desire."

In Acts 2:37-38, Peter, assuming we have faith, states the first principles and ordinances of the gospel: "They were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."

In order to progress in the plan of salvation, we must live the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. Once we have faith in Christ, we must repent of our sins. And this we must do before we can participate in the ordinances of the gospel.

A repentant person, exercising faith, makes a change in her or his life. The change must be for the better and involves repentance—a sorrowful recognition of sin or error that brings about a reformation in that person's life.

The Process of Repentance

To repent, we must follow the five R's:

Paul in 2 Corinthians 7:9-10 stated, "I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death." This "godly sorrow" is a sorrow based upon faith and the love we have for Jesus Christ. The basis of faith is love. The basis of repentance is faith in the hope of forgiveness.

Remember, John the Baptist's mission was to declare Christ and repentance to the people: "In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judaea, and saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 3:2.)

After Jesus' forty-day fast, "from that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 4:17.)

When Jesus "sat at meat" with publicans and sinners, the Pharisees said to his disciples, "Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?" Jesus heard this and said to them, "They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." (Matthew 9:10-13.)

Christ on another occasion said, "Except ye repent, ye shall . . . perish." (Luke 13:3.)

John the Beloved wrote: "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us." (1 John 1:8-10.) We all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. Yet God provides us a way out—a way of overcoming our sins through repentance.

In Luke 15 are a number of parables ending with the parable of the prodigal son, who sinned against heaven and his father. The rehabilitation of the prodigal son shows that the Lord will accept our sincere repentance and will give us bountiful blessings if we repent and live the gospel.

Christ Is the Propitiation of Our Sins

We must always remember that repentance is possible only because Christ came to earth as our Redeemer: "And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) We read in 1 John 4:10, "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins." In Romans 3:25, we read that God has sent Christ "to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God."

Repentance is a gift from God—a pardon from God, which he will liberally give us as we go through the process of repentance. It is a great gift when we consider that not one of us is perfect. We are all subject to the weaknesses of the flesh. That is why we need the Savior.
