Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 10

Baptism

Infants are not barred from the Kingdom of Heaven just because they happen to depart the present life before they have been immersed in water.

—John Calvin

Faith and repentance are the first two principles of the gospel. Baptism is the first ordinance of the gospel. Various churches have various forms of baptism, such as dipping, pouring, sprinkling, forward immersion, backward immersion, trine immersion, rose petals, dirt, and sand. Yet Mormons rightly believe, and the Bible teaches, there is only one correct form of baptism: immersion by one having the authority or priesthood of God to baptize. Baptism is an absolutely essential ordinance if we are to enter the kingdom of God.

What about the various forms of baptism? Paul stated in Ephesians 4:5 that there is "one Lord, one faith, one baptism." Galatians 3:27 says, "As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ."

We accept Christ by being baptized. Baptism is a saving ordinance. We will never understand the atonement of Christ as our individual release from sin unless we are baptized.

In John 3:3-5 we read, "Jesus answered and said unto [Nicodemus], Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."

Peter said, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38.)

In Mark 16:16 the Savior said, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved."

Luke, emphasizing the importance of baptism, said, "The Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him." (Luke 7:30.)

Paul (then named Saul) was one who persecuted the early Christians. While on the way to Damascus, he had a powerful vision. He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" He answered, "Who art thou, Lord?" Christ said unto him, "I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest." What did Paul do? He immediately responded: "What shall I do, Lord?" (Acts 22:7-10.)

He was told to go into Damascus, where he would receive further instructions. In Acts 22:16 we learn what he was to do: "Why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord." Even Paul, one of the greatest witnesses of Christ, had to be baptized.

The Bible is clear that we must be baptized in order to enter the kingdom of God. If it was necessary for Christ to be baptized, in the fulfillment of all righteousness, then it is even more necessary for us to be baptized. Christ's admonition to his apostles was, "Go ye . . . and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Matthew 28:19.) He also said in Mark 16:15-16, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned."

The purpose of baptism is explained in Mark 1:4: "John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." Luke 3:3 says, "He came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins."

The Form of Baptism

If there is only "one Lord, one faith, one baptism," what should be the form of baptism? The verb baptize comes from the Greek bapto, baptizo, and literally means "to dip" or "to immerse."

Paul wrote in Romans 6:3-5: "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection." Here Paul refers to baptism as being "buried" or "planted." We must conclude that we must be immersed under the water to meet the form of baptism Paul referred to as the "one baptism." (Ephesians 4:5.)

The Greeks understand baptism to mean burial in water. In fact, ancient writers like Polybius, a historian of the second century, spoke of the naval battle between the Carthaginian and Roman fleets off the shores of Sicily: "If any were hard pressed by the enemy they withdrew safely back, on account of their fast sailing, into the open sea, and then turning around and falling on those of their pursuers who were in advance, they gave them frequent blows and baptized many of their vessels." (Polybius, book 1, chapter 51.)

For more than two centuries after the Savior, immersion was the Christian mode of baptism. This changed at the end of the third century when the ordinance was distorted.

But Christ set the example for all of us, as described in Matthew 3:16: "Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water." Clearly, he was baptized by immersion.

See also Acts 8:35-39, where Philip baptized the eunuch: "Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the eunuch said, See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing."

John 3:23 states, "John . . . was baptizing in Ãnon near to Salim, because there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized." Why would John choose a place of "much water" unless he was baptizing by immersion?

Ancient history and archaeology prove that the early Christian baptisms were by immersion. In fact, a number of ancient Christian baptismal fonts have been discovered. Clearly, immersion is the correct form of baptism.

Authority Needed to Perform Baptisms

If one form of baptism is important, then isn't it even more important to determine who can perform baptisms in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? (Matthew 28:19.) Certainly, the person performing such baptisms must hold the authority or priesthood of God in order to do so. (See chapter 12 on priesthood authority.)

Infant Baptism

All of us have met young couples who have lost a child in infancy. One couple expressed tremendous anguish and concern that their deceased infant had not been baptized. They questioned aloud whether the child could go to heaven. The worry and fear was eating the life out of the mother. Losing the child was bad enough, but would this beloved infant be forever lost from God and his influence?

What about little children? Do they need to be baptized, or do only persons who are accountable need baptism? Mark 10:13-16 shows that little children do not need to be baptized: "They brought young children to him, that he should touch them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them."

From these scriptures, it is difficult for anyone to conclude that little children will not be saved. I have already quoted Mark 16:16, which says, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." One must be accountable in order to believe. Little children are not accountable until they can rationally make choices. Many psychologists say children have this accountability at approximately eight years of age.

The Book of Mormon is particularly explicit concerning little children: "Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me. And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children. Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach—repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children. And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins. But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons; for how many little children have died without baptism! Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without baptism, these must have gone to an endless hell. Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell. For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism." (Moroni 8:8-15.)

Before the devout gentile Cornelius was baptized, Peter, a Jew, had to accept the revelation that Gentiles were acceptable to God. When Peter did acknowledge that fact, he exclaimed, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him." (Acts 10:34-35.)

One must "fear" God, work righteousness, and be baptized in order to be accepted by God. Clearly little children, especially infants who die before the age of accountability, are too young to "believe," "fear" God, or work righteousness. If they die in infancy, they are saved in the kingdom of God in spite of the teachings of some who say they will go to purgatory or be lost from heaven.
