Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 11

The Holy Ghost

Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

—Acts 8:17

Baptism is the first ordinance of the gospel. The second ordinance of the gospel is the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Remember Matthew 3:16-17: "Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him."

In Matthew 3:11 John the Baptist made it clear that "he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire." He was clearly foretelling the coming of Christ, who would bring with him the power to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

In Acts 8:14-20, the gospel had been preached in Samaria, and a number of people had been baptized. However, none of them had received the Holy Ghost. The apostles heard that they "had received the word of God" and sent Peter and John to give these new converts the Holy Ghost: "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost."

In Acts 19:1-6, Paul came to Ephesus and found certain believers in Jesus Christ. He naturally asked them, "Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?" They answered him, "We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost." Paul, surprised, and knowing that true ministers always promised the Holy Ghost after baptism, asked them, "Unto what then were ye baptized?" They responded, "Unto John's baptism." In other words, they had been baptized by immersion, as John performed baptisms, but they had never heard of the Holy Ghost. Apparently, they were sincere in their beliefs and their actions. They had probably been baptized by a sincere minister. But this minister could not have had the authority of God because he didn't tell them about the necessity of being baptized with "fire and the Holy Ghost." No true minister would have failed to preach that doctrine. Paul told them that "John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus." Therefore, they had to be rebaptized: "When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them."

Paul understood that the minister who baptized them could not have held the priesthood because he did not even know of the Holy Ghost. Therefore, when Paul explained the importance of the Holy Ghost, these sincere believers knew they had to be rebaptized by Paul, who held the priesthood.

Hebrews 6:2-4 mentions the "doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands" and then speaks of "those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost." The conferring of the Holy Ghost is an important part of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The reception of the Holy Ghost is a requisite for those who want to understand the gospel.

The Holy Ghost is called the "Spirit of truth" and the "Comforter" who will "teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." (John 14:17; 26.)

In John 16:13-14, Jesus explained, "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come."

In John 15:26 Christ said, "When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me."

In Luke 12:12, Jesus taught, "The Holy Ghost shall teach you . . . what ye ought to say."

Paul explains in Romans 8:16, "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God."

There is no question that we can be influenced by the Holy Ghost before we are baptized. He can and does bear testimony to us of the divinity of Jesus Christ. However, the scriptures tell us that we must accept his teachings and then live them for the Holy Ghost to stay with us and guide us.

Acts 5:32 states, "We are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him." To continue to enjoy the influence of the Holy Ghost, once we know the truth, we must "obey him" and live God's teachings, including faith, repentance, and baptism. If we do not, we endanger our right to have the Holy Ghost remain with us to protect and inspire us.

There is another aspect to Acts 5:32. We may have a miraculous manifestation of the Spirit to help us find the truth. Yet, if we do not accept the gospel, have faith, repent, be baptized, and receive the Holy Ghost through the administration of those in authority, we will not have obeyed him. (See chapter 12 on priesthood authority.) Regardless of our profound manifestation, unless we obey, the Holy Ghost will leave us.

These first principles (faith and repentance) and ordinances (baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost) are part of what we committed to live when we shouted for joy at the prospect of coming to the earth to gain a body and become more like God. We must now live worthy of returning to God's presence.
