Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 12

Priesthood Authority

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you.

—Jesus to his apostles (John 15:16)

We all face the problem of determining what is right. When we speak of the authority to act for God, we refer to the priesthood of God. We cannot imagine God sanctioning as his own eight hundred different Christian churches, each teaching different doctrines, each contradicting the others, each claiming to be the one true church. Surely when Paul, as one of the apostles, spoke of one Lord, one faith, and one baptism (Ephesians 4:5), he was speaking for Christ.

But which of all of these churches, each claiming to act for God, is right? Which has the true baptism and the true authority to baptize? How do we find this one true church?

The one true church has the priesthood or power of God to perform his ordinances. It teaches the truth about the Godhead and has the answers to the great questions of life.

Think about it. These are true and eternal principles.

God gives authority only to those who act in his name. The authority—the priesthood—is, among other things, essential to administer the ordinances of baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Christ was the only perfect person (Hebrews 5:9) ever to live on the earth. As the perfect Son of God, Christ must have been perfect in his activities, especially in his establishment of his church. Therefore, his church must also have been perfectly organized. If that perfectly organized and established church was necessary then, it must be equally necessary today.

Christ Chose Twelve Apostles as the Foundation of His Church

One of the first things Christ did was to choose twelve apostles from among all of his disciples, or followers.

In John 15:16 Jesus told these apostles, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit [converts], and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you."

These apostles did not choose the Savior. He chose them and ordained them to the priesthood. He gave them the authority to act for him after he left the earth.

In fact, Christ told his apostles in Matthew 16:19, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." This must be an awesome power.

Mark 3:14-15 explains, "He ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils."

Matthew 10:5-8 states: "These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give."

These apostles were the foundation of the Church. (Ephesians 2:19-21.)

Christ's Church—A Perfect Organization

Paul, writing powerfully to the Ephesians (newly baptized members of the Church), in Ephesians 2:19-21 said, "Now . . . ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints [members of the Church], and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord."

These newly baptized members of the Church had become fellowcitizens with the Saints; in other words, they had become members of the Church themselves. That's all the word saints meant in New Testament times: members of the church of Jesus Christ.

More significantly, the Church had as its foundation apostles and prophets.

If we have the church of Jesus Christ today, shouldn't it have as its foundation apostles and prophets? Yes! Christ made it clear that the Church needed apostles and prophets as he filled the vacant positions of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles each time an apostle died. (See Acts 1:22-26, where Matthias was chosen to replace Judas.)

The scriptures clearly state, "He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ [the Church]: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (Ephesians 4:11-14.) Here we have five of the eleven offices Christ filled through ordination to carry on the work of the ministry of his Church.

Actually, according to the scriptures, Christ ordained leaders to eleven different offices in his church for (1) "the perfecting of the saints" (members of the Church), (2) "the work of the ministry," (3) "for the edifying of the body of Christ" or the Church members, and (4) "till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God."

If we are doing the "work of the ministry" and edifying the body of Christ, or the Church, we must have these offices of the priesthood to assist us. We need this perfect organization of eleven offices in the priesthood "till we all come in the unity of the faith." Those who profess Christianity are no more near a unity of the faith today than we ever were. Therefore, we still need this perfect organization of ordained priesthood workers organized exactly as Christ set it up.

Other offices were also important in Christ's church anciently, for the apostles "ordained . . . elders in every church, and . . . commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed." (Acts 14:23.) Actually, they ordained deacons, teachers, priests, elders, seventies, high priests, bishops, pastors, and evangelists to help with the work of the ministry, as mentioned in the following verses:

Apostles and prophets: Ephesians 4:11.

Evangelists: Ephesians 4:11; 2 Timothy 4:5.

Pastors: Ephesians 4:11.

Teachers: Ephesians 4:11; 1 Corinthians 12:28-29.

Deacons: Philippians 1:1.

Priests: Acts 6:7.

Elders: Acts 14:23; Titus 1:5; James 5:14.

Seventies: Luke 10:1, 17.

High priests: Hebrews 3:1; 5:10; 6:20; 7:26.

Bishops: Philippians 1:1; 1 Timothy 3:1-7.

Clearly, Jesus Christ, the perfect man, established a perfect organization that he called his church.

A church is not a building but the organization through which the gospel is preached and the ordinances are performed by those in authority. Because Christ was perfect, he established a perfect and necessary church organization. If Christ's church was perfect or necessary then, it must also be perfect and necessary today. It is logical, then, that the true church of Jesus Christ would have the same organization today, with deacons, teachers, priests, elders, seventies, high priests, bishops, pastors, evangelists, apostles, and prophets. Through revelation, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (the Mormon Church) is organized exactly the same as the church Christ set up anciently. In these latter days, it is the only church with this perfect priesthood organization.

Christ's Unpaid Lay Ministry

Many years ago in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, I was asked to represent my church at a huge convocation of tri-state ministers. As I walked into the luncheon—seats were not preassigned—I tried to pick a table at which a number of different religions were represented. I found the perfect table, at which, if I recall correctly, there were two Catholic priests (one a Maronist father who had taken a vow of poverty), a Presbyterian minister, a Baptist minister, an Episcopalian rector, and a few others.

I asked if I could take the empty seat.

The Episcopalian rector asked me, "What religion do you represent?"

I replied, "I'm an elder in the Mormon Church."

"We don't want you," he retorted with a smile.

I laughed, and as I took my seat I replied, "Small wonder; our Mormon missionaries are converting more than ten thousand of your parishioners in England every year."

Everyone laughed, and they accepted me with friendship and kindness.

During the luncheon, the conversation became serious when one of the ministers noted sadly that young people are not coming into the ministry as they did in times past.

I asked, "Why do you think that is?"

One of the ministers responded, "Well, in times past, the local minister was the most relied upon and respected person in the community. When people had problems, they went to him. When troubles arose, he became the arbiter who helped solve them. However, in our complex times, there is not the same prestige or incentives in becoming a minister."

Another minister stated that the ministers of today are overworked and underappreciated. It used to be that they could spend most of the week preparing for their sermons on Sunday. Today, however, many people expect their ministers to have the answers to every problem. Thus, the demands are overwhelming. He said that the rewards of the ministry do not overcome the unappreciated overly hard work it entails.

Yet another minister said the demands on the clergy are so exhausting and the remuneration so slight that young people are not interested in going into the ministry. They simply are not paid enough to justify the eighty-hour weeks their parishioners expect of them. There are more lucrative and more fulfilling opportunities for the young altruists of today.

At that point, I said, "Please allow me to give a few reasons why young people are not going into the ministry today."

The others looked at me as though they were thinking, "What could this lay elder in the Mormon Church possibly add to this discussion?"

I continued, "I can think of two reasons why young people are not excited to go into the ministry today: first, because ministers today are not teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ, and second, because ministers are being paid to preach the gospel."

The rector sniffed at me. "What do you mean, Mr. Hatch?"

"Let me ask you a question," I said. "How much did Christ pay his apostles and prophets to teach his gospel?" There were puzzled looks all around. Finally, someone said, "Nothing."

I replied, "Oh, he paid them all right, but not in money. They were paid in special blessings."

Everyone agreed, although some of them looked at me suspiciously, wondering where I was about to take them.

I then asked, "How many of you, if your salaries were cut off today, would be at the pulpit next Sunday?" A number of hands went up. "Two months from now?" Only two hands went up. "What about a year from now?" No hands were raised, and everyone was looking quite pensive.

One of the ministers exclaimed, "But what would we do for a living?"

I responded, "What did Christ's ministers do for a living?"

Someone said, "Paul was a tentmaker."

"That's right," I responded. I then quoted Matthew 10:5-8: "These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give."

I continued, "Paul, when confronted with the same problem, replied, 'What is my reward then? Verily that, which I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel.'" (1 Corinthians 9:18.)

The Maronist priest was enjoying the discussion because he had taken a vow of poverty.

I then quoted from memory Christ's lucid statements in John 10:11-13: "I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep." "Please understand," I said. "You are all sincere and devoted people. You raise a practical issue" How can you support your families without a ministerial salary? If you do not have the perfect organization Christ established, with deacons, teachers, priests, elders, seventies, high priests, bishops, pastors, evangelists, apostles, and prophets, the whole burden falls on you. If you have this perfect organization, then you have a great number of fellow officers in the church to share the burden so that all can give freely of their time to spread the gospel and watch over the flock. Then, when the wolf comes, in whatever form, you will not have to flee, and the flock will be spared.

"Christ made it clear that his ministry should not be a paid one because, when hard times come, his ministers will not scatter and run. They will stand and fight for the flock because they are doing the work of the Lord because of their faith, not for remuneration."

When the luncheon was over, one of the ministers said to me, "Young man, you have given us a lot to think about. I really enjoyed the discussion of the scriptures. The trouble with modern Christianity is that we don't often discuss the doctrines and the scriptures that support them."

The others, too, were friendly as they departed for their meetings.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has the only unpaid lay ministry and missionary system in the world. Because of this unpaid ministry, the Church's presiding officers do not have to do all the work of the Church themselves. Bishops, pastors, evangelists, apostles, and prophets can call upon deacons, teachers, priests, elders, seventies, and high priests to voluntarily assist them in the ministry. That is how Christ envisioned his priesthood organization.

The priesthood has been on the earth since the beginning. In Hebrews 5:4 we read, "No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." Remember, Aaron was the brother of the prophet Moses and was called to the priesthood in the time of Moses. He held the Aaronic or lower priesthood. See Exodus 28:1-2 where Moses was told, "Take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons. And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty."

Clearly, if a man is to be called of God as was Aaron, it must be through revelation from God through his living prophet. (See Exodus 40:13-15; Numbers 25:13.)

The power of the priesthood is magnificent. In Matthew 10:1, the Lord gathered his twelve apostles and "gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease."

In Matthew 28:18-19 we read, "Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."

In Mark 3:14-15, Christ "ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils."

In Luke 10:19, Christ gave to the seventy "power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy."

Many of us who hold the priesthood have personally seen the lame walk, the blind see, the deaf hear, and countless other miracles as a result of blessings by those holding the priesthood in these latter days.

The Priesthood of God Cannot Be Purchased

One of the great stories about the priesthood concerns Philip as he preached in Samaria. Apparently he held the Aaronic or lesser priesthood and thus had only the power to baptize with water. Like John the Baptist, he did not have the power to baptize with the "Holy Ghost, and with fire." (Matthew 3:11.) He baptized the Samarians and, like John the Baptist, told them that later they would be given the Holy Ghost. (Acts 8:5, 12.)

"Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: Who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: (For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.) Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost." (Acts 8:14-17.) Peter and John, holding the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood, had the authority to convey the Holy Ghost. (Hebrews 5:6; 7:11-12.)

Yet there is another lesson to be learned about the priesthood in this story. There was a man called Simon (Acts 8:9) who had practiced sorcery and "bewitched" the people of Samaria. "And when Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money." (Acts 8:18-20.)

We must conclude that God's priesthood authority cannot be purchased.

Is Sincerity Enough?

Some have argued that any sincere minister's baptism is recognized by God. That is not true. Mere sincerity is not enough.

For any baptism to be recognized by God, the officiator must hold the true priesthood of God. See Acts 19:1-6, where Paul was passing through the upper coasts and came to Ephesus, where he found certain disciples (followers). Realizing that missionaries like Philip, who held only the Aaronic Priesthood (the power to baptize but not to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost), were baptizing converts ahead of his arrival, Paul asked the disciples, "Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? They answered, "We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost." Here were sincere followers of Christ who had not even heard of the Holy Ghost. So Paul, recognizing their sincerity, asked them, "Unto what then were ye baptized?" They responded, "Unto John's baptism." Paul then explained, "John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus." Remember, John the Baptist always said that one would come after him who would baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire. (Matthew 3:11.)

These were sincere disciples who had been baptized by immersion by an apparently sincere minister. Since the person who baptized them did not know of the Holy Ghost, that "minister" could not have held the priesthood of God. Therefore, even though they had been baptized by a sincere minister, they had to be rebaptized by one who actually had the authority or priesthood. "When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied." (Acts 19:5-6.)

All the sincerity in the world will not substitute for being baptized by one who holds the true priesthood of God.

We can learn much from the Old Testament about the priesthood. One of the most important priesthood stories of the Old Testament concerned Uzzah, who stretched forth his hand to steady the Ark of the Covenant and was struck dead.

In Numbers 1:50-51, we learn of the important principle that only the true priesthood holders could be in charge of the tabernacle and handle the vessels of the tabernacle. As the Lord told Moses: "Appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle. And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death."

In 1 Chronicles 15:2 we read, "David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites: for them hath the Lord chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever."

These scriptures set the stage for the story of Uzzah. No one but the Levites or the holders of the Levitical Priesthood [Aaronic Priesthood] could handle the ark of God, and the non-priesthood-holding stranger would die if he or she violated this instruction.

In the story of Uzzah, the people of David were bringing the ark of God to Jerusalem, and those who had the authority to handle it had placed it on a "new cart." (2 Samuel 6:3.) "And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God." (Verses 6-7.)

This seems very harsh. But God used this incident to impress upon the children of Israel the importance of his instructions concerning the priesthood handling of the ark. The Lord expected appropriate respect to be shown for his ark and the priesthood holders who handled it.

Only priesthood holders could handle the ark of God. So isn't it as important that the church of Christ be administered by those having the priesthood authority to do so?

The true church, which has the priesthood of God, must have the perfect organization leading it. Isn't it logical that the true church should understand the important principles of life, including knowledge of whence we came, why we are here, where we are going, the nature of the Godhead, and the first principles and ordinances of the gospel? What a blessing it is to know that those who who baptize us and bestow upon us the Holy Ghost have the authority to do so.
