Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 13

Looking for the True Church

How be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel.

—3 Nephi 27:8

Today there are hundreds of different churches, all teaching different doctrines—each contradicting the others. Paul spoke of only one church, one faith, one baptism. (Ephesians 4:5.) How do we know which church we should join?

Why is it that most churches teach that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are all one being substance or essence—an analogy like water, steam, and ice—three different aspects of the same substance? The scriptures teach that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are three separate and distinct beings. (Matthew 3:16-17; Acts 7:55-56.)

Why do some churches teach that God is only a spirit without a body when the scriptures teach that God is a perfect being with a perfect body of flesh and bones? Remember, Christ, his Son, was raised from the dead with a body of flesh and bones united with his spirit, never to die again. (Romans 6:9.) Therefore, since death is the separation of the body and the spirit (James 2:26), Christ will always have his perfect, resurrected body of flesh and bones. Christ is in the express image of God's person (Hebrews 1:1-3), and he and God created man in their own image and likeness (Genesis 1:26-27). Therefore, God the Father also has a perfect body of flesh and bones united with his spirit.

Why is it that the churches of today, as sincere as each is, do not have a full knowledge and understanding of the premortal existence and the fact that we are all spirit children of God the Eternal Father?

Why is it that the churches of today do not understand the antiquity of the gospel—that the gospel has been on the earth since the beginning, although it has been taken away from time to time?

This is an eternal truth. We knew of the gospel in the premortal existence, and Adam knew about it at the time of his earth life. Successive prophets have also had a knowledge of the gospel right down to the time of Christ. (See 1 Corinthians 10:1-4; Galatians 3:8; Hebrews 4:2, 6; 11:26-27.)

Why is it the churches of today do not have apostles and prophets as their foundation? (Ephesians 2:19-21.) If they were necessary as the foundation of the Church in the meridian of time, why not now? Ephesians 4:11-14 tells us they are necessary for the perfecting of the members of Christ's church, for the edification of the members of the Church, for the work of the ministry and the preaching of the gospel until we all come to a unity of the faith. They are also necessary to receive the requisite revelation to solve the distinct problems of our own modern times.

If we must have apostles and prophets to guide the true church in righteousness, then where are they? If they are here, how did they get here? Who gave them the authority? How might we know them? What role did they play in the restoration of the gospel? Are they truly the foundation of the Church of Christ? Is the rest of the Church "fitly framed" with all the other officers Christ established in the Church in the meridian of time? (Ephesians 2:19-21; 4:11-14.)

Why is it that churches today do not claim revelation from God to guide us in these modern times? Since God raised up prophets to guide us through all dispensations of time, why not now? Remember, after Christ left the earth, he gave "commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen." (Acts 1:2.) Since the churches are living without God's continual involvement and advice, we have a lack of consistent perspective. Are some of these religions not seeking the Lord but walking in their own way?

Why is it that none of the other Christian churches have the perfect organization that Christ established consisting of deacons, teachers, priests, elders, seventies, high priests, bishops, pastors, evangelists, apostles, and prophets? (See Ephesians 2:19-21; 4:11-14.)

Isaiah, speaking of the last days said, "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left." (Isaiah 24:5-6.)

It takes little imagination to conclude that Isaiah was talking about our times, the last days, before the second coming of Christ, when the earth will be cleansed by fire. Yet here, in these verses, Isaiah makes clear that in the last days people will have fallen away from the true gospel. They will transgress the laws of God, change the ordinances of the gospel, and break the everlasting covenant of living God's principles.

In fact, in Isaiah 29:13-14, again speaking of the latter days—our time—Isaiah says, "Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid."

These verses indicate that, in the last days, the world will be in a state of apostasy, and that a marvelous work and a wonder will occur to redeem the world.

The Apostasy after Christ and His Apostles Left the Earth

In Acts 20:29-30, the Apostle Paul prophesied: "I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them." Paul made it quite clear that evil men will rise up and preach apostasy so that the flock (the church) will not be spared. If something is not spared, it will no longer exist. In other words, Paul was predicting an apostasy from the true religion shortly after the death of the apostles, when the gospel would be taken from the earth. He was predicting the Dark Ages.

In Galatians 1:6, Paul marveled, "Ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel." He was amazed that the people of his day were beginning to apostatize from the truth so shortly after the death of the Savior.

In an even more explicit passage, Paul talked about the "falling away" or apostasy in stark terms. He wrote in 2 Thessalonians 2:1-3: "We beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ [the second coming of Christ] is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition [the devil]."

Paul made it abundantly clear that there will be an apostasy and that Satan will take over for a time before the second coming of the Savior.

The pervasive influence of Satan during the Dark Ages is confirmed in John's prophecy in Revelation 13:7: "It was given unto him [Satan] to make war with the saints [the members of Christ's church], and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations."

This verse says the Saints would be overcome by Satan. I submit that if the power of the priesthood (God's power) was on the earth at the time, the Church would have been spared (Acts 20:29) and the Saints would not have been "overcome." Put another way, if only one holder of God's priesthood had been on the earth, since God's power or priesthood is more powerful than Satan, the Church would have been spared.

We must conclude that the priesthood (the power to act for God on the earth) was taken from the earth shortly after the apostles were killed.

In fact, in A.D. 325, the Council of Nicea was called by none other than Constantine, then a pagan, to unify the Roman Empire. It was at this conference that the doctrinal change in the definition of the Godhead occurred. Through public debate, the council decided that God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost were only one being and that this being was only a spirit without a body. It is easy to understand why Paul, approximately 260 years earlier, was amazed that the people had already begun to apostatize. (Galatians 1:6-9.)

There are several scriptures that foretell the apostasy from the true church. (See 1 Timothy 4:1-3; 2 Timothy 3:1-5; 4:2-4; 2 Peter 2:1-3.)

The Prophesied Restoration of the Gospel

One of the most important scriptures that makes the transition from the meridian of time, the time of Christ, to the modern age is Acts 3:19-21. Peter, on the day of Pentecost stated: "Repent ye . . . , and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began."

This passage shows that the apostasy will take place before the second coming of Christ. Peter tells us to repent and be converted because the "times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord." (Peter is predicting Christ's second coming.) Yet those times cannot come, and Christ must be received in heaven "until the times of restitution [restoration] of all things" which God has spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the beginning of the world. If all things have to be restored, then all things must have been taken away during the time of the apostasy (the Dark Ages).

What are these "times of refreshing" or "times of restitution of all things" spoken of by Peter?

In Ephesians 1:9-10, Paul describes these "times" in terms of the last days: "Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him." Here Paul describes the "times of restitution of all things" (Acts 3:21) as a time when Christ "might gather together in one all things in Christ." More specifically, he describes that period as the "dispensation of the fulness of times."

We are living in the "dispensation of the fulness of times." It is a time of restoration of all things through modern-day prophets who have been called of God to guide us in our own modern times.

Isaiah 2:2-3 says, "It shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." In the last days, the Lord's "house" will be established in the top of the mountains. There will be a Zion and a Jerusalem out of which the Lord's law and word will be given.

Isaiah in the foregoing scriptures foretold our times (the latter days). This prophecy is now being fulfilled because the Lord's temple (mountain of the Lord's house) has been established in the top of the Rocky Mountains and people from all over the world are flowing unto it. As the scriptures have predicted, Israel is now reborn, and we are anxiously awaiting the second coming of the Lord.

In Daniel 2:31-44,Daniel interpreted Nebuchadnezzar's dream about the various nations that would arise from Daniel's time forward, ending in verse 44, where he clearly prophesies about the last days: "In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever."

Daniel referred to this day and age when God's kingdom or church would be established, never to be destroyed again by apostasy or otherwise. It will stand forever. Thus, this must refer to the kingdom to be set up by God in the last days or the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Some have interpreted this kingdom mentioned in Daniel to mean the church set up by Christ in the meridian of time. Yet note in Daniel 2:44 that "the kingdom shall not be left to other people." Christ's kingdom was left to other people, as clearly stated in Matthew 21:43, where the Savior said, rebuking the Jews and those of that generation, "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruit thereof." Thus, in Daniel 2:44, we see that Christ was referring to a kingdom of God in the future, not the kingdom of God Christ set up in approximately A.D. 34.

In Revelation 14:6,John the Beloved "saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." I testify to you that this angel has come and brought the gospel record about which John refers. We will discuss this prophecy later.

In Malachi 4:5-6, God tells us he would "send . . . Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord" to turn our hearts to our forefathers. This has happened and will be discussed later in this book.

It is apparent that an apostasy from the divine church occurred after the death of the apostles and that the true church had to be restored—the restitution of all things—before Christ would come again. (Acts 3:19-21.) The last dispensation is biblically called the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. (Ephesians 1:9-10.)

We are living in that dispensation. True prophets are presently living on the earth.
