Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 14

Latter-day Prophets

Current revelation is equally plain with that of former days in predicting the yet future manifestations of God through His appointed channels. The canon of scripture is still open; many lines, many precepts, are yet to be added.

—James E. Talmage

The prophets are the interpreters of God.

—Philo

I once broached the subject of prophets to a woman in Indiana, bearing my testimony that we have prophets on the earth today. She responded: "That can't be. We cannot have prophets beyond the Bible." Having remembered the logic of one of the latter-day apostles, Hugh B. Brown, I asked her, "Why?"

She exclaimed, "My minister said that we cannot have revelation in this day and age. He has a doctorate of divinity and is the most intelligent man of religion I have ever known. God cannot speak to us today. The heavens are sealed."

I told her, "I can think of only three reasons why God would not give us revelation today to solve our modern problems, since he has raised up prophets in each of the past dispensations to help people with their problems."

She agreed to listen.

"Since God has spoken to all dispensations in the past, the reason he will not speak to our dispensation in modern times is that he does not love us as much as he loved past generations."

"Oh, God is a God of love," she said. "He loves us just as much today as he loved the past generations."

"Well, that is a good argument for why there must be prophets today. Right?"

She hesitated, but she was thinking it over.

I proceeded. "Then perhaps God doesn't have the power to reveal his will to us today, although he has always done so in the past, as evidenced in the Old and New Testaments."

"Oh, God is omnipotent," she replied. "He has just as much power today as he ever had."

"Then that is another reason he would give us prophets today," I said. I continued: "I can think of only one other reason God would not reveal his will to us in these modern days. We have gained so much knowledge, sophistication, and independent thought through our higher schools of learning, including our divinity schools and seminaries—we have become so self-sufficient that we just don't need God to speak to us anymore."

The woman gasped. "We need God more today than at any other time in history!" she said. "Our problems are so great and demanding that he must be willing to speak to us today and help us with our specific and peculiar problems."

"Then what must God be doing?"

She didn't hesitate a second. "He must be revealing his will to a prophet or prophets somewhere," she admitted.

It is true. Why can't God speak to us today? Why won't he help us with our unique modern problems? If he is not a God of preferences and is "no respecter of persons" (Acts 10:34), then he must be willing to help us with our problems in this last dispensation. I testify that he is doing so through modern prophets whom he has called and authorized. The words of an ancient prophet are true: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)
