Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 15

Joseph Smith the Prophet

Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it.

—John Taylor

Joseph Smith, the first modern prophet, was the third son and fourth child in a family of ten children, born the 23rd day of December 1805, at Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont. He was the son of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith. When he was ten, the family moved from Vermont to western New York, settling first at Palmyra, New York, and later in a town called Manchester.

Joseph Smith never had more than three years of formal schooling. This is significant as one considers the other chapters in this book and asks, "How is it possible that this young man, who lived only thirty-eight years, and who never had much schooling, could know so much about the scriptures as to leave us this remarkable gospel doctrine legacy?"

His family favored the Presbyterian Church, and some in the family joined it. Joseph Smith was impressed with the Methodist faith but did not belong to any organized religion. He noticed the strife, contention, differing doctrines, and contradictory religious claims among the various conflicting religions and constantly wondered, "How can they all be true when they contradict each other so much?" Naturally, he was confused.

The area in which he lived has been called the "burnedover district" because of the religious fervor there at the time. He attended revivals and other religious meetings. He wanted to belong but honestly did not know where to turn. He was only fifteen years old.

Then one day while reading in his Bible, he found these words in James 1:5-6: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed."

These verses were extremely powerful to young Joseph. He thought about them again and again, believing that perhaps even he, a mere boy, could talk with God in faith, and that God might respond. All he wanted to know was which church was right. He lacked wisdom. Perhaps, as James said, God would help him understand.

Joseph decided to pray alone in a nearby woods on a beautiful, clear day in the spring of 1820. His own words best describe what happened: "After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

"But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

"It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!

"My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right . . . —and which I should join.

"I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof.'" (Joseph Smith-History 1:15-19.)

Joseph could not keep this experience to himself. When he told his family, they received it with reverence. However, when he told some of the ministers in the area about it, his explanation was treated with contempt. They declared that the time of revelation was past and that God would not speak to people today. He was persecuted and ridiculed by these ministers and their supporters.

Three years later, during the night of September 21, 1823, Joseph was praying for a forgiveness of sins and for further help when he had another heavenly manifestation. Suddenly a personage appeared in his room, bathed in brilliant white light, exhibiting radiant purity. This angel announced that he was Moroni, one of God's messengers, and he instructed Joseph about the work God had for him to do, telling him that his name "should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people." (Verse 33.)

The angel told him about a book, written upon golden plates, which would give an account of the ancient American people and their origins. Moroni told him that this book contained the fulness of the everlasting gospel and that it would be a new witness for Christ. He told him about two stones in silver bows, fastened to a breastplate, called the Urim and Thummim, which were deposited with the golden plates and could be used to translate them. The angel then stressed several prophecies of great import and departed, the light dissipating and disappearing with him. Two more times that night, the angel appeared and repeated all he had said the first time. The next day, Moroni appeared again, delivering the same message.

Joseph Smith was led by the angel to a hill in upstate New York called the Hill Cumorah, where he recognized the spot described by the angel and found the buried gold plates and the Urim and Thummim. He was forbidden to remove the contents of the box in which these sacred objects were buried but was challenged to visit this site each year until the plates and the Urim and Thummim were delivered to him for translation. (See Exodus 28:30; Leviticus 8:8; Numbers 27:21; Deuteronomy 33:8; 1 Samuel 28:6; Ezra 2:63; Nehemiah 7:65.) Only a third of the plates were translated into the Book of Mormon. The angel took back the plates for safekeeping until they would be revealed at a later time, but not before three witness had seen the plates and also the angel Moroni. Eight other witnesses saw the plates but not the angel. All of the witnesses testified publicly to what they saw. (Their testimonies are printed in the first few pages of the Book of Mormon). None ever denied his testimony.

Wasn't this experience of the young Joseph Smith the fulfillment of John the Beloved's prophecy in Revelation 14:6-7? "I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." After all, Moroni told Joseph Smith that the deposited book contained the "fulness of the everlasting gospel." (Joseph Smith-History 1:34.)

Having considered the doctrines explained in this book, it is not difficult to believe that Joseph Smith was filled with the Holy Ghost and had the experience of seeing God and Christ standing in the air before him. This was precisely the experience of the first Christian martyr, Stephen, before he was stoned to death: "He, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:55-56.)

It happened to Stephen. It certainly could have happened to Joseph Smith. I testify that this experience did happen, both to Stephen in ancient times and to Joseph Smith in the nineteenth century.

This experience is one of the reasons Joseph knew so much about the nature of the Godhead. Since he became a prophet of God who received revelations for this modern age, he was able to explain the gospel of Christ in clear and unmistakable terms. It is difficult to believe that he, with his less than three years of formal schooling, could have accomplished all he did without the extra help only God could have given.

Amos 3:7 says, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." Deuteronomy 18:22 notes: "When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously; thou shalt not be afraid of him."

The Prophecies of Joseph Smith

Here is a small sampling of the things Joseph Smith prophesied:

Today, we cannot go anywhere in the world where enlightened people have not heard of the Mormon prophet Joseph Smith. He is either revered as a prophet of God or ridiculed as an impostor. Thousands of books have been written about him, some favorable and many unfavorable. There are countless pamphlets about Joseph Smith. Many are anti-Mormon, critical, and in many cases vitriolic. Surely his name has been "good and evil spoken of among all people."

In 1860, Stephen A. Douglas ran for president of the United States and received the Democratic Party nomination on the 23rd of June. He looked like a sure bet to be elected president. His party had polled one-third again as many popular votes in the preceding election as the two opposing parties combined.

But Judge Douglas, even knowing of their righteousness, raised his voice against Joseph Smith and the Latter-day Saints at a time when he could have helped them. He knew the prophet Joseph Smith. He knew the goodness of members of the Mormon Church. Yet he felt that to defend these Mormons might ruin his political opportunities. Some assumed he was attempting to prove Joseph Smith a false prophet.

Joseph Smith's prophecy was made thirty-three years before this presidential election in 1860. Although he was heavily favored, when the electoral votes were counted, Judge Douglas received but twelve votes. He carried only Missouri, the state where terrible persecutions of the Mormons had occurred. A relatively unknown dark horse won the election and proved to be one of the greatest American presidents—Abraham Lincoln.

Less than twelve months later, Stephen A. Douglas died—partially of a broken heart.

The Mormon Church is now the fourth largest church in the United States, having more than nine million members. Its worldwide headquarters is in the midst of the Rocky Mountains in Salt Lake City, Utah.

"Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls; and the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place. For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations. And it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war."

Put yourself in the shoes of Joseph Smith. Try to predict what will happen twenty-eight years from now, let alone next year. It is impossible to do so. Yet Joseph Smith predicted:

Â The Civil War.

Â The war would begin in South Carolina. On November 10, 1860, South Carolina withdrew its representatives and senators, and the Ordinance of Secession was passed about one week later.

Â The war would result in the death of many souls, as it did. The North lost 35,528 with 275,175 wounded while 258,000 Southerners died with 225,000 wounded.

Â War would be poured out on all nations, beginning with the Civil War. We have had two world wars and countless other serious conflicts with some still raging. The number of wars rose from 2,678 in the twelfth century to 13,735 in the first twenty-five years of the twentieth century.

Â The Southern States would be divided against the Northern States.

Â The Southern States would call upon Great Britain. The Southern States did so, and as a result of Great Britain's intrusions, Great Britain had to pay $15 million in damages after the war.

Â The Emancipation Proclamation that would come after the war began: "After many days, slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war."

Joseph Smith made many other interesting prophecies.

The Prophet Jeremiah said, "When the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord hath truly sent him." (Jeremiah 28:9.)

Perhaps more important than Joseph Smith's many prophecies were some of his revelations of knowledge from the Lord:

ÂThe words of angels.

ÂA translation of a document written by John the Revelator.

ÂBeautiful prayers.

ÂVarious revelations directed to private individuals.

ÂRevelations about the priesthood and its history.

ÂStupendous visions, including section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which contains an account of five visions dealing with God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, Satan, and the future glory and destiny of mankind. Section 110 is the description of four visions in which the Savior, Moses, Elias, and Elijah gave instructions or important keys necessary for the work of the restoration.

Â Various items of instruction from the Lord.

Â God's law of health, the "Word of Wisdom," which, more than a hundred years ago, warned of the dangers of alcohol and tobacco, dangers that have been medically proven today.

Â A revelation on eternal marriage.

Â Revelations on faith, hope, charity, the nature of God, salvation for the dead, temple work, the latter days, and numerous other spiritual and temporal matters.

Probably the most important tangible evidence of Joseph Smith's prophetic calling is the Book of Mormon itself.
