Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 16

The Book of Mormon

When ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things.

—Moroni 10:4-5

I knew a couple who lived in Michigan. Their marriage was on the rocks, and they were headed for the divorce court. Neither was doing the will of the Lord at the time. Each was living an untoward life of sin.

The wife wanted to save the marriage, but she was frustrated and didn't quite know what to do. So one day she decided to take her frustrations and yearnings to the Lord in prayer.

That night, she dreamed she was down in the basement, cleaning out the furnace. She was all covered with soot when a knock came at the door. Two young men in dark apparel were standing there. They told her they had the truth for her.

She never told her husband about this dream, but she could not get it out of her mind.

Sure enough. One day she was down in the basement cleaning out her furnace, all covered with soot, when a knock came at the door. Two young Mormon missionaries were standing there. They told her they had the truth for her and asked if they could come in. She told them she would rather they came back at a more convenient time. Of course, they did.

As they taught this receptive investigator the gospel, she became more and more convinced of the truthfulness of their message. Always her husband refused to discuss anything with the missionaries. Every time she raised the issue, he simply refused to talk about it.

Still, she always left a copy of the Book of Mormon and Church pamphlets in plain view. But he never seemed interested.

Finally, she came to the conclusion that she must be baptized, but she fretted over the confrontation with her husband. He had always snarled when she mentioned the missionaries.

Getting up her courage, she finally decided to talk with her husband about her decision to be baptized. She gingerly approached him. "Dear?" she said.

"What?" he demanded.

She decided to face him head on: "I've decided to be baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the Mormons."

"So have I!" he exclaimed.

"What? You haven't even listened to the missionaries."

"Yes, but when I got home that first night, I saw the Book of Mormon lying on the mantel. I picked it up and threw it into the wastebasket. But I had second thoughts. It wasn't my book. And that book is magnetic. As I picked it out of the wastebasket, I couldn't put it down until I had read it. I too have a testimony of its truthfulness, and I too want to be baptized."

No one could have been more pleasantly surprised than the wife. Both were baptized. Their marriage became solid and full of spirituality, humor, uplift, love, and fulfillment. Both were fulfilled by a uniting force—a belief in the truthfulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Prophecies About the Book of Mormon

In the Old Testament book of Ezekiel 37:15-17, the prophet seems to be talking about two books: "The word of the Lord came . . . unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions: and join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand."

The Lord, through the prophet Ezekiel, is clearly prophesying about two sticks or books that shall be joined together in the last days. Since "books" in that day and age were scrolls rolled on sticks, he was clearly talking about a scriptural history of Judah (the biblical history of the Jews) and a scriptural history of the descendants of Joseph, one of Judah's other eleven brothers.

Judah and Joseph's sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, were the progenitors of three of the twelve tribes of Israel. Naturally, they were record-keeping peoples, as taught by the prophets. So, we must be looking for the scriptural history of the Jews (the Bible) but also the scriptural history of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph. Where is this scriptural history of Joseph or Ephraim and Manasseh? It must be joined together with the scriptural history of the Jews. If these two records are to be joined together, we must obtain both of them.

It is important to know more about Joseph, Judah's brother, whose sons were Ephraim and Manasseh. These two sons took their places as heads of two of the tribes of Israel when one of the twelve sons of Israel was deemed unworthy. In Genesis 49:22-26, Father Jacob or Israel gave his patriarchal (father's prophetic) blessing on the head of Joseph, prophesying what was going to happen to Joseph's posterity in the future: "Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall: The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:) even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb: the blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren."

This is beautiful allegorical language. Joseph is a "fruitful bough"—a father of a great posterity. He is going to have many descendants. They would be "by a well" or a body of water. His "branches" would "run over the wall"—the ocean. He would be hated by the archers, who would shoot at him and who hated him. Yet his "bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by" God. He would be blessed with blessings from "heaven above." He and his descendants would have many children—"blessings of the breasts, and of the womb." And, most important, his posterity would inherit the "utmost bound of the everlasting hills."

Who are these descendants of Joseph? Where is the land of the "everlasting hills"? If they have been blessed by God as this prophecy states, who are they? Where are they? Where is the record pertaining to them?

The "utmost bound of the everlasting hills" seems to refer to the North and South American continents—the only continents in the world with a string of everlasting hills (mountains) from the northern tip of North America to the southern tip of South America.

Remember, in Ezekiel 37:15-17, the record of Joseph is to be joined in the last days with the record of Judah (the Bible). We have the Bible. Where is the record of Joseph? Surely the biblical prophesy must come to pass.

If we could find this scriptural account of the posterity of Joseph's sons Ephraim and Manasseh, it would be an invaluable treasure.

The Bible is the historical and religious account of the ancient Jewish people. God raised up prophets in the holy land and gave them revelations, which they recorded as scripture. Today we know these scriptures as the Bible.

Yet there were other people in the world at the same time. For instance, there was a great civilization in the Western Hemisphere, the Americas.

Surely, the people there needed God's help as much as the Hebrews.

Surely, God loved them as much as those in the Middle East.

Surely, God is no respecter of persons. (Acts 10:34.)

Surely, God must have spoken to them through prophets as well.

Surely, we should find a historical and religious record of them.

When the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on multiple occasions, he told him about a buried record in a hill in upstate New York, the Hill Cumorah. Ultimately, Joseph Smith was permitted to take the record and, with the help of the Urim and Thummim, translate one-third of it and publish it as the Book of Mormon, the historical and religious account of the ancient American people. The angel Moroni claimed to be the resurrected last prophet of ancient America—the one who had buried the records in the Hill Cumorah in approximately A.D. 421.

This record was retrieved from the ground by Joseph Smith, an unlearned farm boy. With the inspiration and help of God, he translated one-third of the metal plates and published the translation as the Book of Mormon in 1830.

In Revelation 14:6-7,John the Beloved, on the Isle of Patmos, saw "another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters."

When the angel, who introduced himself as Moroni, appeared to Joseph Smith, he said "there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants." (Joseph Smith-History 1:34.) This was in fulfillment of the prophecy in Revelation 14:6-7.

A Fulfillment of a Prophecy of Isaiah

Isn't the Book of Mormon the record referred to in Isaiah 29:1-4: "Woe to Ariel, to Ariel [Jerusalem], the city where David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices. Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow: and it shall be unto me as Ariel [clearly talking about some other people]. And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee. And thou shalt be brought down, and shall speak out of the ground, and thy speech shalt be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust."

Prophetically, these passages of scripture talk about "Ariel," another name for Jerusalem. In the middle of this prophecy about Jerusalem, the prophet shifts to another area that "shall be unto me as Ariel." To what geographical area and people was he referring? He refers to a people who "shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground . . . low out of the dust."

The Book of Mormon was translated from golden plates found in the ground or dust. It speaks of Jerusalem, or Ariel. Also, it speaks of the ancient American people who wrote upon these plates and preserved them for centuries by burying them in the ground until Joseph Smith was permitted to retrieve them. With the help of God, he translated the plates into the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon literally came from the ground. It speaks out of the dust. It has been referred to as a "voice from the dust."

Joseph was able to translate only one-third of the metal plates because two-thirds were sealed. But, the angel assured him, the last of this record is yet to come forth.

While Joseph Smith was translating the Book of Mormon, Martin Harris, a respected local farmer, got a copy of some of the characters from the plates and took them to a professor Charles Anthon in New York City.

Harris described his experiences as follows: "I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Charles Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyriac, and Arabic; and he said they were true characters. He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him.

"He then said to me, 'Let me see that certificate.' I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, 'I cannot read a sealed book.' I left him and went to Dr. [Samuel] Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation." (Joseph Smith-History 1:64-65.)

In 1834, Professor Charles Anthon vehemently denied he had told Martin Harris the Book of Mormon characters resembled Egyptian characters. However, shortly after Martin Harris's visit with him, in 1831 William W. Phelps wrote a letter in which he stated that Anthon had translated some of the characters. He said they were "the ancient shorthand Egyptian."

Where else could Harris have gotten the phrase "shorthand Egyptian?"

That phrase was a scholarly one that Harris would not have been privy to. In 1824, Champollion had used basically the same term, "tachygraphie," something Anthon would undoubtedly have read, in describing a hieratic Egyptian script. In June 1827, the book in which Champollion was quoted was reviewed in the American Quarterly Review, wherein the hieratic Egyptian script was called "short-hand" Egyptian. Anthon had a copy of this and could have read it only months before Harris's visit.

Anthon did deny the story in 1834. He also wrote to anti-Mormon Eber D. Howe, claiming he did not give Harris a written statement. However, in a later letter in 1841 to T. W. Coit, Professor Anthon admitted that he had done so.

Anthon admitted Harris had come to him but left with the "express declaration" that he was not going to mortgage his farm or do anything further to help with the printing of the Book of Mormon. Harris must have left fully satisfied, because he did mortgage his farm and totally supported Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon thereafter.

Then why the discrepancy between Anthon's letter to E. D. Howe and his letter to T. W. Coit? He must have been protecting his standing with his intellectual peers. It would have been professionally difficult for Anthon to have been linked with the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith, a man constantly and falsely ridiculed in the yellow press for "roguery."

Some forty years later, in 1868, in a "Commemorative Address," Anthon's successor at Columbia College declared that the episode was a real threat to Anthon's reputation.

Most important, this was a fulfillment of the prophecies in Isaiah 29:11-14, wherein Isaiah prophesied: "The vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed. And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid."

This experience of Martin Harris was a literal fulfillment of Isaiah's prophesy. Joseph Smith was that unlearned person, and Charles Anthon was the learned one.

Martin Harris was a solid, honest, and dependable citizen. No one can find anything to criticize about his reputation. Anthon admitted to meeting with Harris, but in the attempt to salvage his reputation, he lied and sold his birthright for a mess of intellectual pottage.

The Story of the Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon begins in 600 B.C. with the family of Lehi, a prophet in Jerusalem who received revelation about the coming destruction of Jerusalem during the reign of King Zedekiah. Lehi was told to flee and that the Lord would guide him, his family, and a few others to a "promised land."

They wandered in the wilderness for eight years until they were told how to build a ship. Then they were commanded to embark for the promised land and were guided to the Americas.

The family of Lehi eventually divided into two nations: the Nephites, who were lighter-skinned, and the Lamanites, who were darker-skinned—progenitors of the Native Americans.

The Book of Mormon is a new witness for Christ and contains many testimonies of Christ throughout its pages. The Nephites and the Lamanites continually warred against each other. Most often the Nephites were the more righteous but, on occasion, the righteousness of the Lamanites exceeded the Nephites. Prophets in this Western Hemisphere with names like Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, Omni, Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, Mormon, and Moroni enlighten us with their writings about Christ and his gospel.

Christ, in the meridian of time, made a startling statement in John 10:16, speaking to the Jews: "Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd."

Some thought he must have been referring to the Gentiles, but that is not so. In Matthew 15:24, Christ said, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." So Christ's mission at that time was not to the Gentiles but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. The Book of Mormon makes it clear in 1 Nephi 6:2 that these early Americans were descendants of Israel. Nephi said, "It sufficeth me to say that we are descendants of Joseph." Joseph was the son of Israel who had the coat of many colors, was sold into Egypt, and became the salvation of Israel.

Then who were these "other sheep" who were "not of this fold" in Jerusalem? Where were they?

The Book of Mormon tells us that Christ, as a resurrected being, came to America. He told those he visited, "Ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." (3 Nephi 15:21.)

Thus we have more words of Christ as they were recorded by ancient American prophets. These chapters of his visit as a resurrected being are absolutely fascinating and beautiful. He taught his gospel here in the Americas centuries before European settlers arrived to inhabit the New World.

The Book of Mormon on Baptism

The resurrected Christ taught these people the true nature of Christian baptism. Remember that Paul said there would be one Lord, one faith, one baptism? Christ explained the true nature of baptism and gave the people in this hemisphere the authority to baptize: "The Lord said unto [Nephi]: I give unto you power that ye shall baptize this people when I am again ascended into heaven. And again the Lord called others, and said unto them likewise; and he gave unto them power to baptize. And he said unto them: On this wise shall ye baptize; and there shall be no disputations among you. Verily I say unto you, that whoso repenteth of his sins through your words, and desireth to be baptized in my name, on this wise shall ye baptize them—Behold, ye shall go down and stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them. And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name, saying: Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth again out of the water." (3 Nephi 11:21-26.)

With those instructions, there is no doubt of the true doctrine of baptism—who should perform it and how it should be performed. The Book of Mormon is explicit on this subject.

But why should we be baptized?

The Book of Mormon gives us the answer: "No unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day." (3 Nephi 27:19-20.)

The Beatitudes in the Book of Mormon

Christ gave his Sermon on the Mount to the Nephites but with some notable differences from his sermon in Palestine. We will examine only a few of the verses to give their flavor. It may be helpful to compare some of the scriptures as recorded in the King James Version of the Bible to the beatitudes recorded in the Book of Mormon:

The Bible: "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 5:3.) What is meant by the "poor in spirit?" The drunk down on the corner is "poor in spirit." So is the person on death row. Is theirs the kingdom of heaven? No.

The Book of Mormon: "Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (3 Nephi 12:3.) The additional four words, "who come unto me," clarify this beatitude and fulfill its meaning.

The Bible: "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled." (Matthew 5:6.) What are they to be filled with? Is it love, faith, honor, virtue, happiness, kindness?

The Book of Mormon: "And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost." (3 Nephi 12:6.) What greater gift could those who search after righteousness obtain than the gift of the Holy Ghost? How much more clear this beatitude becomes in the Book of Mormon!

As you can see, there are noticeable differences in the two versions. The Book of Mormon version is more complete and makes more sense.

The Name of Christ's Church

What should the name of Christ's church be? We have many different churches with many different names. The Book of Mormon is explicit on this subject. In 3 Nephi 27:8 Christ said, "How be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel."

When we review the churches of the world, very few are called by the name of Christ. Offhand it is difficult to name more than a dozen. Certainly, the church should bear the name of Christ. Yet there is one more qualification. The true church of Jesus Christ must be built upon his gospel. Therefore, we should look for the name of Christ and then compare the teachings of that church with the true gospel of Jesus Christ as outlined in the scriptures.

That is one of the reasons for this book. It is apparent from the scriptures that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints not only bears the name of Christ but also has the true doctrinal understanding of Christ's gospel.

We May Know for Ourselves

One of the greatest teachings of the Book of Mormon is that we can find out for ourselves whether it is true and whether Joseph Smith is a true prophet of God.

In the last chapter of the Book of Mormon, in Moroni 10:4-5, a wonderful promise is given to all who sincerely read and pray about the Book of Mormon: "When ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things."

What a powerful promise! Prayerfully turning to God, millions have found the truth that there are prophets in the world today—yes, in our day and age. The advantage of this promise is that we do not have to take anyone's word or follow anyone's teachings other than those of Christ. We can find out for ourselves if the Book of Mormon is true by putting this great promise to the test. Once we do, we will want to embrace the gospel, follow the living prophets, and do all within our power to live the principles of truth.

Converted through the Book of Mormon

One of the most interesting testimonies of the Book of Mormon arises out of the conversion of a good friend of mine who died a few years ago. Father John Staley had been a Benedictine monk for twenty-five years when he finally met a wonderful woman who helped to bring him the Book of Mormon and the gospel. He was the second of sixteen children. His father and uncle had been orphans who were lovingly raised by Benedictine monks of St. Vincent Arch Abbey in Latrobe, Pennsylvania. In fact, John's uncle was the head or abbot of that monastic community. The abbot uncle was John's hero.

At age twelve, John left his family circle and entered St. Vincent's for its prep school, liberal arts college, and seminary training for Catholic priests. After two years of college, he took his first triennial vows as a Benedictine monk. At the age of twenty-five, in 1941, he became a Catholic priest and a devoted servant to the Catholic people.

In 1967, at the age of fifty, he left the community at St. Vincents. He met Mariellen, his future wife, who brought the young Mormon missionaries to him. He began to see scriptural matters more intensively than at any time in his life. He did not want to leave the Catholic Church and, in fact, was devoted to his fellow monks and priests right up until the time he died.

He obtained a copy of the Book of Mormon and was challenged to put its promise to the test. This he did. Through the Spirit, he obtained a tremendous testimony of the gospel. He was baptized. He married Mariellen and became a sociology professor at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah.

John never lost his love for the Catholic Church, its priests, monks, and other officials. He visited them, loved them, and cared for them. But he had found the true gospel of Jesus Christ.

Before he died, I asked him to be on my advisory committee for persons with disabilities. He, along with other professionals on that advisory committee, played a significant role in advising me as we wrote the Americans with Disabilities Act—the comprehensive bill guaranteeing civil rights to persons with disabilities.

I know John felt this experience was one of the greatest of his life. I will forever be grateful for his contributions to that effort.

John Staley was one of the greatest men I have known. He did not hesitate, once he received the testimony of the Spirit, to join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Joseph Smith said, "I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone to our religion, and a man could get closer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." (Teachings, p. 194.)

Why not put the book's promise to the test by reading it with a prayerful heart, in faith? Find out for yourself if it is true. Ask God if he has placed modern prophets on the earth to help us with our modern problems.

I bear witness that the Book of Mormon is true. The first time I knew it was when I was seventeen years old. I read it, prayed about it, and had a profound spiritual experience that impressed upon my mind that it is true and that Joseph Smith was a true prophet of God. That is one reason I am so confident that you too will receive this God-given testimony of the truthfulness of these scriptures if you will read the Book of Mormon and ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, if it is not true. I know that God will manifest the truth of it to you by the power of the Holy Ghost.
