Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

PART 3

Where Are We Going?

Chapter 17

Our Life after Death

The spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, . . . are taken home to that God who gave them life.

—Alma 40:11

You have probably had occasion during your life to mourn the death of a loved one. Possibly you have wondered what has become of that person. Possibly you have wondered what will become of you after you die. When we die, the spirit leaves the body. That is what death is—the separation of the body and the spirit. James 2:26 says "the body without the spirit is dead." Where does the spirit go?

The Spirit World

In Luke 16:19-26, the Master's parable explains that the spirit goes to the spirit world: "There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day: and there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores. And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; and in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence."

We can see from the Lord's parable that the rich man had everything in this life, while Lazarus, the beggar, had nothing but the crumbs from the rich man's table. Yet when the rich man died, he went to a place of torment, which we call hell. Lazarus, who apparently had lived a decent life, went to Abraham's bosom, or a state of paradise. Both men went to a part of the spirit world.

In whose shoes would you like to be: those of Lazarus or those of the rich man? Naturally, Lazarus is the one to emulate. Yet it all depends on what we do while here on the earth.

Lazarus went to a place of comfort, a place of peace called Abraham's bosom. The rich man went to a place of torment. He could see Lazarus on Abraham's bosom but, because of a great gulf, could not receive any comfort from Lazarus to cool his tongue.

This makes it abundantly clear how important our earth life is. It is only a short time in the eternal scheme of things. But our lives here will determine whether we go to Abraham's bosom (a state of paradise) or a place of torment, or hell.

Which will you choose?

Whichever, immediately after death, it is the spirit world we will enter. What happens to us after that?

The Resurrection

Note 1 Corinthians 15:20-22, which explains the next step: "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." In other words, everyone who comes to the earth will be resurrected with a perfect body of flesh and bones to house his or her spirit. That is one of the reasons we shouted for joy at the opportunity of coming here.

In Philippians 3:20-21, Paul explains the resurrected state: "Our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself." Our resurrected bodies will become like Christ's, to the extent that we will be able to "subdue all things" unto ourselves. We, like the resurrected Christ, will then have power over the elements.

Even so, as great as the resurrection is, John 5:25-29 says: "The hour is coming, and now is when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation."

The scriptures are evidence there will be a resurrection of the just and the unjust. Which do you want to be? It all depends on how you live. This earth life is extremely important! Living the gospel of Christ here will bring joy, peace, comfort, and assurance of blessings, not only in this life but also in the life hereafter with Christ and God.

The Judgment

After the resurrection, then what? Consider Revelation 20:12: "I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works."

So the day of judgment will come to each of us. We will be judged in accordance with what we have done here on the earth. This earth life is extremely important.

Again, whose shoes would you like to be in—the rich man's or those of Lazarus? The rich man had an even better chance here on the earth but failed the test because he did not keep God's commandments. Lazarus passed the test and reaped the benefits of being judged a wise and decent man.

Where do we go after the day of judgment? Most Christian churches teach that we will go to one of two places—either heaven or hell. And the Catholic Church has the additional concept of purgatory.

What if two people, you and I, are borderline cases? We are not righteous enough to live with the great prophets, priests, and other righteous people. But neither are we so evil that we deserve to go to hell with liars, murderers, whoremongers, and adulterers.

What if I live just slightly better than you and slip into heaven, barely making it in with the prophets, saints, and holiest of people? You barely miss going into heaven because you did one less good deed than I. So you slide into association with the corrupt. Would that be just? Yet there would have to be a great number of borderline cases like this if there are only a heaven and a hell in the life hereafter. How can we justify the fact that I go to heaven while you, not really a bad person, go to hell with the dregs of humanity—liars, murderers, whoremongers, and blacklegs? It wouldn't be right. Would a just God do that to you and me?

Surely there must be a better way. Consider what the Savior said in John 14:2: "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you." Christ talked about many places we might go in the life hereafter.

In Matthew 10:41, a profound scripture, Christ says, "He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward."

This scripture clearly foretells at least three rewards we may receive when we die: (1) a prophet's reward, for those who followed the prophets; (2) a righteous man's reward, for those who did not follow the prophets but were nevertheless righteous; (3) the reward (by implication) of the unrighteous, who certainly will not go where the righteous or those who followed the prophets will go. Therefore, we can deduce there are at least three places we can go in the life hereafter.

This deduction is confirmed in 1 Corinthians 15:40-43, which says, "There are . . . celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption."

There will be three degrees of glory where we, as resurrected beings, may go, depending upon our worthiness. These three degrees of glory are compared with the sun, the moon, and the stars. Also, there will be different degrees of glory within each of these degrees of glory (for one star differs from another in glory).

The celestial kingdom is metaphorically compared to the glory of the sun. This is the highest kingdom and the one where God dwells. The terrestrial kingdom is the one where those who reject the prophets but still live good lives will go. The lower kingdom, as designated in latter-day revelation, is the telestial kingdom. That is where the wicked will go. Latter-day revelation tells us that even though the telestial kingdom is where the unrighteous go, its glory is beyond our earthly comprehension.

There must be one other kingdom—that of the devil, Lucifer, the adversary. It is called outer darkness or the kingdom of perdition. That is where the third of the hosts of heaven who were cast out with Lucifer will go, as well as resurrected mortals who are "filthy still," who have murdered by shedding innocent blood after receiving the new and everlasting covenant or who have committed blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. (Matthew 12:31. See also John 17:12; 2 Thessalonians 2:3; Hebrews 10:9; 2 Peter 3:7; Revelation 17:8.)

Where would Lazarus finally have gone? If he had followed the prophets and lived the gospel on earth, he would have entered the celestial kingdom. How about the rich man? Most likely, he went to the telestial kingdom, which was compared to the stars in the sky. Which do you want to inherit—the celestial, terrestrial, or telestial kingdom? Accepting the prophets and their teachings is the key to inheriting the celestial kingdom of God. To go there, we must humble ourselves and live the gospel taught by Christ and his holy prophets.
