Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 18

Salvation for the Dead

It was, thanks no doubt to heavenly power and aid, that the doctrine of salvation like the rays of the sun, suddenly lighted up the whole world.

—Eusebius

One of the most perplexing questions for most Christians is, What happens to all who have never heard of the Bible, Christ, even God, the priesthood, baptism, or any of the gospel? Or, what happens to those who have heard but not accepted the gospel for some reason? What happens to those who believe they have accepted the gospel but, in fact, have belonged to a church that does not have the priesthood? What happens to all who have lived with little or no opportunity to hear the gospel and who have not had the same opportunity for salvation that we have?

Some churches teach that many of these people may be lost or damned. Some churches have no answers to these questions. Some teach that unless all people accept their particular brand of religion, they are damned or lost. Some merely throw up their hands in frustration because they do not know how to answer these questions.

The larger question is, Does it seem logical that God, being just, would damn these people without giving each of them an equal opportunity to accept his teachings? No!

Then what happens to the vast majority of the world's prior and present population that is non-Christian and unknowledgeable about the gospel of Jesus Christ? God is just. Then isn't it logical that all people will have the opportunity to hear and either accept or reject the gospel of Christ? If God is no respecter of persons, as stated in Acts 10:34-35, then we must all be given the privilege of accepting or rejecting his gospel. If that is so, then how do we reconcile the fact that billions who have lived on earth have never heard of the gospel?

"They That Hear Shall Live"

Through revelation, we learn some simple eternal truths about this subject of salvation for all. Speaking about the unfortunate people who have not had the opportunity of accepting Christ's gospel, the Prophet Isaiah wrote, "They shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in prison, and after many days shall they be visited." (Isaiah 24:22.)

Naturally, questions arise: What does Isaiah mean by "pit" or "prison"? Who will visit those who dwell there?

In John 5:25-29 we find a partial answer. Speaking of the dead and of the resurrection, Christ explained: "The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation."

Christ will visit the dead, who will hear his voice. Those who listen to him and change their lives "shall live." Christ will have the authority to "execute judgment," and "all that are in the graves shall hear his voice."

Now we see why Isaiah said these people would be "gathered in the pit" and be "shut up in prison," but after many days "they [would] be visited." We now know that Christ is their visitor. Christ's mission is always to teach his gospel. Therefore, if the spirits of the dead hear Christ's voice, as he visits them in the pit or prison, they will hear the gospel of Jesus Christ.

When Christ was on the cross, he was flanked on both sides by two thieves or "malefactors." (Luke 23:32.) "And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us." The other malefactor rebuked the first and said, "Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom." Christ responded, "Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise." (Verses 39-43.)

Where did Christ and the thief go? Paradise.

When? That very day.

Some theologians assert that paradise is simply another word for heaven. That is not so. In John 20:17, after Christ had been resurrected, Mary went to embrace him. Christ said to her, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God and your God."

Christ and the thief went to paradise that very day. Yet three days later, Christ was resurrected; Mary tried to embrace him, and he said, "Touch me not for I have not yet ascended to my Father," who dwells in heaven. Christ had gone to paradise but had not yet ascended to heaven. Therefore, paradise must be a state of existence between earth life and heaven.

Paradise is part of the spirit world where the righteous go immediately following death. Remember the other part of the spirit world? Yes, it was torment or prison. Could anyone go from one to the other at that time, before Christ's resurrection? No. Why? Because there was "a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence." (Luke 16:26.)

Since Christ went to the Spirit World, he must have had some special reason to do so. Christ does not do unnecessary things. In 1 Peter 3:18-20, his mission is explained: "Christ . . . hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." Peter tells us that Christ's mission was to preach to the spirits in prison. What did Christ preach? He must have preached his gospel.

Remember what separated paradise or Abraham's bosom from the prison? It was the "great gulf." The people could not go from one side of the gulf to the other until Christ bridged the gulf and allowed the gospel to be preached to those in prison. So, one of Christ's missions was to bridge the gulf and make it possible for others, after his visit, to preach the gospel to those in the spirit prison.

In 1 Peter 4:6, we learn why Christ preached the gospel to them in prison: "For this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." It is easy to deduce that the people who have departed this life will have the opportunity to accept the gospel in the spirit world so they can be judged in the end like those who have the privilege of receiving it here on the earth. More important, if they accept the gospel, they might "live according to God in the spirit," that is, with God in the life hereafter.

Would Christ have wasted his time preaching the gospel to them if there was no opportunity for them to receive it and accept it? No!

Baptism for the Dead

To accept the gospel here on earth, we must obey the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. First, we must have an active belief—faith. Can a spirit have faith? Certainly. Then we must repent. Can a spirit repent of his or her sins? Certainly. But then we must accept the gospel and be baptized, for "except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) Of course, baptism is an earthly ordinance, performed with earthly materials. Therefore, can a spirit be baptized? No. So what happens? Here we have spirits who have accepted the gospel, had faith, and repented but now cannot be baptized because they are no longer in the flesh.

Think about it. Would Christ have preached the gospel to them if no way was provided for them to be baptized and gain their salvation? No! Yet, they cannot be baptized for themselves. What can be done?

Consider 1 Corinthians 15:29: "What shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" Here, Paul explains that the early Christians were "baptizing for the dead." He didn't say baptism of the dead but baptism for the dead. This verse makes it clear that someone on earth must be baptized vicariously for each of those who have passed on but who have accepted the gospel in the spirit world.

This vicarious act isn't odd. After all, who performed the greatest vicarious act in history? Christ died that, through him, all of us might gain salvation. Christ's greatest work was to bring about the opportunity of salvation for all mankind.

We have been directed through latter-day revelation to search out the genealogies of our ancestors. Then we must send the information to the temples of the Church, where this special ordinance of vicarious baptism for those who have passed on is performed. Thus, a greater work will have been performed for billions of people who, having had the gospel presented to them in the spirit world, may accept the gospel and receive all of the benefits thereof.

In John 14:12, Christ said, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father." Christ's greatest work was to give us salvation, yet he tells us in John that we will do the same work. By seeking out the genealogy of those who have passed on and by vicariously going to the temple and being baptized for them, we are providing a means for those in the spirit world to gain their salvation.

It is a wonderful concept that all people will have the opportunity sometime in their journey through eternity—either here on earth or in the spirit world—to gain salvation.

This vicarious work is part of the work performed in the beautiful temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We are expected to do this work because God has "provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect." (Hebrews 11:40.)

In Malachi 4:5-6 we read one of the greatest prophecies concerning the last days: "I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse."

Malachi prophesied that before Christ came the second time, Elijah the prophet must come. On April 3, 1836, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were visited by Elijah the prophet, "who was taken to heaven without tasting death." (Doctrine and Covenants 110:13.) Elijah stood before them and said, "Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that [I] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors." (Verses 14-16.)

Through the work in the temples, including the gathering of genealogical information, the hearts of the children are turned to their fathers. Those waiting for the work to be done are the fathers whose hearts are turned to their children.
