Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 19

Eternal Marriage

Adam could not be happy even in Paradise without Eve.

—John Lubbock

Have you ever wondered what will happen to your family in the hereafter? What will happen to your parents and your brothers and sisters? What will happen to your spouse and children? The family is the most important reason for living and enjoying this earthly life. Will it be dissolved once we die? Or will we be together in the hereafter? Is there a way we can be married for more than "till death do us part?"

One of the reasons for Mormon temples is the performance of sealings, or eternal marriages, for loving couples who dedicate themselves and their families to being worthy to be together forever.

The Savior, speaking to Peter in Matthew 16:19, said, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."

That power to bind is further described in Mark 10:7-9: "A man [shall] leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder."

This is further illustrated in 1 Corinthians 11:11: "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord."

The Lord's plan is to elevate families to the highest place of significance in our lives. To do so, he provides a way for families to be eternal. If men and women, as equal and spiritual partners, rear children righteously while showing respect and kindness for each other, they can be bound together by one having authority to perform eternal marriages. Families can be united eternally in the presence of God. That gives new meaning to the importance of marriage, family, children, and our lives together.

Paul gave this counsel to husbands: "Love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it." (Ephesians 5:25.) In Ephesians 5:28 he wrote: "So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself." Additionally, in Ephesians 5:33 we read, "Let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband."

In the compilation of modern revelations called the Doctrine and Covenants, Joseph Smith wrote: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase." (D&C 131:1-4.)

In the 132nd section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verses 15-16, the Lord said, "If a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world. Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory."

In Doctrine and Covenants section 132:19, the Lord expanded that statement: "If a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; . . . it shall be said unto them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths."

One of the latter-day apostles, Bruce R. McConkie, summed it up this way: "The most important things that any member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ever does in this world are: 1. To marry the right person, in the right place, by the right authority; and 2. To keep the covenant made in connection with this holy and perfect order of matrimony—thus assuring the obedient persons of an inheritance of exaltation in the celestial kingdom." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 118.)
