Orrin G. Hatch, Higher Laws: Understanding the Doctrines of Christ ( 1995)

Chapter 20

A Final Testimony

I have written this book because of the need for a short primer explaining the beautiful doctrines of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is intended for those investigating the Church, the missionaries who teach them, new converts to the Church, those who are young and learning, and those who are interested in studying the doctrines of the Church.

One of the great blessings of my life is having seen many people search the scriptures, read the Book of Mormon, listen to the missionaries, and join the Church. I have seen Catholic priests, ministers of other faiths, Jewish people, agnostics, atheists, and many others read the Book of Mormon, gain a testimony of the gospel, and join the Church.

When I reached the age of seventeen, having had faith in my religion throughout my youth, I decided to find out for myself if the Book of Mormon was true. I took the challenge of the Book of Mormon to read it and to pray about it with real intent and with faith in Jesus Christ. I can still recall being in my humble, unheated, and sparsely furnished upstairs bedroom when I finished reading the book. I was overcome by the Spirit witnessing to me that the Book of Mormon is true. Ever since that eventful evening, I have been able to bear testimony of its truthfulness.

When I was twelve years old, my parents took me to an old farmer-patriarch in the little town of Smithfield, Utah, for a patriarchal blessing. (Remember Jacob's patriarchal blessing on his son Joseph, mentioned earlier in this book.) I was the son of a skilled laborer and knew nothing about government, the Constitution, or any other political matters. As a young boy, my only goals were to become a builder like my father (which I later came to be) and to become a good athlete. I had no other ideas about the future. The prophetic blessing the old patriarch gave me was simple yet profound.

Patriarchal blessings are extremely personal, so I will not share much of it, but you will be interested in just two sentences in the middle of the blessing: "Thou shalt be privileged to mingle with people of many types of character and learning, and shalt have contacts with men and women of educational attainments, and holding high and responsible positions of leadership among the people. These contacts will help thee to ripen in wisdom and judgment." Surely these promises have come to pass. But these two sentences are by no means the most important sentences in my blessing. The blessing prophesies many other astounding things, and I cannot read it without amazement at the inspiration of that old farmer-patriarch forty-nine years ago. He predicted a great number of things that have already come to pass and some that are still to occur.

About the time I received my patriarchal blessing, which promised me that my life would be spared, a friend and I were going home from a Sunday double-header baseball game when I got off the bus and ran across the road. Unfortunately, I didn't see the automobile that was coming down the road at fifty miles per hour. It hit me head-on and threw me sixty feet, twelve feet in the air. At that moment, my father and a friend were coming around the corner and saw it all. I was picked up unconscious, with a serious concussion and other unknown internal injuries, and taken to the hospital. The elders of the Church administered to me (blessed me), and I awoke with only a bruised hip and a headache. My life was miraculously spared. I also learned an important lesson from this experience—keep the Sabbath day holy.

I have personally had the experience of exercising the Melchizedek Priesthood, which was conferred upon me. I have seen the power of the priesthood, as stated in James 5:14-15: "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him."

I have had the privilege of representing the Lord and administering these blessings to numerous people. I have seen the lame walk, the blind see, the barren have children, and the chronically ill be healed. I have seen people receive the gift of faith. I have seen chronic nausea dispelled, lives saved, and people healed in a wide variety of ways. These have been wonderful spiritual experiences to me.

I have personally known a number of the modern prophets, from David O. McKay to the present prophet, Gordon B. Hinckley. I have felt and recognized their inspiration as apostles and prophets. I know that each of them was raised up for specific purposes by the Lord. How blessed we are to have prophets in this day to guide us and help us with the myriad problems of our complex modern society.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is true. I know that beyond any doubt and have expressed my testimony on many occasions to friendly and not-so-friendly audiences. That knowledge transcends any other knowledge I have obtained in life. Nothing else is as important as knowing that Jesus Christ atoned for our sins, died, was resurrected, and paved the way for us to return to our Father in Heaven with our families.

It is my hope and prayer that this little book will be of interest to you and your family as evidence of the truthfulness of the beautiful gospel of Jesus Christ. I express my love and my thanks that you have taken time to read it. God bless you.

Â 1. We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

Â 2. We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression.

Â 3. We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.

Â 4. We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Â 5. We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

Â 6. We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, and so forth.

Â 7. We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, and so forth.

Â 8. We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God.

Â 9. We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.
