David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

PREFACE

These chapters have been written over a period of perhaps twelve years. The only ones which were written expressly to be published sequentially are chapters 1 through 5. The others have been written for various occasions as articles for periodicals, or formal papers for special seminars or assemblies, etc. Although they have been written over a period of years and according to no predetermined plan, they do constitute a remarkably coherent sequence as arranged for this book.

The title of this work, The Gospel: God, Man, and Truth, is a generic description of its contents. Chapters 1 through 5 deal principally with the Godhead: Elohim, the Father; Jesus Christ, the Redeemer; and the Holy Ghost, the Comforter. Chapters 6 through 13 deal principally with man. And chapters 14 through 17 deal primarily with truth.

Although the specific content of each chapter is indicated in its own title, there is also an implicit relationship of all three of the major and underlying concerns of this book in each chapter too. In the concluding chapter, "Ye Shall Know the Truth. . ." there is a convergence of these concerns, God, Man, and Truth.

It is the hope of the author that this book will be of interest and value to any reader, but particularly that it will be of assistance to the student whose mind is frequently challenged with new and enticing—sometimes beguiling—ideas, in helping him to be firmly anchored in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Through the years I have discussed various parts of the contents of this book with different ones of my colleagues and I would like to express appreciation to them for their influence, encouragement, and assistance. I am indebted to Drs. Sidney B. Sperry, B. West Belnap, Chauncey C. Riddle, Truman G. Madsen, and Professor Robert K. Thomas. I am especially indebted to Professor Roy W. Doxey, who has examined the entire manuscript. Thanks is also due my wife, Marilyn, three of my daughters, Karen, Steffani and Rebecca, and my secretary, Miss Pauline Duke. Mr. Alva H. Parry of Deseret Book Company and his staff have made helpful suggestions and have been most cooperative, and I also wish to acknowledge here my appreciation for their assistance.

PUBLISHER'S PREFACE TO THE 1978 CLASSICS IN MORMON LITERATURE SERIES EDITION

The Gospel: God, Man, and Truth is a book that is unique in our Mormon literature. In its discussions of those three topics—God, man, and truth—it helps clarify and create perspective for all readers, and especially for the student of philosophy and religion who stretches his mind to understand the philosophy of the world as it relates to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

Because this work has been published in the Classics in Mormon Literature series, we have not attempted to correct numbers and data that were current in the 1965 edition. Also, where the author has quoted materials that are now part of the new scriptures added to the Pearl of Great Price in 1976 we have left the original reference.

ABBREVIATIONS

The Standard Works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

The Holy Bible: Books of the Bible.

The Book of Mormon: 1 Nephi

2 Nephi (These are the only books cited in the Book of Mormon.)

Mosiah

Alma

Mormon

Ether

Moroni

The Doctrine and Covenants: D&C The sections are referredto by their respective numbers

The Pearl of Great Price: MosesAbrahamJoseph Smith

Abbreviations for other works cited in this book:

AFThe Articles of Faith (Sixteenth edition in English), by James E. Talmage.CRReports of Annual and Semiannual Conferences of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.DBYDiscourses of Brigham Young (1941 edition), edited by John A. Widtsoe.DHCDocumentary History of the Church, or History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by Joseph Smith, edited by B. H. Roberts.DSDoctrines of Salvation, by Joseph Fielding Smith, compiled by Bruce R. McConkie.GDGospel Doctrine (Fifth edition), by Joseph F. Smith.JDJournal of Discourses (26 volumes).TPJSTeachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith.

Other sources, which are referred to less frequently in this work, are identified in appropriate places in the text.

PART I GOD
