David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

CHAPTER I ELOHIM

Through the ages peoples of all times, places, and cultures have speculated much regarding and been very concerned about the notion of God.

The very influential German philosopher, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (d. 1831) makes an extremely important observation concerning this interest of mankind in the following passage:

Religion is the sphere in which a nation gives itself the definition of that which it regards as the True. A definition contains everything that belongs to the essence of an object; reducing its nature to its simple characteristic predicate, as a mirror for every predicate — the generic soul pervading all its details. The conception of God, therefore, constitutes the general basis of a people's character. (The Philosophy of History [Revised Edition; New York: Willey Book Co., 1944], p. 50.)

As one considers Hegel's statement it could be a very profitable enterprise for him to ask himself what he thinks about God, believes about God, and knows about God, and how his answers to these questions influence his life.

God has revealed much regarding himself through his prophets, particularly in our dispensation. Let us examine some of the things he has revealed about himself and what they should mean to us in terms of our own conduct or behavior.

The Meaning of "Elohim"

"Elohim" is a name for God which is found in Hebrew texts of the Old Testament. It is the plural form of "El" and "Eloah," other Semitic words for God. Not only does "Elohim" have a quantitative meaning but a qualitative meaning as well. That is, not only does it mean "Gods" instead of "God" but it also connotes majesty, excellence, power, and supremacy. It is in this latter sense that "Elohim" is used as the name of God the Eternal Father. The name is representative of his greatness.

God Is an Exalted Man

Speaking of Elohim, the Prophet Joseph Smith declared:

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens. That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible, — I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form — like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instructions from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another.

* * *

. . . It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did. . . . (TPJS: 345-346.)

Mortals are not treading a course unknown to God. He knows mortality not merely analogically or even vicariously but by his own personal experience.

He has not chosen to reveal himself personally to men upon the earth many times, but he has done so sufficiently that man should know both that he is, and what he is.

He bore witness with his voice, of Jesus' divine Sonship at Jesus' baptism. (Matt. 3 :17.)

On the mount of transfiguration the three chief apostles, after beholding the transfigured Lord and Moses and Elijah, heard the Father identify Jesus as his beloved Son. (Matt. 17 :5.) Again, after Jesus entered Jerusalem for the last week of his mortal life, the Father's voice was heard (and interpreted variously) by the people, in response to Jesus' prayer unto him. (John 12 :28.)

But the Father has shown himself to some of his mortal children. As Stephen was being stoned to death he saw the Father in vision. (Acts 7 :55-56.) The young Joseph Smith saw him in his first vision. (Joseph Smith 2 :17.) Also Sidney Rigdon in the company of Joseph Smith saw the Father. (D&C 76 :20-24.)

Joseph Smith, in relating his first vision, speaks of God as a personage who spoke to him. In D&C 130 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which contains "Important Items of Instruction given by Joseph Smith the Prophet," it is declared that "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's." (vs. 22.) Further, when Paul wrote to the Hebrews and bore his testimony of Jesus as the Son he described him as being in the express image of the Father's person. (Heb. 1 :1-3.)

It is also interesting and significant to observe that during the creation God declared, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness," and that the record says "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Gen. 1 :26-27.) But this is made even more meaningful when we note the record regarding the birth of Adam's son, Seth. It reads: "This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him. . . . And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth." (Ibid., 5 :1-3.) That is, Adam was in the image of God and after his likeness, and Seth was in the image of Adam and after his likeness.

Therefore, Elohim, or God the Eternal Father, is not some vague abstraction. He is not a mystical something or other which can dwell in the hearts of men. As the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false." (D&C 130 :3.) On the contrary, he is a personal being. As President Brigham Young said:

If we could see our heavenly Father, we should see a being similar to our earthly parent, with this difference, our Father in heaven is exalted and glorified. (JD 4 :54, Sept. 21, 1856.)

God's Knowledge, Character, and Other Attributes

Abraham understood the foregoing very well, for he said, "Thus I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made; And he said unto me: My son, my son (and his hand was stretched out), behold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes and I could not see the end thereof." (Abr. 3 :1-12.)

While Abraham enjoyed that great experience with God he was told something of tremendous importance regarding God himself. Abraham relates: "And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all." (Ibid., 3 :19.)

In this dispensation it has been revealed that God's glory is intelligence. One should not assume, however, that this connotes mental brilliance only, for the revelation continues by identifying intelligence as light and truth, and declares, "Light and truth forsake that evil one." (D&C 93 :36-37.) This suggests that the intelligence which is God's glory is not only intellectual capacity and knowledge but a disposition of character. It is a disposition which is contrary to evil.

The Prophet Joseph Smith in describing the Father's knowledge and character said: "God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fullness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell; and that he is the Father of lights; in him the principle of faith dwells independently, and he is the object in whom the faith of all other rational and accountable beings center for life and salvation." (Lectures on Faith [Salt Lake City: N. B. Lundwall, compiler and publisher, no date] Lecture 2, para. 2.)

. . . Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him. (Lec. 4, para. 11.)

After enumerating and briefly discussing some of God's attributes, the Prophet summarized in these words:

Let the mind once reflect sincerely and candidly upon the ideas of the existence of the before-mentioned attributes in the Deity, and it will be seen that, as far as his attributes are concerned, there is a sure foundation laid for the exercise of faith in him for life and salvation. For inasmuch as God possesses the attribute knowledge, he can make all things known to his saints necessary for their salvation; and as he possesses the attribute power, he is able thereby to deliver them from the power of all enemies; and seeing, also, that justice is an attribute of the Deity, he will deal with them upon the principles of righteousness and equity, and a just reward will be granted unto them for all their afflictions and sufferings for the truth's sake. And as judgment is an attribute of the Deity also, his saints can have the most unshaken confidence that they will, in due time, obtain a perfect deliverance out of the hands of their enemies, and a complete victory over all those who have sought their hurt and destruction. And as mercy is also an attribute of the Deity, his saints can have confidence that it will be exercised towards them, and through the exercise of that attribute towards them comfort and consolation will be administered unto them abundantly, amid all their afflictions and tribulations. And, lastly, realizing that truth is an attribute of the Deity, the mind is led to rejoice amid all its trials and temptations, in hope of that glory which is to be brought at the revelation of Jesus Christ, and in view of that crown which is to be placed upon the heads of the saints in the day when the Lord shall distribute rewards unto them, and in prospect of that eternal weight of glory which the Lord has promised to bestow upon them, when he shall bring them in the midst of his throne to dwell in his presence eternally. (Lec. 4, para. 17.)

Inasmuch as these are some of the attributes of your Father, to what extent are you developing these attributes in yourself? Do you really want to become as he is?

More briefly than the Prophet Joseph Smith, Alma epitomizes God's attributes as follows: "He has all power, all wisdom, and all understanding; he comprehendeth all things, and he is a merciful Being even unto salvation, to those who will repent and believe on his name." (Alma 26 :35.)

Law in the Cosmos

Concerning the vast creations of the cosmos and the application of God's knowledge, power, and benevolence, he has revealed the following: "All kingdoms have a law given; and there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in the which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions." (D&C 88 :36-38.)

Speaking of the Father, the revelation continues, "He hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons; And their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth, which comprehend the earth and all the planets." (Ibid., 88 :42-43.)

Elohim Is Our Father

The existence of the earth, the moon, other planets, the sun, and the countless vast systems of the cosmos as the works of Elohim justify his majestic name. However, these great things do not entitle him to the name Eternal or Heavenly Father except metaphorically. But his being called Father does not rest upon this metaphorical entitlement, for he is literally the Father of the spirits of all mankind.

President Brigham Young said:

I want to tell you, each and every one of you, that you are well acquainted with God our heavenly Father, or the great Elohim. You are all well acquainted with Him, for there is not a soul of you but what has lived in His house and dwelt with Him year after year; and yet you are seeking to become acquainted with Him, when the fact is, you have merely forgotten what you did know . . . .

There is not a person here today but what is a son or a daughter of that Being. In the spirit world their spirits were first begotten and brought forth, and they lived there with their parents for ages before they came here. This, perhaps, is hard for many to believe, but it is the greatest nonsense in the world not to believe it. If you do not believe it, cease to call Him Father; and when you pray, pray to some other character. (JD 4 :216, February 8, 1857.)

Man is the offspring of God. . . . We are as much the children of this great Being as we are the children of our mortal progenitors. (Ibid., 9 :283, February 23, 1862.)

President George Albert Smith spoke similarly when he said:

. . . we are the children of God. He is the Father of our spirits. We have not come from some lower form of life, but God is the Father of our spirits, and we belong to the royal family, because He is our Father. (CR, p. 125, April, 1946.)

The realization that we are of a celestial parentage should so inspire men and women that they should not be satisfied to live for less than a celestial life.

Providence

God is not only literally the Father of our spirits, but he has a providential concern for us and all of his works.

President John Taylor said:

. . . He governs this and other worlds, regulates all the systems and gives them their motions and revolutions; He preserves them in their various orbits, and governs them by unerring, unchangeable laws, as they traverse the immensity of space. In our world He gives day and night, summer and winter, seedtime and harvest; He adapts man, the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air and the fishes of the sea to their various climates and elements. He takes care of and provides for not only the hundreds of millions of the human family, but the myriads of beasts, fowls and fishes; He feeds and provides for them day by day, giving them their breakfast, dinner and supper; He takes care of the reptiles and other creeping things, and feeds the myriads of animalculae, which crowd earth, air and water. His hand is over all, and His providence sustains all. (JD 10 :260, October 10, 1863.)

In a similar vein President Brigham Young said:

. . . He is our Heavenly Father; He is also our God, and the Maker and upholder of all things in heaven and on earth. He sends forth His counsels and extends His providences to all living. He is the Supreme Controller of the universe. At His rebuke the sea is dried up, and the rivers become a wilderness. He measures the waters in the hollow of His hand, and meteth out heaven with a span, and comprehendeth the dust of the earth in a measure, and weigheth the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance; the nations to Him are as a drop in a bucket, and He taketh up the isles as a very little thing; the hairs of our heads are numbered by Him, and not a sparrow falleth to the ground without our Father; and He knoweth every thought and intent of the hearts of all living, for He is everywhere present by the power of His Spirit — His minister the Holy Ghost. He is the Father of all, is above all, through all, and in you all; He knoweth all things pertaining to this earth, and He knows all things pertaining to millions of earths like this. (Ibid., 11:41, January 8, 1865.)

God's Work

Consistent with the foregoing words of two latterday prophets is the Lord's own declaration to Moses: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Speaking generally, mankind has not been willing to receive God's will, and he has exercised great patience with those who have made covenant with him in the various dispensations, for even they, in large part, have not been constant. But even so, as President John Taylor said: "As a kind and beneficent father towards His children, He has been seeking from generation to generation to promote the welfare, the happiness, and the exaltation of the human family." (JD 24:125, April 8, 1883.)

Conclusion

It should be a source of incomparable joy to men to understand the following even in a very finite or limited way.
