David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter II JEHOVAH: SON AND REDEEMER

"Jehovah" is the anglicized form of the Hebrew name Yahweh or Jahveh. It means the Self-existent One or The Eternal. This name is essentially the same as that revealed to Moses when he was instructed to tell the children of Israel, "I Am hath sent me unto you." Identifying himself for Moses, the Lord declared his name to be "I Am That I Am." (Ex. 3:13-14.) In effect the Lord was saying to Moses that he is without beginning of days or end of years, that he is identical with existence, that he did not come to be nor will he cease to be. The connotation is essentially the same as another of his names used in the scriptures, Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, or the beginning and the end. Summarily, his names mean I am he who really is, or I am he who eternally exists.

The name by which he is most frequently called in the Christian world is Jesus Christ, "Jesus" meaning Savior (Matt. 1:21), and "Christ" meaning Messiah. (John 1:41.) The words "Savior" and "Messiah" are sometimes used along with other sacred titles such as the Only Begotten Son, Son of God, Son of Man, Emmanuel, the Anointed One, Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, Lamb of God, Lamb without spot and without blemish, and Firstborn.

Each of these titles has its particular meaning, but in general these titles refer to two kinds of things:

(1) The relation of Jesus Christ to the Father and (2) The mission of Jesus Christ in behalf of mankind.

Jesus Is the Literal Son of God

Among the titles of the first kind perhaps the most prominent are the Only Begotten Son, Son of God, Son of Man, and Firstborn.

In "A Doctrinal Exposition by the First Presidency and the Twelve," dated June 30, 1916, is the following statement which clearly and emphatically sets forth the doctrine that Elohim is not only the Father of the spirits of all men, but that he is the Father of both the Spirit and the body of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Scriptures embodying the ordinary signification—literally that of Parent—are too numerous and specific to require citation. The purport of these scriptures is to the effect that God the Eternal Father, whom we designate by the exalted name-title "Elohim," is the literal Parent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and of the spirits of the human race. Elohim is the Father in every sense in which Jesus Christ is so designated, and distinctively He is the Father of spirits. Thus we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews: "Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?" (Heb. 12:9.) In view of this fact we are taught by Jesus Christ to pray: "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name."

. . . Jesus Christ is the Son of Elohim both as spiritual and bodily offspring; that is to say, Elohim is literally the Father of the spirit of Jesus Christ and also of the body in which Jesus Christ performed His mission in the flesh, and which body died on the cross and was afterward taken up by the process of resurrection, and is now the immortalized tabernacle of the eternal spirit of our Lord and Savior. (AF :466.)

President Joseph F. Smith, who was President of the Church at the time the above statement was issued, spoke on this subject in a conference of the Box Elder Stake conducted on December 19 and 20, 1914. A local newspaper reported the following:

President Smith stated that it is a perplexing thing to him why men persist in evading the simple truth in connection with the conception and birth of the Saviour. . . . He declared that God accomplishes all His purposes on natural principles and if man has been created in the exact image of God then God must be exactly like man in form and Mary the virgin, is the mother of Jesus while God the Eternal Father is the actual father of Jesus just the same as earthly parents are the fathers and mothers of their children. President Smith emphasized the fact that God is the father of the Saviour, not the Holy Ghost nor any other influence or spirit. The Saviour is in reality the "only begotten of the Father" and God is actualy [sic] and truly His father. (The Box Elder News, for Thursday, December 24, 1914, p. 2.)

Regarding the paternity of Jesus Christ President Brigham Young declared:

When the time came that his First-born, the Savior, should come into the world and take a tabernacle, the Father came himself and favored that Spirit with a tabernacle instead of letting any other man do it. The Savior was begotten by the Father and his Spirit, by the same Being who is the Father of our spirits, and that is all the organic difference between Jesus Christ and you and me. (DBY :50.)

The First Presidency of the Church in 1912, writing upon Jesus' Sonship to Elohim also makes reference to the title, Firstborn. They wrote:

. . . It was our Father in Heaven who begat the spirit of him who was the Firstborn of all spirits that come to this earth and who was also his Father by the Virgin Mary, making him "the Only Begotten in the flesh." Read Luke 1:26-35. Where is Jesus called "the Only Begotten of the Holy Ghost"? He is always singled out as "the Only Begotten of the Father." (John 14:3, 16-18, etc. The Holy Ghost came upon Mary, her conception was under that influence, even of the spirit of life; our Father in Heaven was the Father of the Son of Mary, to whom the Savior prayed, as did our earthly father Adam. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954], p. 345.)

The Son of Man

The above statements account for Jesus' being called the Only Begotten Son, the Son of God, and the Firstborn, but why is he called Son of Man? Does that refer to his having lived among men, or his having inherited the capacity to die, from his maternal line? No! This title, as the others mentioned, denotes his divine origin, for "Man" in the title is only an abbreviation for one of the names of Elohim. "For, in the langage of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ. . . ." (Moses 6:57.)

Therefore, Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Son of an Exalted Man (Man of Holiness). But furthermore he is "the Firstborn of all spirits that come to this earth" and is the Father's Only Begotten Son in the flesh.

Some of the titles applied to the Lord Jesus Christ which have to do primarily with his mission in behalf of mankind are the following: the Anointed One, the Redeemer, Savior, Messiah, Christ, Lamb of God, and Lamb without spot and without blemish. All of these titles connote, in one way or another, the great atonement.

The Atonement Revealed

From the days of Adam it was known among men that the Son of God was to come to the earth and suffer the atonement.

Adam was given commandments, which he taught to his posterity, that he should worship the Lord and offer the firstlings of his flocks for an offering unto the Lord. (Moses 5:5.)

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore.

And in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will. (Ibid., 5:6-9.)

The sacrifices offered by Adam and his posterity were in similitude of the great sacrifice which was to be made later by Elohim and his Son. For just as Adam and his descendants were to offer the firstlings of their flock, so Elohim was going to offer the Firstborn of his "flock" (his spirit children).

In a mighty vision Enoch was shown the unique mission of the Lord. Moses records:

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Look, and he looked and beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men;

And he heard a loud voice; and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned; and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent; and the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory;

And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God; and the remainder were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day.

And again Enoch wept and cried unto the Lord, saying: When shall the earth rest?

And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the space of a thousand years. (Ibid., 7:55-58; 65.)

Noah taught his generation redemption through Jesus Christ. (Ibid., 8:3-24.) Abraham was acquainted with Jesus' mission. (Abr. 3:22-28.) Joseph, the son of Jacob, knew of the Messiah's coming. (2 Ne. 3:5; 4:1) Moses understood that the Only Begotten of the Father is the Savior. (Moses 1:6.)

Isaiah was shown many things, and part of his testimony is the following.

Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. (Isa. 7:14.)

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, the everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. (Ibid., 9:6-7.)

Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. (Ibid., 53:1-12.)

Similarly, Nephi and other prophets among his people were shown the Lord's mission hundreds of years prior to his advent in Bethlehem; for example, Nephi said:

And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me again, saying: Look! And I looked and beheld the Lamb of God, that he was taken by the people; yea, the Son of the everlasting God was judged of the world; and I saw and bear record.

And I, Nephi, saw that he was lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world. (1 Ne. 11:32-33.)

The Birth of the Savior

When the time came for Jehovah to take upon himself a tabernacle of flesh and bones, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God to a virgin of Nazareth named Mary, and declared unto her:

Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be. And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. (Luke 1:28-35.)

When Jesus was born, an angel appeared to some shepherds of Judea and announced to them: "Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord." (Ibid., 2:10-11.)

During Jesus' ministry he tried in various ways to prepare his disciples for his own death, but they did not seem to understand.

Jesus Taught the Atonement

Matthew records the great conversation at Caesarea Philippi in which Peter bore solemn testimony of Jesus' divinity, and the Lord told him it was by the power of revelation and spoke of the keys of the priesthood, and then Matthew continues:

From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee. But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of man. (Matt. 16:21-23.)

And again, a short time thereafter, while he and the twelve were still in Galilee he said:

. . . The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men: And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry. (Ibid., 17:22-23.)

Again, a short time prior to the passion week the Lord predicted the imminence of his suffering:

And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things should happen unto him. Saying, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles: And they shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him; and the third day he shall rise again. (Mark 10:32-34.)

On the third day of the passion week certain Greeks who were at the feast came to the disciples and requested to see Jesus.

And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honour. Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. The people therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered: others said, An angel spake to him. Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said, signifying what death he should die. The people answered him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man? Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you: for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them. (John 12:23-36.)

The Atonement

Finally, in the evening of the fifth day of passion week, after celebrating the passover, having his last supper, washing the disciples' feet, instituting the ordinance of the Sacrament, giving his last great discourses, and offering his prayer for his disciples and prophesying concerning them, he retired to the Garden of Gethsemane. He said to most of the twelve: "Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder." He took Peter, James, and John with him, "Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me. And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matt. 26:36-39.)

And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. (Luke 22:43-44.)

Then Jesus rose, went to his disciples, and found them asleep. He retired again and prayed a second time as he had before. He went to his disciples again and found them still asleep. A third time he retired and prayed to his Father as he had done before. (See ibid., 26:40-46.)

Sometimes it is not recognized that Jesus' suffering in the Garden was a fundamental part of his atoning sacrifice. However, Luke reports that the Lord's agony in the Garden was so intense that "his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground."

President Joseph Fielding Smith gives us insight into this great event. He says:

We speak of the passion of Jesus Christ. A great many people have an idea that when he was on the cross, and nails were driven into his hands and feet, that was his great suffering. His great suffering was before he ever was placed upon the cross. It was in the Garden of Gethsemane that the blood oozed from the pores of his body: "which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit — and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." (D&C 19:18.)

That was not when he was on the cross; that was in the garden. That is where he bled from every pore in his body.

Now I cannot comprehend that pain. I have suffered pain, you have suffered pain, and sometimes it has been quite severe; but I cannot comprehend pain, which is mental anguish more than physical, that would cause the blood, like sweat, to come out upon the body. It was something terrible, something terrific; so we can understand why he would cry unto his Father: "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (DS I:130.)

After the betrayal by Judas Iscariot the Lord was taken to Annas, Caiaphas, the Sanhedrin, Pilate, Herod, and Pilate again and all the while suffering a host of humiliations, indignities, and physical pains.

Finally, at the place called Calvary, he was crucified between two malefactors. Suffering the anguish of the cross he said, "It is finished," "bowed his head, and gave up the ghost." (John 19:30.)

We cannot conceive of the suffering he experienced in crucifixion. Serious contemplation of such a death almost makes one ill. But although he was a divine Being, bearing the sins of the world in his suffering, thousands of mortals were executed by crucifixion. This all the more emphasizes the anguish he suffered in the Garden, which was an altogether unique experience.

All men know they must eventually die the temporal death, but how must it have been for the great Jehovah to know both prior to his mortal birth and throughout his mortal years that he would eventually suffer for the sins of all mankind. We sometimes quail at the thought of having to suffer only for our own sins. Try to imagine anticipating having to suffer for the sins of all mankind.

Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul, mind, and strength, and love thy neighbor as thyself are meaningful to a point beyond human expression when contemplated with the infinite love, mercy, humility, patience, forbearance, etc., which were manifested by the Lord Jesus Christ in his suffering for the sins of the world.

"Sins of the world" connotes all sins. But this may sometimes seem a little remote or impersonal. Even to say "our sins" is a bit general. We need to come to grips with the fact that he suffered for my sins and your sins.

Conclusion

It should grieve our souls, yours and mine, to think of his suffering, but it should give us unspeakable joy to know that he loves us so much that he was willing to give himself for us as he did.
