David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter III BLESSINGS THROUGH THE ATONEMENT

There are many blessings which have already come to mankind and others which will be theirs because of the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ. One does not need to contemplate upon the matter very long until he realizes what a vast network of blessings are his due to the Lord's being the Redeemer.

Here we will discuss only five generic or very general blessings which are results of the atonement. They are: (1) Resurrection, (2) Forgiveness of sins, (3) Salvation of those who die in their childhood, (4) Salvation of those who die without the law, and (5) Freedom-captivity alternatives.

Resurrection

Some of the best-known words of the Lord regarding his power in the resurrection are recorded in the Gospel of John. They are:

I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. (John 11:25.)

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.

No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father. (Ibid., 10:17-18.)

And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.

This he said, signifying what death he should die. (Ibid., 12:32-33.)

No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day. (Ibid., 6:44.)

For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.

And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. (Ibid., 6:38-40.)

Amulek, the Book of Mormon prophet, in a remarkable passage, explains the relation of the resurrection to the Christ very clearly. He says:

Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death.

The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil.

Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption. (Alma 11:42-45.)

Abinadi succinctly gives his witness of resurrection through Jesus Christ in the following words:

And if Christ had not risen from the dead, or have broken the bands of death that the grave should have no victory, and that death should have no sting, there could have been no resurrection.

But there is a resurrection, therefore the grave hath no victory, and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ. (Mosiah 16:7-8.)

Forgiveness of Sins

Another great blessing available to man which can come only through the Lord Jesus Christ is forgiveness of sins. Just as all mankind are mortal and have to die, similarly all mankind have committed sins and need to obtain forgiveness.

On one occasion when Jesus was talking to the ancient Palestinian Jews, as recorded in the Gospel of John, he was emphatic that it was only through accepting him that one can obtain a forgiveness of sins. He said:

I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. (John 8:24.)

The prophets speak of man's being out of the presence of God as spiritual death. Therefore, in addition to man's having to die the temporal death, or death of the body, all mankind as mortals experience the first spiritual death. In order to overcome the first spiritual death, obtain a forgiveness of sins, and avoid the second spiritual death, that of being eternally separated from God's presence, we must turn to Christ the Redeemer and repent of our sins.

Samuel the Lamanite taught this impressively, prophesying of the Lord's coming, when he said:

For behold, he surely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the Lord.

Yea, behold, this death bringeth to pass the resurrection, and redeemeth all mankind from the first death — that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual.

But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord.

Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness. (Hel. 14:15-18.)

When the resurrected Lord visited the Nephites he identified himself as he who was to come and he through whom forgiveness of sins comes. He declared:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

When the Nephites heard these words the whole multitude fell to the earth and then the Lord said:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. (3 Ne. 11:10-11, 14.)

In our own dispensation, in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord identified himself as the Redeemer as follows:

I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins of the world, even as many as will believe on my name, that they may become the sons of God, even one in me as I am one in the Father, as the Father is one in me, that we may be one. (D&C 35:2.)

We need to become as enthusiastic in this knowledge as was Nephi, the son of Lehi. He said:

And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophesies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of sins. (2 Ne. 25-26. Italics ours.)

Salvation for Those Who Die in Childhood

A third great blessing which comes to mankind by virtue of the atonement of the Lord is the salvation of children who die before they reach the age of accountability.

In a modern revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said:

But, behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me. . . (D&C 29:46-47.)

King Benjamin, in his remarkable sermon, speaks of the effect of the atonement upon those who die as children. He says:

And even if it were possible that little children could sin they could not be saved; but I say unto you they are blessed; for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins.

And moreover, I say unto you that there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.

For behold he judgeth, and his judgment is just; and the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy; but men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.

For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father.

And moreover, I say unto you, that the time shall come when the knowledge of a Savior shall spread throughout every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.

And behold, when that time cometh, none shall be found blameless before God, except it be little children, only through repentance and faith on the name of the Lord God Omnipotent. (Mosiah 3:16-21.)

Perhaps there are no more forceful words from the prophets regarding the redemption of children than those contained in an epistle of Mormon to his son Moroni. Mormon declares:

And the word of the Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost, saying:

Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me.

And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children.

Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach — repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children.

And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins.

But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world. . . .

Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption.

Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment. I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me. Listen unto them and give heed, or they stand against you at the judgment-seat of Christ. (Moro. 8:7-12, 19-21.)

On Thursday, January 21, 1836, after recording an account of a vision of the celestial kingdom and a revelation from the Lord, Joseph Smith states:

And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven. (DHC II:381.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith, discussing this matter, says:

Little children who die before they reach the years of accountability will automatically inherit the celestial kingdom, but not the exaltation in that kingdom until they have complied with all the requirements of exaltation.

For instance:

The crowning glory is marriage and this ordinance would have to be performed in their behalf before they could inherit the fulness of that kingdom. The Lord is just with all his children, and little children who die will not be penalized as the Catholic Church penalizes them, simply because they happen to die. The Lord will grant unto these children the privilege of all the sealing blessings which pertain to the exaltation.

We were all mature spirits before we were born, and the bodies of little children will grow after the resurrection to the full stature of the spirit, and all the blessings will be theirs through their obedience, the same as if they had lived to maturity and received them on the earth. (DS II:54.)

Regarding Those Who Die Not Knowing the Law

Still another blessing which comes to a vast multitude of mankind through the atonement wrought by the great Jehovah, is the redemption of those who do not know the law as mortals and have no opportunity to either accept it or reject it while in the flesh.

Paul writes of this to the Romans in saying: "For there is no respect of persons with God. For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law." (Rom. 2:11-12.)

Jacob, the brother of Nephi and the son of Lehi, has provided us with the following words which express this aspect of the Lord's atoning sacrifice very clearly:

Wherefore, he has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him.

For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death and hell, and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment; and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of Israel.

But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state! (2 Ne. 9:25-27.)

In a revelation of this dispensation the Lord, speaking concerning the last days, said through his prophet, Joseph Smith:

And then shall the heathen nations be redeemed, and they that knew no law shall have part in the first resurrection; and it shall be tolerable for them. (D&C 45:54.)

The Freedom-Captivity Alternatives

The last great blessing we shall mention here which comes to mankind as a result of the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ is the freedom to choose between the freedom-captivity, eternal life-death, alternatives.

In the state of pre-mortal existence Lucifer attempted to take away the agency of man. The account of this event in the book of Moses reads as follows:

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:3-4.)

When Adam and Eve were in the garden of Eden, the devil beguiled Eve and set off a chain of events which caused the fall of man. This event brought both sin and death into the world. Mankind became what the Book of Mormon prophets call natural man, an enemy to God. (See chapter on the Holy Ghost.) Natural man was a captive of the devil. As a captive of the devil he really had no choice. Whatever he would do, whether it might be termed "good" or "evil," he was within the power of Satan, and there were no real alternatives available to him. In effect, it would appear that as a consequence of the fall, Lucifer had accomplished his purpose in trying to thwart Elohim's plan inasmuch as he had for all intents destroyed the agency of man.

However, God in his wisdom prepared the means by which man's agency should not be destroyed, for as Lehi explained to his sons:

And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given.

Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself. (2 Ne. 2:26-27.)

The Savior's coming made it possible that mankind could make real choices, and exercise real agency, and by choosing the way of the Lord man could attain liberty and eternal life. Our precious right to make genuine choices is another blessing from our Redeemer.

Necessity of the Atonement

The necessity of the atonement has been revealed from time to time even from the beginning; for example, the Lord said to Adam:

Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach things freely unto your children, saying:

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified;

Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power, according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment.

And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time. (Moses 6:58-62.)

From the time of Adam until the Lord came there were burnt offerings and sacrifices. The blood sacrifices were atonements for sin. However, they were all in the similitude of the great anticipated atonement of the Son of God and were not efficacious in and of themselves but were dependent upon his sacrifice for their validity and power. For as King Benjamin of Zarahemla declared: "the law of Moses availeth nothing except it were through the atonement of his blood." (Mosiah 3:15.)

Aaron, the son of Mosiah the younger, said: "There could be no redemption for mankind save it were through the death and sufferings of Christ, and the atonement of his blood." (Alma 21:9.)

One of the most comprehensive scriptural statements concerning the necessity of the atonement of the Christ is the following testimony of Amulek:

And now, behold, I will testify unto you of myself that these things are true. Behold, I say unto you, that I do know that Christ shall come among the children of men, to take upon him the transgressions of his people, and that he shall atone for the sins of the world; for the Lord God hath spoken it.

For it is expedient that an atonement should be made; for according to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, all are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made.

For it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice.

Now there is not any man that can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man murdereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, Nay.

But the law requireth the life of him who hath murdered; therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world.

Therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood, then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away.

And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal.

And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption. (Ibid., 34:8-16.)

Consequences Had There Been No Atonement

Men seldom, if ever, take the time to consider what the consequences for mankind would have been had there been no atonement by the Lord. Obviously, none of the blessings discussed here would have belonged to man had it not been for the atonement. But there is a much more impressive way of stating what would have been man's lot without the atonement. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, understood those horrible consequences well. He said:

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement — save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit. (2 Ne. 9:6-10.)

Conclusion

As one enjoys the spirit and begins to understand in a limited measure what great things the Lord has done and does for him, he should come to realize how much the Lord loves mankind and gain some insight into the significance of these words of the Christ, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." (John 15:13.)

When one begins to comprehend what great things the Redeemer has done for him, he cannot help humbly acknowledging that at best he is an unprofitable servant. His heart is caused to cry out as did King Benjamin's people: "O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son. . . ." (Mosiah 4:2.)

One should also never forget that as Jesus bade his disciples to keep his commandments and love one another, he declared: "These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full." (John 15:11.)

Jesus did and does his work that your joy might be full.
