David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter IV THE ROLES OF JESUS THE CHRIST

In the previous two chapters we have discussed some of the names and titles by which Jesus is known and some of the great blessings which come to man through his atoning sacrifice. But as fundamental and important as the atonement is, there are other very significant aspects to the Lord's work; for example, what was his status and role prior to the earth's existence? What did he have to do with the earth's coming into being? What did he have to do with mortals prior to his birth to Mary? What missionary labors did he perform other than those among the people in Palestine? What has he done for mortals since that time? What great work still lies ahead of the Lord? This chapter will treat these questions.

Jesus in the Council in Heaven

Among the names and titles discussed earlier is the Firstborn. As was indicated there, this name refers to Jesus' being the Firstborn of all the spirit children of Elohim who have or will come to live on this earth. As the Firstborn he was associated with the Father from the "beginning." In one revelation Jesus is identified as "my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning. . . ." (Moses 4:2.)

In the great council in heaven when all who have come to this earth were still in the pre-mortal estate as spirit beings only, it was Jehovah, the pre-existent Jesus, who sustained the plan of choice or agency in opposition to that of force. In a revelation to Moses the Lord spake saying:

That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me saying — Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me — Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; . . . (Moses 4:1-3.)

This passage clearly reveals that the Lord, Jehovah, was in complete accord with Elohim and that it was his desire that Elohim's will be done. Many times in Jesus' ministry among mortals, as recorded by John particularly, the Lord announced that he came not to do his own will but the will of the Father; for example:

My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. (John 4:34.)

I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me. (Ibid., 5:30.)

But I have greater witness than that of John: for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. (Ibid., 5:36.)

This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. (Ibid., 6:29.)

It seems clear from these passages that what we commonly call the plan of salvation or the gospel of Jesus Christ is the will of the Father, Elohim, and that in opposition to Lucifer, who proposed a plan antagonistic to God's will and the welfare of man, Jehovah arose in defense of the will of his Father and in the interest of his Father's other spirit children. (See also President John Taylor's The Mediation and Atonement, pp. 93-94.)

Jesus Is the Creator

As a part of the great council already mentioned, according to a revelation given to Abraham, the creation of the earth and its purpose was discussed. Abraham records:

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever. (Abr. 3:24-26.)

When the time came for the earth to be created or organized, the Lord said: "Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth." (Ibid., 4:1.) Jehovah was the principal figure in the creation. John says:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.

And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth. (John 1:1-3, 14.)

In writing to the Ephesians Paul says of God, he "created all things by Jesus Christ." (Eph. 3:9.) In writing to the Hebrews he said: "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds." (Heb. 1:1-2.)

The Book of Mormon prophets understood very well that Jesus was the Creator. Jacob, the son of Lehi and brother of Nephi, said: "For it behooveth the great Creator that he suffereth himself to become subject unto man in the flesh, and die for all men, that all men might become subject unto him." (2 Ne. 9:5.)

King Benjamin, in his great discourse, prophesying of the Lord's coming, said: "And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and his mother shall be called Mary." (Mosiah 3:8. See also Hel. 14:12.)

When the Lord appeared to the Nephites he identified himself in unequivocal language as follows:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name. (3 Ne. 9:15.)

In similar words the Lord revealed himself to the Prophet Joseph Smith. For example, in a revelation to David Whitmer recorded in D&C 38 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said:

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I Am, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes;

I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me. (D&C 38:1-3.)

One of the greatest testimonies of this kind is that of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon recorded in the Prophet's account of their vision of the three degrees of glory. Joseph Smith declares:

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (Ibid., 76:22-24.)

Jesus Is the Lawgiver

After Jehovah had created the world and placed man upon it and man had fallen, it was he who gave instructions to the antediluvian patriarchs. In this dispensation the Lord has given us an account of one of his early ancient appearances among the patriarchs.

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation. (Ibid., 107:53-56.)

Identifying himself as the one who so established Adam, in another modern revelation the Lord says:

That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion, who hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman;

Who hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life.

The Lord continues by saying: Wherefore, do the things which I have commanded you, saith your Redeemer, even the Son Ahman, who prepareth all things before he taketh you. (Ibid., 78:15-16, 20.)

When the Lord made the gospel and priesthood covenant with Abraham, again it was Jehovah. Part of that covenant follows:

My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations. (Abr. 2:8-9.)

Perhaps of all the scriptures which identify Jesus Christ as the Jehovah of the Old Testament period of man's history there is none which is more to the point than the words of the Redeemer himself when he was among the Nephites giving them instructions about the law of Moses. He said:

Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses.

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end. (3 Ne. 15:4-5.)

Jesus' Earthly Ministry

Thus we see Jesus was the Firstborn of all spirits who come to this earth; he sustained the Father's plan in the council in heaven; he was the Creator and he was the great Jehovah who manifested himself to the ancient prophets. Finally, the time came for him to take upon himself a body of flesh and bones and dwell among mortals as had been revealed to the prophets from the beginning of man's sojourn upon earth. As has been discussed in a previous chapter he was born of Mary, grew to manhood, performed his ministry in Palestine, and fulfilled his mission as the Redeemer of man in offering himself as an infinite atonement, having been prepared for this from before the foundation of the world. (See Ether 3:14.)

Jesus' Ministry in the Spirit World

As great as was the Lord's ministry and missionary endeavor in Palestine, it did not come to an end when "he gave up the ghost." Peter tells us:

For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit:

By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;

Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. (1 Pet. 3:18-20.)

Furthermore, says Peter: "For this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (Ibid., 4:6.)

On October 3, 1918, President Joseph F. Smith was given a marvelous vision regarding the contents of these very verses. He records:

As I pondered over these things which are written, the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great. And there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality, and who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in their Redeemer's name. All these had departed the mortal life, firm in the hope of a glorious resurrection, through the grace of God the Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ.

* * *

While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death, the Son of God appeared declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful, and there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on conditions of repentance. But unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised, neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face.

* * *

And as I wondered, my eyes were opened, and my understanding quickened, and I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them; but behold, from among the righteous he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men. And thus was the gospel preached to the dead.

* * *

Thus was it made known that our Redeemer spent his time during his sojourn in the world of spirits, instructing and preparing the faithful spirits of the prophets who had testified of him in the flesh, that they might carry the message of redemption unto all the dead unto whom he could not go personally because of their rebellion and transgression, that they through the ministration of his servants might also hear his words. (GD: 472-476.)

This marvelous part of Jesus' ministry occurred after his death and prior to his resurrection. After his resurrection, already considered in a previous chapter, he manifested himself to his disciples in Palestine on a number of occasions and on one of those occasions was seen by more than five hundred brethern at once. (See 1 Cor. 15:6. Also see list of his appearances in Talmage's Jesus the Christ, p. 699.)

Jesus' Ministry among the Nephites

After his resurrection the Lord also visited the Nephites as had been prophesied among them from the days of Nephi, the son of Lehi. He taught them on three successive days and then returned to visit them on a number of occasions. (3 Ne. 11-28.) Mormon records: "I would that ye should behold that the Lord truly did teach the people, for the space of three days; and after that he did show himself unto them oft, and did break bread oft, and bless it, and give it unto them." (3 Ne. 26:13.)

Jesus and the Lost Tribes of Israel

When Jesus was among the Nephites he told them they were the other sheep of whom he had spoken to his disciples in Palestine. (See John 10:16.) But he also told them that there were still others. He said: "And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep, which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem, neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been to minister." (3 Nephi, 16:1.) Later he said to them: "But now I go unto the Father, and also to show myself unto the lost tribes of Israel, for they are not lost unto the Father, for he knoweth whither he hath taken them." (Ibid., 17:4.)

Jesus and the Last Dispensation

But just as Jesus' work did not end on the cross, nor in the spirit world, it did not end with his visit to the Nephites and the lost tribes of Israel.

The last dispensation, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, was ushered in by a visitation of the Father and the Son, Elohim and Jehovah, to the fourteen-year-old Joseph Smith. In part of his account of that event Joseph Smith says: "When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other—This is my Beloved Son. Hear Him!" The Lord then gave the young Joseph some instructions. (Pearl of Great Price, p. 48.)

As already cited above, the Lord also was seen by the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon when they were given the great vision of the three degrees of glory. (See D&C, D&C 76.) Still again the Lord manifested himself when he appeared in the Kirtland Temple to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. The report reads:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. (Ibid., 110:1-4.)

Over and over again in the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord identifies himself. The following are a few examples:

I am Alpha and Omega, Christ the Lord; yea, even I am he, the beginning and the end, the Redeemer of the world. (Ibid., 19:1.)

Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Lord your God, and your Redeemer, whose word is quick and powerful. (Ibid., 27:1.)

Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I Am, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins. (Ibid., 29:1.)

Listen to the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, whose course is one eternal round, the same today as yesterday, and forever.

I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins of the world, even as many as will believe on my name, that they may become the sons of God, even one in me as I am one in the Father, as the Father is one in me, that we may be one. (Ibid., 35:1-2.)

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I Am, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes;

I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me. (Ibid., 38:1-3.)

Thus it is evident the Lord actively directed the process of the restoration of his gospel, and as his prophets have continued to testify, he continues to direct the affairs of his kingdom on the earth.

Jesus to Reign on Earth

The prophets have also foreseen and been caused to prophesy that the Lord will usher in the millennium and reign among men upon the earth for a period of a thousand years.

At the time Jesus departed from his disciples in Jerusalem and ascended into heaven two angelic beings appeared and said to the disciples who were looking in amazement: "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:11.)

Peter, preaching to the multitude after healing the lame man at Solomon's porch, rebuking the Jews because they had slain the Redeemer of the world, said unto them: "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.)

John was shown these things and recorded his account in part as follows:

And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. (Rev. 20:4-5.)

In our own dispensation the Lord has said this:

For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, the time is soon at hand that I shall come in a cloud with power and great glory.

And it shall be a great day at the time of my coming, for all nations shall tremble. . . .

And verily, verily, I say unto you, I come quickly. I am your Lord and your Redeemer. Even so. Amen. (D&C 34:7-8, 12.)

Also: "For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand." (Ibid., 29:11.)

Too:

For in mine own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth.

For the great Millennium, of which I have spoken by the mouth of my servants, shall come. . . .

Hearken ye to these words. Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world. Treasure these things up in your hearts, and let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds. (Ibid., 43:29-30; 34.)

These will be great events, and they have been seen and hopefully looked to at least from the days of Enoch, who, when he was shown what was to happen to the Beloved Son when he would come into the world, wept and cried unto the Lord asking, "When shall the earth rest?" Later in the great vision the Lord declared to Enoch "for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the space of a thousand years." (Moses 7:64-65.)

Jesus Is the Judge

Even having reigned on earth for a thousand years, the work of the Lord Jesus Christ will not be entirely finished. For, as John the Revelator says: "When the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea." (Rev. 20:7-8; see vss, 9-10 also.) After a "little season" of the devil's rampaging he will be cast out forever.

The Lord at that time will perform another great function of his Godhood when he judges the world. On one occasion he declared: "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son. . . . Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. . . . I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." (John 5 :22, 25-27, 30.)

Peter, in preaching to Cornelius and others, said, speaking of Jesus: "And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead." (Acts 10 :42.)

King Benjamin, speaking of the Lord, declared to his people:

And moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. For behold he judgeth, and his judgment is just. . . . (Mosiah 3 :17-18.)

Mormon, lamenting over the destruction of his people, records:

And the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on immortality, and these bodies which are now moldering in corruption must soon become incorruptible bodies; and then ye must stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, to be judged according to your works; and if it so be that ye are righteous, then are ye blessed with your fathers who have gone before you. (Morm. 6 :21.)

Moroni, in concluding his book refers to the Lord as "the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead." (Moro. 10 :34.)

Conclusion

Thus we see that from the very beginning of man's pre-mortal existence the Firstborn, Jesus Christ, Jehovah, has directed the work for the saving of his Father's children. In summary:

We sometimes think of the mortal span as a long time to endure to the end, but compare this with Jesus' work.
