David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter V THE HOLY GHOST AND BEING BORN OF THE SPIRIT

Associated with Elohim (Heavenly Father) and Jehovah (Jesus Christ) in the Godhead is a Personage known to mortals as the Holy Ghost. Sometimes he is called by other names such as Holy Spirit, or the Spirit, etc., but it is better to call him the Holy Ghost and use the other names to refer to the influence which comes from the heavenly Presence.

In this chapter we will be concerned with such questions as: How is the Holy Ghost distinguished from the Father and the Son? In what special way does the Holy Ghost contribute to the salvation and exaltation of man? What is the nature of man? Why must one be born again? What does it mean to be born again? What are the blessings which are available to those who have the gift of the Holy Ghost?

In some "Important Items of Instruction" given by the Prophet Joseph Smith the Holy Ghost is distinguished from the Father and the Son as follows:

The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us. (D&C 130 :22.)

There are many gifts and blessings which come to man through the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. 12; Mark 16 :16-18; Morm. 9 :24-29; D&C 46 :11-33), but there is one way particularly in which the Holy Ghost contributes to the salvation and exaltation of man. He assists man in that priceless process of being born again.

In the Lord's well-known counsel to Nicodemus, he said: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." (John 3 :5-6.)

Regarding the Nature of Man

But according to the word of the Lord and his prophets, what is the nature of man? In a modern revelation the Lord said:

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God.

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers. (D&C 93 :38-39.)

Thus, from the beginning of man's mortal existence the wicked one, the devil, has engaged in taking away "light and truth." He has done this through men, individually and collectively—individually through disobedience and collectively through the tradition of their fathers.

Fundamentally, the revelation teaches us that infants are innocent, but that they are born in a mortal world where men are agents unto themselves, even acknowledging various influences which may contribute to decision-making, and where, through the exercise of agency, men individually have chosen in varying degrees to acknowledge or deny God, and similarly have chosen to accept and practice or reject his principles in varying degrees. Consequently, although babes are innocent, by the time they reach the age of accountability they have become acquainted, through personal weaknesses and those of others, with a fallen world. Although not comprehending these words, they no doubt quite adequately understand that man has his failings. Perhaps this is in part what King Benjamin had in mind when he said:

For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father. (Mosiah 3 :19.)

Another passage speaks of the natural man as carnal, sensual, and devilish. These words may seem harsh, but it is probably impossible for us even to guess what the corrupt state of man would be had there not been periodic restorations of the gospel in man's history and some glimmer of spiritual knowledge trickling down through the centuries.

It is important that the teaching of Mosiah be distinguished from the apostate doctrine of depravity. Man is not born evil, but innocent. He is innocent until he reaches the age of accountability, but he grows up in a world of sin and as an agent makes choices from among a vast complex of enticements, and when he becomes accountable and refuses to make his will submissive to God by accepting him and making covenants with him, he is carnal, sensual, and devilish.

An examination of the matter suggests, however, that the words "carnal," "sensual," and "devilish," must not be limited to their more narrow and specific connotations, but that they are accurately, though more broadly, interpreted by the scriptural phrase "enemy to God." That is, not all men who have not made the covenants with the Christ are given to indulging in practices which are appropriately designated carnal, sensual, and devilish. Yet, all men, regardless of how moral and how pure they may be with reference to those practices called carnal, sensual, and devilish, are enemies to God until they yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, accept the atonement of the Lord, and are submissive to his will. A significant point here is, what we conventionally call basic personal and social morality is not enough. In addition to these things one must do other things which are binding upon him by virtue of his covenantal relationship with the Father and the Son. Or, putting it otherwise, for one not to be an enemy to God he must do all things whatsoever the Lord his God shall command him. (See Abr. 3 :25.)

Summarily put, the natural man (he who is carnal, sensual, and devilish; he who is an enemy to God) is the man who has not humbled himself before God and made covenants with God by receiving the revealed ordinances at the hands of God's authorized servants, and if, having done this, has failed to conduct himself in such a way as to heed the counsel or command given when he was confirmed a member of the Church to "Receive the Holy Ghost."

One Must Be Born Again

One must put off the natural man. He may be born of the water by baptism in the water by one who holds the Holy Priesthood and may also receive the ordinance of the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost by an authorized servant of the Lord, but the Priesthood bearer cannot give him the Holy Ghost, only the right to receive that gift. The Holy Ghost will be manifest in his life only as he strives for that gift and will come to him through the Holy Ghost himself. Therefore, one's being born of the Spirit comes only from the Spirit.

Adam was instructed to teach this principle of rebirth to his posterity, as Moses informs us in the remarkable passage:

. . . by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified. (Moses 6 :59-60.)

This wonderful passage forcefully indicates that it is essential for men to be born again, and that this consists of the water, the Spirit, and the blood, and that by the water the mortal keeps the commandment, and by the Spirit (Holy Ghost) he is justified, and that by the blood (the atonement of the Christ) he is sanctified.

What It Means to Be Born Again

That the spiritual rebirth involves more than the mere acceptance of an ordinance (laying on of hands) and requires a change in the man is evident from the words of Alma. In one place he says (note that he was addressing his remarks to the "brethren of the church") : "And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?"

Speaking of the judgment when men will have been raised from their graves, he adds: "I say unto you, can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands? I say unto you, can you look up, having the image of God engraven upon your countenances?" (Alma 5 :14, 19.)

The necessity of this change is stated emphatically by Alma as follows:

And the Lord said unto me: Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters;

And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. (Mosiah 27 :25-26.)

Alma's language seems to be plain enough that his meaning cannot be mistaken. He is speaking of a real change in which men become "new creatures."

In another passage, again addressing himself to the members of the Church, he says:

And now I say unto you that this is the order after which I am called, yea, to preach unto my beloved brethren, yea, and every one that dwelleth in the land; yea, to preach unto all, both old and young, both bond and free; yea, I say unto you the aged, and also the middle aged, and the rising generation; yea, to cry unto them that they must repent and be born again. (Alma 5 :49.)

This suggests that there were members of the Church who were aged, and middle-aged, as well as those of the rising generation who still had not been born of the Spirit.

One may receive the ordinance of the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but the responsibility clearly rests upon him to live in such a way that he will receive the blessings of the Holy Ghost in his life; for example, President Joseph F. Smith said: "The presentation or `gift' of the Holy Ghost simply confers upon a man the right to receive at any time, when he is worthy of it and desires it, the power and light of truth of the Holy Ghost, although he may often be left to his own spirit and judgment." (GD: 60-61.) He also said: "It will depend upon the worthiness of him unto whom the gift is bestowed whether he receive the Holy Ghost or not." (GD: 61.)

One Needs the Blessings of the Spirit

From the beginning of the restoration the Saints have been urged to live so that they might enjoy the blessings of the Spirit. President Wilford Woodruff related some interesting experiences in this regard. He said:

One morning, while we were at Winter Quarters, Brother Brigham Young said to me and the brethren that he had had a visitation the night previous from Joseph Smith. I asked him what he said to him. He replied that Joseph had told him to tell the people to labor to obtain the Spirit of God; that they needed that to sustain them and to give them power to go through their work in the earth.

Now I will give you a little of my experience in this line. Joseph Smith visited me a great deal after his death, and taught me many important principles . . . Joseph and Hyrum visited me, and the Prophet laid before me a great many things. Among other things he told me to get the Spirit of God; that all of us needed it. . . .

* * *

Brigham Young also visited me after his death. On one occasion he and Brother Heber C. Kimball came in a splendid chariot, with fine white horses, and accompanied me to a conference that I was going to attend. When I got there I asked Brother Brigham if he would take charge of the conference. "No," said he, "I have done my work here. I have come to see what you are doing and what you are teaching the people." And he told me what Joseph Smith had taught him in Winter Quarters, to teach the people to get the Spirit of God. He said, "I want you to teach the people to get the Spirit of God. You cannot build up the Kingdom of God without that."

That is what I want to say to the brethren and sisters here today. Every man and woman in this Church should labor to get that Spirit. (Weber Stake Conference address, reported in the Deseret Weekly News, Vol. 53, No. 21, Nov. 7, 1896.)

Men and women may repent of their sins and signify this to the world by making covenants with the Lord through baptism and confirmation by God's authorized servants, but they must be steadfast in righteousness. They must, paraphrasing King Benjamin, retain a remission of their sins from day to day that they may walk guiltless before God. (Mosiah 4 :26.)

President David O. McKay, speaking of this, said:

. . . He [the Lord] told Nicodemus that before he could solve the question that was troubling his mind, his spiritual vision would have to be changed by an entire revolution of his "inner man." His manner of thinking, feeling, and acting with reference to spiritual things would have to undergo a fundamental and permanent change with reference to spiritual matters.

It is easy to see temporal things. It is easy to yield to lascivious things. It requires little or no effort to indulge in anything physical and animal-like. But to be born out of that world into a spiritual world is advancement that the Lord requires of each of us. (CR, April, 1960, p. 26. Italics added.)

Elder Marion G. Romney speaks of the continual conflict in which mortals are involved and indicates what is necessary for them to maintain a condition of righteousness in their lives. He says:

The great over-all struggle in the world today is as it has always been, for the souls of men. Every soul is personally engaged in the struggle, and he makes the fight with what is in his mind. In the final analysis the battleground is, for each individual, within himself. Inevitably he gravitates towards the subjects of his thoughts. Ages ago the wise man thus succinctly put this great truth: "For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23 :7.)

If we would escape the lusts of the flesh and build for ourselves and for our children great and noble characters, we must keep in our minds and in their minds true and righteous principles for our thoughts and their thoughts to dwell upon.

* * *

If we would avoid adopting the evils of the world, we must pursue a course which will daily feed our minds with and call them back to the things of the spirit. I know of no better way to do this than by reading the Book of Mormon.

* * *

And so, I counsel you, my beloved brothers and sisters and friends everywhere, to make reading in the Book of Mormon a few minutes each day a lifelong practice. All of us need continuing close contact with the Spirit of the Lord. We need to take the Holy Spirit for our guide that we be not deceived. (CR, April, 1960, pp. 111, 112.)

Those who receive the initiatory ordinances of baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost are formally eligible to receive great blessings, for as President Wilford Woodruff said:

The Holy Ghost . . . is different from the common Spirit of God, which we are told lighteth every man that cometh into the world. The Holy Ghost is only given to men through their obedience to the Gospel of Christ; and every man who received that Spirit has a comforter within—a leader to dictate and guide him. This Spirit reveals, day by day, to every man who has faith, those things which are for his benefit. As Job said, "There is a spirit in man and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth it understanding." It is this inspiration of God to His children in every age of the world that is one of the necessary gifts to sustain man and enable him to walk by faith and to go forth and obey all the dictations and commandments and revelations which God gives to His children to guide and direct them in life. (JD 13:157, December 12, 1869. Italics ours.)

The role and power of the Holy Ghost in the lives of men and women who have received not only the right to the gift but also the gift of the Holy Ghost itself is succinctly put by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the following words: "No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator." (DHC VI:58.)

To assist men and women in retaining the remission of sins from day to day there are many individual gifts which may come to one through the gift of the Holy Ghost. Prefacing a discussion of and an enumeration of some of those gifts in a modern revelation the Lord says:

But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils.

Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given;

For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts. (D&C 46:7-9.)

Conclusion

The gift of the Holy Ghost is another marvelous witness of the Lord's great love for mankind. From time to time since the days of Adam the Lord has raised up prophets to whom he has revealed his will and through whom his gospel has been taught. The Lord himself came to the earth and lived among mortals and gave his life in the infinite atonement that men would be resurrected and that they could be forgiven for their sins. He has provided the means for men to make covenants with him by which they may obtain a remission of their sins, be permitted to take his name upon themselves, and be initiated into his earthly kingdom. And finally, those who receive the initiatory ordinances of baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost and strive to the utmost to live faithful to those covenants have the gifts of the Holy Ghost granted unto them to bless them in this world and assist them to resist the powers of the adversary and endure to the end, that ultimately they will be heirs to God's heavenly kingdom.

PART II MAN
