David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter VI "HOW DOES A MAN GET TO KNOW GOD?"

Immediately upon reading this title some persons will probably exclaim, "How presumptuous!" Even a cursory analysis of the title will reveal that it assumes two basic propositions: first, God is; and second, man can know him. However, it is not the purpose of this brief chapter to examine these propositions.

Whether a given person considers the title presumptuous or not there are many individuals who, in varying degrees, accept the two propositions assumed in the title and with corresponding degrees of eagerness desire to know God. Furthermore, the Lord Jesus Christ suggested man could know him and the Father when he said:

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. (John 17:3.)

To one who has studied the written revelations I believe the title is full of meaning, for in God's mercy he has revealed many things to encourage his children to seek him and has manifested the ways they might come to know him.

The following six steps are fundamental in man's getting to know God.

That one must believe that God exists to entertain the question, "How Does a Man Get to Know God?" is obvious, but it is the logical beginning of the answer to the question and needs to be stated.

Less obvious but equally necessary, it must be recognized that if God is to be known he must be a kind of being that can be known. In other words, he must not be a conceptual abstraction only, but must have substantive reality.

Furthermore, one must not only believe that God is the kind of being that can be known, but he must believe that it is possible for man to come to know him.

Believing that God is, that he is the kind of being that can be known, and that man can know him, one must acknowledge him by offering his prayers of thanksgiving to him.

One who becomes aware of God's existence and acknowledges him devotedly is usually motivated to want to know him. He begins to realize his own inadequacies as well as God's greatness and desires within his soul to draw near unto God and know the power and sweetness of his presence.

Much could be said regarding each of the foregoing necessary steps, but inasmuch as they are preliminary to the crux of the answer to our question the remainder of our brief treatment must be devoted to it.

One who has achieved an earnest and honest desire to know God is ready to strive to know him. What are some of the minimal things of which his striving must consist?

As one strives to find God, he should study the works of others who claim to have found him, that is, the prophets. The words of the Lord as given to us by the prophets declare that we must have faith in Jesus Christ. This is not simply faith in God, but faith in Jesus as the Christ. There are many scriptures illustrative of this point but Jesus' words as recorded by John are as fitting and clear as any, where he said:

. . . if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. (John 8:24. See also Acts 4:10-12; Rom. 6:23.)

But as one begins to develop faith in Jesus he must come to a realization of his own shortcomings and sins and his need to repent. He must vigorously exert himself to correct his wrongs and improve himself.

To be complete the initial process of repentance must culminate in the person's being baptized, for the Lord said:

He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. (Mark 16:16.)

But the Lord said two baptisms are essential if one is to enter the kingdom of God, not only a baptism by water, but also a baptism of the Spirit. (See John 3: 1-13.) The baptism of the Spirit, or the right to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, is conferred upon a person by the laying on of hands by one bearing the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Although one may be given a testimony that the gospel is true prior to being baptized, these principles and ordinances are essential if one is to enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost, to say nothing of that great gift of coming to know God, for in this day, speaking of the priesthood and the ordinances of the gospel, the Lord has declared:

. . . [The Melchizedek] priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live. (D&C 84:19-22.)

Therefore, one must have faith in the Lord, repent of his sins, and receive the ordinances administered by God's holy priesthood. These things are necessary, but to come to know God and enjoy the companionship of his Spirit he must retain a remission of sins from day to day by striving to observe all things which the Lord has commanded and counseled.

If one really desires to know God let him always remember that the Lord has said:

Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. (Rev. 3:20.)

And:

He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. (John 14:21. See also 1 Jn. 3:2-3; D&C 38:7-8; 67:11; 76:94; 88:67; 93:1.)
