David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter VII THE TWO GREAT COMMANDMENTS

Jesus said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.) What does that sentence mean?—not just what does it mean in the abstract—what does it mean to you concretely?

For thousands of years the world has had the benefit of a great revelation God gave to Moses. It is known as the Decalogue or, more popularly, as the Ten Commandments. It is found in the twentieth chapter of Exodus in the Old Testament. Those commandments are:

It is interesting to observe the order of the commandments, for a definite pattern is discernable. The first four commandments deal with one's relation to God and the worship of God; the last six deal with one's relation to his fellow men. It should be noted that the fifth commandment, the first of those regarding one's relation to his fellow men, concerns one's relation to his parents.

This observation is consistent with what Jesus taught when he was approached by a lawyer and asked, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" (Matt. 22:36.)

Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

This is the first and great commandment.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. (Ibid., 22:37-40.)

Therefore, all the commandments of the Decalogue, and all the other commandments of God hang upon those two commandments.

What are some of the other commandments?

Men are taught to be meek, merciful, peacemaking, pure in heart, to suffer persecution for the sake of righteousness, to cast those things out of their lives which are offensive, not to swear, and to love their enemies. Also, the Lord said: do good to them that hate you, pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you, be perfect, do almsgiving privately, pray sincerely avoiding show and vain repetitions, forgive your fellow men, fast without show, seek righteousness first, judge not, give not that which is holy to the dogs, ask, seek, and knock. All of these things and more the Lord advocated in his Sermon on the Mount. (Ibid., 5, 6, 7.)

In modern times God has revealed to man that he should abstain from taking certain substances into his body indicating that they are harmful. This revelation is known as the Word of Wisdom. (See D&C, D&C 89.)

Also, in this dispensation the Lord has reaffirmed his commandment that men should observe his law of tithing, giving one tenth of their annual increase (income) for the building up of God's kingdom on the earth. (See ibid., D&C 119.)

There are many commandments God has given to mankind, either through his Son or through the prophets, yet all of them hang upon what Jesus called the first two commandments.

Some people may suggest that there is no need for them to belong to any church nor declare belief in any form of religion to do the things mentioned here. And, when it comes to the majority of the things listed here they are exactly right. As a matter of fact, there are good people the world over, of many religious professions, who claim belief in and achieve varying measures of success in striving to observe these principles. But their striving and achievement can be thought of only in terms of the second commandment, loving one's neighbor as himself.

But, someone will say, how can you say that? Are not the first two commandments the same? Is not one necessarily keeping the first commandment when he keeps the second?

The two commandments are not the same. If there was no difference between them, there would have been no need for the Lord to distinguish them as two commandments.

Furthermore, one who keeps the second commandment necessarily keeps the first only in a limited way. This answer is required for at least two reasons: (1) The first commandment is more inclusive than the second, for if one loves the Lord with all of his heart, soul, and mind he will do all things which God has commanded. The first commandment therefore includes some things which are required of man in addition to those involving one's relation to his fellow men. (2) There are people in the world who observe the second commandment on other than religious grounds, who totally ignore those things which are specifically part of the first commandment.

If one can keep most of the commandments, those basically oriented in mercy and justice, and live the kind of life which would be called exemplary—the good life—without the Church and other commandments, what is the basic role of the Church?

Essentially, the answer to that question is something like this: the gospel of Jesus Christ involves and requires much more of a man than what is customarily called the good life.

As already indicated, the good life (the second commandment, speaking generally) is necessary, but if one is to please God and achieve his own highest purposes he must keep the first commandment also.

Now, what is specifically required in the first commandment which is not a necessary part of the second commandment? Here are a few fundamental things:

The Lord has been very explicit about this. He said: "for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins." (John 8:24.) So regardless of what else one does in an effort to improve himself and obtain a forgiveness of sins he must turn unto the Christ. The Lord stresses this point over and over again, that there is only one way to his Father and that is through him, Jesus. Forgiveness of sins comes only through Jesus Christ, so in order to obtain that forgiveness and have one's repentance complete he must turn unto the Lord.

If having faith in the redeeming power of Jesus Christ, and turning from wrongdoing with all one's soul is not turning to the Lord, what is lacking?

In a modern revelation, speaking regarding the same subject, Jesus said: "And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me. For whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin." (D&C 84:50-51.)

Baptism is the gate; it is the outward expression or sign of the covenant one makes with Jesus; it is the completion of repentance. For one to say he has faith in Jesus as the Redeemer, and that he desires to repent and be forgiven of his sins means that he wants to be baptized. So, if he means what he says, he will be baptized at the hands of one who holds the priesthood of God which has been restored in this dispensation.

But he who has been baptized by a properly authorized servant of God is eligible to receive another gift:

The Lord said to a leader of the ancient Jews:

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. (John 3:5.)

Therefore, if one is not to be damned (see Mark 16:16 above) and is to enter the kingdom of God, he must do more than keep those commandments which are summarized in the charge to love one's neighbor as himself.

He must have faith in Jesus as the Redeemer; he must repent of his sins; he must be baptized by an authorized servant of God, and receive the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost by one holding the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Remember Jesus said:

He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.

And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. (Matt. 10:37-38.)

The Lord has given mankind many commandments and they are for the benefit of man. He even gave his life on the cross that man could be redeemed through him.

When one begins to grasp his own inadequacies and the majesty and love of the Lord, he longs not merely to keep the second commandment by imitating good works, but he longs for the rebirth—to be born of the spirit—changed in the inner man. This can only come in time as one keeps the first and great commandment, and meets those requirements the Lord has set, which demonstrate that he loves the Lord with all of his heart, soul, and mind.
