David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter VIII PRAYER

Many people consider prayer a period of quiet reflection, introspection, and contemplation. They regard it as a means of lifting themselves by their own bootstraps. That is, by taking the time to pause and ponder, individuals become aware of certain of their propensities or inclinations and through such self-awareness become better prepared to overcome their weaknesses or put them in their proper places. No doubt there is merit in such activity. People should pause occasionally and attempt to evaluate themselves, determine their strengths and weaknesses, set goals of improvement to be achieved, and plan systematic ways to reach those ends. But can such reflection, even with a bowed head or kneeling body, properly be called prayer?

Prayer is more than contemplation to the Latterday Saint. It is communion with the Divine; it is communion with God. In fact, it is more than communion. It is communication—communication between man and God, and one avenue of communication between God and man. The word "communion" connotes community or harmony of attitude or spirit with the Divine, or perhaps may describe one's feeling, but the word "communication" means more than that. In addition to the above, "communication" means interchange of thoughts or ideas, which, simply put, means that man expresses his thoughts to God and not infrequently experiences, feels, or has impressed upon him, thoughts or inspiration from God.

Prayer is real. It is powerful. It bears fruit in direct proportion to the seriousness with which it is considered, and likewise with the faith, diligence, and obedience of the one who prays. Man does not merely commune with a world spirit, or an imaginary being without body, parts, or passions, but he communicates with a real Being, one who is in form like man, with a glorified body of flesh and bones, and one who is capable of not mere communion, but communication. He is God the Eternal Father; the Father of the spirits of all mankind.

As we go through our daily routines, doing the things which are required of us to maintain our livelihood, and performing those other tasks which we have assumed, school, church, and other responsibilities, we are continually met with problems. This life we are living is called by the Book of Mormon prophets a probationary state, that is, a period when men are on trial, so to speak. It is a period when men are given an opportunity to meet situations which require making decisions, and on the basis of those decisions, depending upon what they are, men either progress or retrogress, they develop or hinder their development. So, it is in the nature of things for men to be faced with problems and difficulties. The significant thing is not the fact that we have problems, but the question, how do we face them? What is our attitude when we have to meet them? Do we have a calm assurance that in some way the situation will be satisfactorily met, or do we become so unnerved and inwardly disturbed that we cannot employ all of our resources to the best advantage? Surely all people would prefer to have the confidence and assurance that things will be worked out satisfactorily.

One modern writer has illustrated this point very well in the following excerpt:

Once, as a young man full of exuberant fancy, I undertook to draw up a catalogue of the acknowledged "goods" of life. As other men sometimes tabulate lists of properties they own or would like to own, I set down my inventory of earthly desirables: health, love, beauty, talent, power, riches, and fame—together with several minor ingredients of what I considered man's perfect portion.

When my inventory was completed I proudly showed it to a wise elder who had been the mentor and spiritual model of my youth. Perhaps I was trying to impress him with my precocious wisdom and the large universality of my interests. Anyway, I handed him the list. "This," I told him confidently, "is the sum of mortal goods. Could a man possess them all, he would be as a god."

At the corners of my friend's old eyes, I saw wrinkles of amusement gathering in a patient net. "An excellent list," he said, pondering it thoughtfully. "Well digested in content and set down in a not-unreasonable order. But it appears, my young friend, that you have omitted the most important element of all. You have forgotten the one ingredient lacking which each possession becomes a hideous torment, and your list as a whole an intolerable burden."

"And what," I asked, peppering my voice with truculence, "is that missing ingredient?"

With a pencil stub he crossed out my entire schedule. Then, having demolished my adolescent dream structure at a single stroke, he wrote down three syllables: peace of mind.

"This is the gift that God reserves for His special proteges," he said. "Talent and beauty He gives to many. Wealth is commonplace, fame not rare. But peace of mind—that is His final guerdon of approval, the fondest sign of His love. He bestows it charily. Most men are never blessed with it; others wait all their lives—yes, far into advanced age—for this gift to descend upon them."

At that time I found it difficult wholly to believe the wisdom of my rabbinic friend. But a quarter of a century of personal experience and professional observation has served only to confirm his almost oracular utterance. I have come to understand that peace of mind is the characteristic mark of God Himself. . . . I know now that the sum of all other possessions does not necessarily add up to peace of mind; yet, on the other hand, I have seen this inner tranquility flourish without the material supports of property or even the buttress of physical health. Slowly, painfully, I have learned that peace of mind may transform a cottage into a spacious manor hall; the want of it can make a regal park an imprisoning nutshell. (Joshua Loth Liebman, Peace of Mind [New York: Simon and Schuster, Inc., 1946] pp. 3-5.)

This was written by a man near the end of his life, a life full of experience in counseling people. It is a clearly and beautifully phrased illustration that an inner feeling of security, or a calm assurance, or peace of mind, is one of the supreme gifts that mortals can enjoy.

Latter-day Saints believe that prayer is a necessary prerequisite to peace of mind. Prayer is the means whereby a man draws himself close to God. He unfolds the secrets of his heart to Heavenly Father, confiding in him. Prayer is man's way of seeking the partnership of Heavenly Father in all of his undertakings. When a man so prays and works diligently to accomplish all things in accordance with Heavenly Father's will, he cannot but be blessed with the serenity of mind which he desires.

This calm assurance or peace of mind is what might be called an over-all gift, one which affects man in a general way and permeates all that he does. It helps him do everything that he does better than he would do those things otherwise. We can see from all that has been said that this is a blessing or benefit one derives from prayer which cannot be measured.

In addition to this wonderful blessing which men can enjoy through prayer, accompanied by obedience and diligence, there is a host of blessings or benefits or fruits of prayer which men can and do enjoy. There is perhaps a number of ways in which these fruits of prayer might be classified, but for our purposes let us consider them in two categories. The first category we shall designate the Personal Blessings. The second category we shall designate the Social Blessings. Certainly these names are arbitrarily given, for all blessings are personal and all blessings have social implications, even if they are not directly social. But these names, Personal and Social, will serve as guides, and under each we shall discuss those blessings we consider more directly personal or social.

I. Personal Blessings

(1) Protection against the adversary.

In the Sermon on the Mount when the Lord Jesus Christ taught his disciples how to pray, among other things he said, "And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." (Matt. 6:13.) Implicit in this admonition is the promise that if men will so pray they will not be led into temptation but will be led away from evil paths.

When the Lord went to the Garden of Gethsemane to pray to his Father, he took Peter, James, and John with him to be watchers for him. When he came to them and found them asleep he counseled, "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." (Ibid., 26:41.)

Not once, but many times in modern revelation the Lord has counseled his servants similarly.

One verse of modern scripture shows with unmistakable clearness that prayer is a means of fortifying ourselves against the adversary. This advice given to the Prophet Joseph Smith will surely hold true for anyone who will follow these words of Jesus. "Pray always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work." (D&C 10:5.)

We need not think that we are immune to the devil and his hosts. Regardless of who we are or where we live the old devil would like to have us. The more righteous one is the greater the prize he would be for Satan. For this reason the Lord has also counseled in modern times that the whole Church should take heed and pray always, for, says he, "Yea, and even let those who are sanctified take heed also." (Ibid., 20:34.)

And probably this is illustrated best of all where the Lord addresses his counsel directly to the Prophet Joseph Smith and says, "What I say unto one I say unto all; pray always lest that wicked one have power in you, and remove you out of your place." (Ibid., 93:49.)

From these scriptures we see that the Lord has continually counseled men to pray and promised them that if they will heed that advice they will have a shield of protection against the adversary they can obtain in no other way.

(2) Forgiveness.

From ancient time to the present we have promises from God that he will be merciful to the man who confesses his sins, or that he will forgive the man who confesses his sins and forsakes them.

In Proverbs we find, "He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy." (Prov. 28:13.)

The apostles of the Lord also taught the same thing; for example, in one New Testament passage we find that "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous." (1 Jn. 1:9.)

A very significant and beautiful illustration of forgiveness of sins by prayer and confession is found in the Book of Mormon. After King Benjamin delivered his great sermon his people were very penitent. They prayed aloud as

. . . with one voice, saying: O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things; who shall come down among the children of men.

And it came to pass that after they had spoken these words the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ who should come. . . . (Mosiah 4:2-3.)

In this passage we discover not only that the people prayed, confessed their sins, and professed belief in Jesus Christ, but also that "they were filled with joy" because they "received a remission of their sins." Furthermore, the scripture explicitly states that those good people had "peace of conscience," the great gift of which we have already spoken.

We should also know that in modern revelation, the Lord has said much concerning this matter. Carefully consider these verses:

Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more.

By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them. (D&C 58:42-43; see also ibid., 61:2; 64:7; 84:61.)

So, here we find another glorious gift which men can enjoy if they will pray. If they do pray always, with real intent, confessing their sins, and forsaking their sins, they will have the strength to overcome them and do them no more, and will receive the precious gift of forgiveness and enjoy "peace of conscience."

(3) Faith and Testimony.

The scriptures teach us that faith is a gift of God, that it is a gift within the reach of all men. But, it, like all things of value, has a price: not a price measured in dollars and cents, but one measured in sincere desire, real intent, integrity of purpose, a price that can be paid only by one's mind, heart, and spirit. The formula for obtaining the gift is the same as the formula for obtaining the price of the gift. One must be willing to acknowledge to himself that he is not self-sufficient. He must recognize his own present weaknesses and limitations. And upon realizing these things he must be humble enough also to acknowledge these things to his Father in heaven. If he will do this with real intent, as has been suggested, he will find that his mind, heart, and spirit will soon detect the seeds of faith growing within his soul. If he continues to nurture those seeds of faith they will grow and develop and be the means of yielding knowledge, powers, and other blessings beyond one's ability to dream. (See Alma 32:26-43.)

(4) Guidance of the Holy Ghost and some of its accompanying blessings.

In this dispensation the Lord has made glorious promises to his people if they will keep his commandments. Attempt to consider the magnitude of this promise: "Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing—yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth and corruptibleness to the extent thereof." (D&C 19:38.)

In another place the Lord informs us that it is not just the praying always, or as we sometimes say of other things in common parlance, "going through the motions" of prayer, that will bring those great blessings. But it is the "prayer of faith" one must utter, for says the Lord, "And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith. . . ." (Ibid., 42:14.)

By the prayer of faith men can receive unlimited blessings. One of the specific blessings promised the Church is that "by the prayer of your faith ye shall receive my law, that ye may know how to govern my church and have all things right before me." (Ibid., 41:3.) Later the revelation found in D&C 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants was received containing the promised law.

Ponder this promise given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, if he would ask for it in prayer. "And if thou wilt inquire, thou shalt know mysteries which are great and marvelous; therefore thou shalt exercise thy gift, that thou mayest find out mysteries, that thou mayest bring many to the knowledge of the truth, yea, convince them of the error of their ways." (Ibid., 6:11.)

True it is that he was a Prophet among men, but all of the faithful have been given similar promises by the Lord; for example, on one occasion some of the elders had experienced difficulty in trying to give an understanding of the gospel to their inquirers. A revelation was given to them through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Among other things they were promised that should they call upon the name of the Lord, the Comforter would "teach them all things that are expedient for them—" and that they should pray always that they would not faint, "and inasmuch as they do this," said the Lord, "I will be with them even unto the end." (Ibid., 75:10-11.) How much greater blessing can there be than to have the Lord with you even unto the end?

There are numerous places where the Lord names great blessings of the Holy Ghost one can receive through prayer. Certainly one of the most significant promises for every Latter-day Saint or anyone seriously investigating the gospel is found in the last chapter of the Book of Mormon. The verses are addressed particularly to the reader of the book.

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. (Moro. 10:4-5.)

That promise is not restricted to time, place, nationality, or race; it is a promise given to all men who will follow its counsel. Notice particularly the comprehensiveness of the last sentence, "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Italics ours.)

From the scriptures enumerated here we can see that the promise of the Spirit to men if they would offer the prayer of faith involves not one but many blessings. O how we would humble ourselves, live righteously, and offer prayers of faith, if we could only begin to comprehend the extent and glory of these blessings.

II. Social Blessings

(1) Love at Home.

One of the greatest satisfactions a mortal can experience is that of living in a home filled with love. On the other hand, one of the most miserable things that a mortal can endure is having to live in a home devoid of love, one filled with hate, greed, envy, distrust, and the like.

The Lord has made known a cure for the latter, and the means by which love can abound in the home. The beginning of love and the preservation of love in the home is rooted in prayer. The members of the family should pray individually. And if they do have their secret prayers in righteousness their spirits will be so tempered that they will have an influence for good on the other members of the family. But this is not all. There should be family prayer also. In fact, the prophets have counseled us to have family prayers; for example, Amulek, the Book of Mormon prophet, said unto the people: "Cry unto him in your houses, yea over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening." (Alma 34:21.) When the Resurrected Lord was among the Nephites, he taught them saying: "Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed." (3 Ne. 18:21.)

Just as there are many blessings which can be enjoyed individually through individual secret prayers, there are many blessings which can be obtained through family prayers.

Love at home is a heavenly gift, but mortals can enjoy it if they will seek the Lord in private and family prayers.

(2) Love for Fellow Men.

Another far-reaching blessing which is for some, and can be for all, the result of prayer, is love for fellow men. We recall that when the Savior gave the first great commandment, to love God, he said the second was like unto it. "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matt. 22:37-39.)

In his Sermon on the Mount he not only taught men to love their neighbors but also to love their enemies. There he said: "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Ibid., 5:44.)

Within this teaching the Lord reveals a glorious principle. The obvious principle throughout the whole verse is that men should return good for evil, the principle of the golden rule. And through the application of this counsel men through their patience and kindness teach by example the principle of love. But perhaps, even deeper than this, the Lord knew that it is the disposition of fallen man to retaliate and return evil for evil. The real way for one to love his fellow beings is to "bless them," "do good to them," "and pray for them." By this means one does not permit himself to fall into sin, for he learns love instead of hate, and at the same time he creates love for himself in others, therefore ridding them of their hatred. In this, prayer has a cleansing effect, not only upon the one who prays, but also upon the one in whose behalf the prayer is uttered.

Surely love for fellow men is wonderful, and the genuine prayer from the sincere heart promotes this blessing and brings in beneficial returns a hundredfold.

(3) Harmony with Authorities.

The last of what we have chosen to call the social blessings we will consider here is being in harmony with God's authorized servants.

In one of Paul's epistles he says, "I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; For kings, and for all that are in authority. . . . " (1 Tim. 2:1-2. Italics ours.)

Here the great apostle appeals to his readers to pray for all that are in authority. We are particularly concerned about praying for those who bear God's authority. Those men bear an immeasurable responsibility in the earth and need the prayers of the Saints.

President Joseph F. Smith said, "There never should be a day pass but all the people composing the Church should lift up their voices in prayer to the Lord to sustain his servants who are placed to preside over them." (GD:223.)

Not only do God's servants need the blessings which come from the prayers of the Saints, but the Saints need the blessings which will come to them as a result of praying for their leaders. If they pray for their leaders, their souls will be turned more affectionately toward them. They will love them more, and loving them more they will understand them more, and loving them more and understanding them more, they will sustain them more. When one loves the Authorities and sustains the Authorities, he is given a peace and satisfaction of spirit which can come in no way other than being in harmony with God's anointed ones.

Conclusion

In summary, we have seen prayer can be not only communion with God but communication with him. It is a means of man's receiving great blessings, only a very few of which we considered under two general classifications, (1) Personal Blessings, and (2) Social Blessings.

Under Personal Blessings we discussed: (1) Protection against the Adversary, (2) Forgiveness, (3) Faith and Testimony, and (4) Guidance of the Holy Ghost and its Accompanying Blessings.

Under Social Blessings we discussed: (1) Love at Home, (2) Love for Fellow Men, and (3) Harmony with Authorities.

In conclusion let us turn our attention to a promise given by the Lord—a promise every man should always have present in his mind:

And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. (Luke 11:9-10.)
