David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter IX REPENTANCE—THE PRINCIPLE OF PROGRESSION

Before the Lord began his personal ministry in Palestine, John the Baptist prepared the way for him. The essence of that preparation or of John's message, as recorded by Matthew, was this, "Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matt. 3:2.)

But John was not alone in crying repentance. Mark tells us that "after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel." (Mark 1:14-15.)

On one occasion there were some Jews who came to Jesus reporting a rather unusual situation from which they apparently inferred the victims were grievous sinners. The Lord responded to them by saying, "Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." (Luke 13:2-3.)

In this case the Lord emphatically points out that repentance is not what many or even perhaps most people seem to think it is, something for somebody else, but not for one's self. He makes it clear that a person must be vitally concerned with his own repentance, for he said, "except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish."

When the Christ had ascended into heaven and the earthly ministry was left in the hands of his disciples, we find that they taught precisely the same doctrine. On the day of Pentecost as Peter preached to the multitude "they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized everyone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:37-38.)

In our own dispensation the Lord has given revelation upon revelation in which he has bade mankind to repent and instructed his servants to teach repentance. For example, in verses eleven through fourteen of D&C 18 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord says, "For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance. And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth! Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people."

Furthermore, upon examining the scriptures we find that repentance was not only taught by John the Baptist, the Lord Jesus Christ, the apostles of Palestine, and commanded to be taught in our dispensation, but we find that from the very beginning God has called upon men to repent. In the days of Adam ". . . the Lord God called upon men by the Holy Ghost everywhere and commanded them that they should repent; And as many as believed in the Son, and repented of their sins, should be saved; and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned; and the words went forth out of the mouth of God in a firm decree; wherefore they must be fulfilled." (Moses 5:14-15.)

What is meant by repentance? Quite simply stated it involves three things. First, repentance means forsaking or refraining from doing that which was done which is wrong. Second, repentance means doing that which is right which has been neglected. Third, repentance means making a restitution for offenses where restitution is possible. These are the basic elements of repentance, but they have many implications. Some of the implications of these principles are found in an analysis made by Dr. James E. Talmage. (AF:109-112.) His analysis hinges upon two basic ideas, attitude, and action. He names three characteristics which are embodied in the repentant attitude. They are: (1) Conviction of guilt, (2) Desire to be relieved of the hurtful effects of sin, and (3) An earnest determination to forsake sin and do good. These involve no action. They concern the individual and his soul—that is, what happens inside himself. Certainly there would be no disposition to repent if one had no conviction of guilt. After having such a conviction one would then desire to rid himself, and any he had caused to suffer, of the hurtful effects of sin. Then he would make a firm resolve and have an earnest determination to forsake sin and do good. These characteristics reflect the repentant attitude. Yet one who has a repentant attitude cannot be said necessarily to have repented. The attitude is essential to repentance but not repentance itself.

However, the repentant attitude should be the efficient cause, or provide the motivation for the action which produces repentance. Returning to Dr. Talmage a moment, within the idea of action he lists three steps which one must take to have repented, and to obtain forgiveness and a remission of sins. The steps are: (1) Confess sins to God and others who are concerned, (2) Forgive others of their offenses, and (3) Demonstrate confidence in the atoning sacrifice of the Lord by complying with his commandments. These three steps are distinguished from the former in that they require action. They are not reflections or reasonings, desires or resolves, determinations or feelings. They are doings. They involve his doing things. He must confess his sins to the Lord and seek his forgiveness. He must seek forgiveness from those whom he has offended by acknowledging his guilt. And he should seek those whom God has chosen to be judges in his kingdom.

Not only should one confess his sins and solicit a forgiveness of them, but he must forgive others of their offenses. He cannot expect a forgiveness of his sins if he is unwilling to forgive others of theirs.

And the summation of the process of repentance is found in keeping God's commandments. For he who does what God has commanded demonstrates that he not only has a repentant attitude but that he has repented indeed, and accepts the atoning sacrifice of the Lord and loves the Lord, for Jesus said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.)

One may ask the question, why is repentance necessary to salvation? Basically, and functionally, for the reason that repentance is the principle of progress. If one had the faith, the knowledge, the will, the love, and the purity which is necessary always to think, and say, and do the right thing, he would have nothing of which he needed to repent. However, experience and revelation both teach us that few mortals, if any, have reached such a condition.

In the broadest terms the word "repentance" has this same application. Whenever a person is doing anything wrong, or incorrectly, or in a less efficient way than it might be done, and discovers his error, or the better way, and then follows it, he applies the principle of repentance; for example, should an engineer do a mathematical problem and make a miscalculation, his error might cause a tragedy on the building or bridge or other structure he is planning. Should he or a colleague discover the error, he would correct it. He would be considered worse than foolish if he did not. And, his correcting the error is a demonstration of the principle of repentance.

This same idea applies to the scientist or technician in the laboratory, to the craftsman in the use of his tools, to the seamstress in the use of her skill, to the surgeon in the operating room, and to all men and women in the performance of their labors in the world. When anyone forsakes a wrong thing or way, for the right or better thing or way he is applying the principle of repentance. Certainly we must agree that this is an extremely practical procedure. In fact, it is the only procedure by which progress can be made.

If we will but consider the matter, we will realize that the idea we have been discussing is one of the basic factors in modern science. At the outset that may seem to be a very strange and perhaps even paradoxical thought that repentance has some relation to science—modern science. Repentance as a concept has always had such a deep and integral connection with religion, and religion and science are not always regarded as being on the best of terms with each other; so it is a rather natural reaction to be perhaps at least a little startled at the suggestion that repentance is a basic factor in modern science. Well, then, what do we mean by this assertion?

Fundamentally, this is our meaning. Our whole structure of modern science with the great knowledge and multitude of advantages it has brought to man is founded on the principle of examining and testing things to see if they will work. If hypotheses fail, new ones are suggested, and the procedure is repeated. And the process does not stop at this point. Researchers and technicians are constantly searching and experimenting in order to make still further advances and improvements. This entire procedure is based on or consistent with (although perhaps unwittingly) the religious teaching of Paul, wherein he said, "Prove all things; hold fast that which is good." (1 Thes. 5:21.) Now—obviously the proving of all things, the dismissing the evil, or that which fails, or that which is inadequate, and the holding fast that which is good is precisely what happens in the operation called repentance. Furthermore, this is also precisely what occurs in modern science as conscientious men and women eagerly strive to make new discoveries and developments in the fields of their particular training and interest. So we see the principle of repentance does have a place in modern science although its usual religious connotations would not immediately suggest it.

In fact we should go much further into this analysis, for actually it has been the operation of this principle which perhaps most clearly distinguishes modern science from ancient science, and likewise is one of the most basic reasons, if not the most basic reason, why modern science has become what it is, has made the almost incredible contribution it has, and has inspired the confidence of millions.

Ancient science was primarily descriptive in nature. The natural philosopher, as he was called, would observe the world, or the universe, or nature, or any of her parts, and then give a report of what he saw, and that was science. He was not a manipulator or experimenter. On the contrary, the modern scientist is an experimenter. He is not satisfied to be a passive observer of his environment. He observes things in the world then formulates hypotheses and finds some way to verify them through experimentation.

In this process he employs the principle of repentance. For through his researches he finds errors or inaccuracies in former conclusions and corrects them, or he finds better ways of doing things, and provides the means whereby the improved methods, devices, and instruments may supplant the former and poorer ones.

To be more concrete and quite specific, let us cite a very significant example. The great Greek philosopher Aristotle, who lived in the fourth century before Christ, claimed that heavy bodies fall faster than light bodies. Because of the great esteem in which Aristotle was held, and far more basically, because apparently no one was of the disposition or inclination to doubt that he was correct and to experiment with falling bodies to find out whether he was right or wrong, the world accepted his opinion on the matter until the seventeenth century of our era. For almost two thousand years his opinion had been accepted primarily for the simple reason that no one tested the opinion to see if it was correct.

But in the seventeenth century there lived a man who wondered about Aristotle's conclusion and devised a means of testing it to see if it were true. Upon examination, experimentation, he discovered that Aristotle was wrong. As significant as that discovery and the consequent mathematical formulations were, that which was of the utmost significance was the fact that experimental method was born. Galileo had awakened the world to the tool which was to be instrumental in wresting from nature many of her secrets, and the process goes on.

Now the point of all the foregoing is this; as long as men only observed and recorded their observations there was no progress or development in science. On the contrary, immediately when men began to apply the principles which they thought about, progress was the result. But it was not merely the application of principles which produced modern science, but it was the dismissing of those things which were not verified, eliminating that which was not confirmed or found to be true or productive of worthy and profitable consequences, and the holding fast that which was good. And thus the progress which has been and is being made by modern science is fundamentally based upon this principle of proving all things and holding fast that which is good; and obviously from what has been stated previously, it is clear that this very process is basically that of repentance, wherein the searcher turns from that which is faulty or inadequate or untrue to that which can stand the test, endure, and produce. So we see that the best possible illustration of progress that we experience (that of modern science) has been possible because of the application of the principle of repentance. Thus when we speak of repentance as the principle of progress, we need not restrict it to a theological or religious context, for we see that it is applicable to all of the affairs of life.

Now for a moment, let us return to the question, why is repentance necessary to salvation?

When it comes to the matter of the salvation of the souls of men, we find that repentance performs identically the same function that it does in areas of other application. That is, when one forsakes thoughts, words, and practices which are inconsistent with the revelations of God, and does things which God has commanded that one should do, he progresses in that he purifies himself and frees himself from a multitude of things which formerly held him in bondage, things which bring pain, suffering, dissension, frustration, distress, sorrow, and regret. And far worse than any one of these, or any combination of them in this life, is the incalculable loss that one would net eternally.

The Lord has said that no unclean thing can dwell in his presence. (See D&C 94:8-9; 97:15) Each person will receive a glory in which there is law that he can abide. For the Lord said, "And Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself." (Ibid., 105:5.) And in another place, ". . . he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory." (Ibid., 88:22.) These scriptures make it evident that in order for one to receive the highest glory he will have to learn and live the highest law. From this we see that repentance is necessary for salvation by virtue of the fact that men do not now abide by the celestial law; throngs do not abide even a lesser law, and they must turn from their ways to obtain salvation, for the word "salvation" itself means to be saved from, or spared, the consequences of ill actions, etc. Repentance then is to forsake the worse for the better.

In D&C 130 of the Doctrine and Covenants there are two verses which are significant here. They read:

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. (Verses 18-19.)

I would like to emphasize the use of the words "knowledge" and "intelligence" in these verses. It appears to me that it is not inappropriate to suggest that these words may be distinguished by regarding knowledge as being of a passive or static nature whereas intelligence is active or dynamic. That would mean knowledge is inert of itself, an instrument to be used. Intelligence would be a combination of factors which we might quite simply call disposition or character. This would imply that the disposition or character would determine the use to which the knowledge would be put. Now to paraphrase the scripture in terms of this analysis we find that whatever principle of character (or disposition) we develop or acquire in this life, that is the character (or disposition) we will have in the resurrection. (See also Alma 34:34-35.) And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence (or good character, or disposition, or love of righteousness) in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come.

This also points up the grave importance of repenting of one's sins and shortcomings, for we make of ourselves what we will. All that we think, say, and do not only determines what our knowledge is, but even more important, determines our attitude, our disposition, our character, in short, our intelligence. And now is the time to do something about our sins. No one else can repent for us. Each must do his own repenting. Just as each will progress and be judged according to his knowledge and intelligence, as D&C 130 puts it, or to state it differently, according to his knowledge, faith, and works, so at this very moment each is retrogressing, or idling, or progressing, according to his knowledge, faith, and works. Each one should examine himself now, and make a firm resolve that he will repent of his sins or shortcomings and permit himself to progress and become the person he is capable of becoming.

One prophet has said: ". . . do not procrastinate the day of your repentance . . . "(Alma 34:33.) Certainly that is wise counsel. Does procrastination increase or decrease one's ability to repent? What has been your experience? Does your disposition and will to repent increase with procrastination? Or, does it decrease?

Another aspect of procrastination is this. The Lord says, ". . . I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven; And he that repents not from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man." (D&C 1:31-33.) When his Spirit is gone, repentance becomes an impossibility.

The more one does the wrong thing, the greater becomes the barrier between him and God. And remember, God does not build the barrier; the one who sins builds it. In fact the more one does a wrong thing the less freedom he has not to do it. And by the same token, the more he overcomes and does not yield to that temptation, the more freedom he has. In this way one determines the degree of his own freedom. Every time he makes the right choice he increases his freedom, and every time he makes the wrong choice he lessens or decreases his freedom. In this process also we see a connection between repentance and freedom, for when one rejects the evil and accepts the good, it is a manifestation of repentance, and through it he increases his freedom.

In conclusion let us say: remember, repentance has been taught from the beginning, and repentance is a principle which is applicable to all things that we do and say and not just to those we might consider as having religious or spiritual implications. In all of those areas, as well as in the religious area, repentance is the principle of progress. In fact the gospel itself is a plan for improvement. And the inherent concomitant of improvement is freedom.
