David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter X AN APPROACH TO THE MORMON CONCEPT OF THE NATURE OF MAN

In one of his addresses at the Utah Conference on Higher Education in 1959 Dr. Philip Wheelwright distinguished three basic types of philosophic orientation for considering the nature of man. These types of orientation are: the theocentric, the anthropocentric, and the physiocentric. I do not recall Dr. Wheelwright's having designated the theocentric view by any other name, although he did call the anthropocentric view humanism and the physiocentric view pure naturalism. He considered the theocentric and physiocentric views as extremes with the anthropocentric view as the mean. Perhaps he arranged the three views in that order for that reason. But his arrangement might also be used to suggest that the physical orientation is the lowest, the human orientation is higher, and the divine orientation is highest. In this scheme the anthropocentric view subsumes the physiocentric view, and similarly the theocentric view subsumes the anthropocentric view. That is to say, the theocentric view is the most inclusive, for it transcends not only the physical world but mortal man also, and therefore no ultimate values contained in the other two perspectives are lost in this perspective.

In Dr. Wheelwright's terminology the Mormon concept of man is theocentric. That is, the nature of man cannot be understood devoid of knowledge of man's relationship to God. Traditionally, although frequently only poetically or metaphorically, man has spoken of God anthropomorphically and even we claim that God is an anthropomorphic being. Of course, the point we attempt to stress with those claims, fundamentally, is that God is a tangible being, in the same generic form as man. However, inasmuch as our form derives from him, and our ultimate form is to be eternally tabernacled like him, I think it would be more accurate to say man is a theomorphic being rather than say God is an anthropomorphic being. Another way of stating it is to say man is of the race of the Gods rather than say God is of the race of men. Inasmuch as man is the off-spring of God and his life is not merely of mortal duration, one can hardly expect to understand accurately man's nature if these things are ignored.

Now, what do I mean by the nature of man? I will consider this briefly in terms of four questions. First, what is man? Second, what is his state or condition? Third, what are his characteristics? And fourth, what is he potentially?

Now first, what is man? The Lord has revealed that man as mortal has three determinate aspects to his being: intelligence, spirit, and body. Each man's original being; called an intelligence, was provided a tabernacle of substance called spirit. Spirit beings in turn are tabernacled in bodies of flesh. A mortal man, or soul, is thus a union of spirit and body. Therefore, man is a being who has both mortal and immortal parents, for his body is provided for him through the physical processes involved in procreation, and his spirit is provided by celestial parents. In considering the nature of man, therefore, we must at least be cognizant that man has more than a mere biological heritage from mortals. He also has a life-heritage from celestial parents plus whatever capacities, talents, and dispositions he may have developed in his pre-mortal existence.

Second, what is man's state or condition? As before stated, we call man's condition mortal. Simply, this means that man is subject to death. Not only is he subject to death but also to sin. Fundamentally this sub-jection of man is what is meant by saying he is in a fallen state. Different philosophies call man's situation by different names, but universally, I believe, it is regarded as a predicament.

Third, what are man's characteristics? This question, its answers, and their implications are probably what is intended or meant by most people when they ask what is the nature of man? In typical familiar words men are honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, etc.; but they are also dishonest, false, unchaste, malevolent, vicious, and so on. Man is a rational being, as the philosophers have trumpeted through the centuries, but he is also an irrational being, as some have reluctantly admitted since Plato, and others have widely and loudly proclaimed in the last century. Man is an egoist, as Hobbes vigorously declared, but he is also an altruist, as Shaftesbury, Hume, Kant, and Mill maintain in various ways. Or in Martin Buber's words, which were used ad nauseam in the conference mentioned above, man extensively finds himself in an I-It relationship, but it is possible for him also to know the I-Thou relationship. And as also was suggested in the conference, but not stated in the explicit language of social psychology, man does make decisions under the conscious or unconscious influence of reference groups.

As man is observed, his conduct does not reveal a simple continuum from vice to virtue, but a vast complex in which each man manifests some combination of virtues and vices.

Fourth, what is man's potentiality? In a modern revelation the Lord says:

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God. (D&C 93:38.)

There are several fascinating ideas here, but the point I want to make is that as each spirit enters its body of flesh in the infant state it is innocent before God.

The revelation continues:

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers. (Ibid., 93:39.)

There are two points I wish to draw from this verse. First, the wicked one, the devil, "cometh and taketh away light and truth." And second, he does this through man, individually and collectively—individually through disobedience and collectively through the tradition of their fathers.

Essentially, one of the significant things this means is that infants are innocent, but they are born in a mortal world where men are agents unto themselves, even acknowledging various influences which may contribute to decision-making, and where, through the exercise of agency, men individually have chosen in varying degrees to acknowledge or deny God and similarly have chosen to accept and practice or reject his principles in varying degrees. Consequently, although babes are innocent, by the time they reach the age of accountability they have become acquainted, through personal weaknesses and those of others, with a fallen world. Although not comprehending these words, they no doubt quite adequately understand that man has his failings. Perhaps this is in part what King Benjamin had in mind when he said:

For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father. (Mosiah 3:19.)

Another passage speaks of the natural man as carnal, sensual, and devilish. Let me hasten to say it is probably impossible for us even to guess what the corrupt state of man would be had there not been periodic restorations of the gospel in man's history and some glimmer of spiritual knowledge trickling down through the centuries. However, I must also say, and emphatically, this is not identical by any means with the apostate Christian doctrine of depravity.

As I examine the scriptures it appears to me that the words "carnal," "sensual," and "devilish," must not be limited to their more narrow and specific connotations, but they are accurately, though more broadly, interpreted by the scriptural phrase "enemy to God." That is, not all men who have not made the covenants with the Christ are given to indulging in practices which are appropriately designated carnal, sensual, and devilish. Yet, all men, regardless of how moral and how pure they may be with reference to those practices called carnal, sensual, and devilish, are enemies to God until they yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, accept the atonement of the Lord, and are submissive to his will. A significant point here is, what we conventionally call basic personal and social morality are not enough. For one not to be an enemy to God he must do all things whatsoever the Lord his God shall command him. (See Abr. 3:25.)

So, man comes into the world innocent; he is free and purposive. He seeks self-preservation and self-fulfillment. He encounters thwartings because of his own nature, his environment, and the cosmic process. The thwartings produce antagonisms and frustrations. Antagonisms and frustrations possibly provoke man to sin. A product of sin is guilt, and probably more frustration and need for self-assertion. Guilt in turn often leads to despair. Through it all the sense of ful-fillment may at some point become perverted. Or, on the other hand, man may be able to cope with his thwartings and frustrations, sins, feelings of guilt, etc., and be a noble example of mortality at its unredeemed best. But not only does man have the mortal potentialities suggested here but also available to him is his highest ultimate potentiality of becoming in character like his celestial parents.

In summary, then, the Mormon concept of the nature of man may be called theocentric. Man is a son of God as well as a son of man. He has a celestial life-heritage as well as a biological heritage. He has capacities, talents, and dispositions developed in his pre-mortal state. At present he is a mortal or fallen being, subject to sin and death. He has the agency to choose between virtues and vices. He comes into this world innocent, with a potentiality ranging from a son of perdition to a celestial being. The biological and social sciences and some other disciplines can, should, and do illumine our understandings of the nature of man. But in order that they may illumine, and not obscure our understanding, we must strive to comprehend what the Lord has revealed. If we focus all of our attention on fallen man, perhaps we will have difficulty ever rising above fallen man. Perhaps due consideration to both fallen man and potentially celestial man will result in our being acceptable to the redeeming power of the Lord.
