David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter XI FREE AGENCY AND PSYCHIC DETERMINISM

The Lord gave Abraham a great vision in which he was shown the intelligences that were organized before the world was. (Abr. 3:22.) The Lord said: ". . . I rule in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath, in all wisdom and prudence, over all the intelligences thine eyes have seen from the beginning; I came down in the beginning in the midst of all the intelligences thou hast seen." (Ibid., 3:21.) It appears Abraham was shown all the intelligences which were organized before the world was, intelligences which were to come to this world, but that there were other intelligences which Abraham was not shown. Abraham was told the intelligences have no beginning; ". . . they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal." (Ibid., 3:18.)

The same concept was revealed to Joseph Smith as follows: "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." (D&C 93:29.) The original state of man was that of an intelligence. Furthermore, intelligences, like truth, are independent in the spheres in which God places them, to act for themselves; otherwise, says the revelation, there is no existence. (See ibid., 93:30.) This is a simple and clear statement of the principle of idealistic metaphysics that essentially if there were no minds there would be no existence, for irrespective of what physical phenomena actually existed, that existence would be fundamentally the same as non-existence if there were no minds to perceive or imagine them.

Not only does the Lord inform us that intelligences are eternal and have the power to act for themselves, but he tells us that they were innocent in the beginning, and because of the redemption from the fall men again became innocent in their infant state. (Ibid., 93:38.)

It is a fact of observation that even infants with the same parents very early manifest diverse tendencies, desires, and aversions and on the basis of the revelations of the Lord it is not unreasonable to make the inferences that each infant that comes into the world was an entity—an intelligence, a spirit, a personality—prior to entering the body provided for it through the process of procreation, and likewise possesses its own common and unique proclivities in addition to whatever biological characteristics it may have inherited from its mortal forebearers.

Although little children have their differences, their own likes and dislikes, God has revealed ". . . that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through . . . [his] Only Begotten; Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before . . ." the Lord. (Ibid., 29:46-47.) Apparently, even though little children are subject to many influences, and do some things which might be regarded as sin if done by one more mature than they, in the justice and mercy of God they are not held accountable for their deeds until they reach an age at which they should be able to discern between good and evil.

As children manifest their likes and dislikes they reveal what we have come to call the power of choice. The Prophet Lehi suggests, as do others, that there is eternal law (generically speaking), and that eternal beings—intelligences, spirits, mortals, post-mortal spirits, resurrected beings—by virtue of the fact that they are intelligences, inherently have the power to act contrary to the law. Conforming to the law constitutes righteousness and yields happiness, and acting in opposition to the law constitutes sin and yields misery.

Further, Lehi says: "And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given. Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Ne. 2:26-27.)

In effect Lehi says: Because of the fall all men were in captivity to the devil, but because of the atonement of the Messiah, men have become free to act for themselves and not to be acted upon unless they fail to observe God's commandments.

That man has the power to act and is responsible for his actions is made very clear by the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith in these words: "For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." (D&C 58:26-29.)

As law is eternal, and agency is eternal, opposition seems also to be eternal. The scriptures indicate that in the pre-mortal existence spirits had the power to act in opposition to God and eternal law even to the point of rebellion. In this mortal existence even as the light of Christ or Holy Spirit enlighteneth every man who comes into the world and will respond to its influence, similarly the influence of the adversary is present to beguile and deceive men and lead them carefully down to hell.

The Lord has said that the devil takes away light and truth from the children of men in two ways, generically speaking. First, by the disobedience of men they lose the truth, and secondly, through the traditions of their fathers. (Ibid., 93:39.) One is held accountable only for the light and truth he receives or has opportunity to receive. If he is born in an environment where he has access to the full light of the gospel, his responsibility will be different from that of the person who is born in an environment devoid of that light. However, where one does not have access to the full light of the gospel if he is faithful and persists in the light he has with full purpose of heart he shall receive more light, but either in this life or in the post-mortal life every man will have opportunity to responsibly accept or reject the light, even as one third of the hosts of heaven made their final choice even in the pre-mortal estate.

Now the Lord has said that all blessings are predicated upon law. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith he revealed that "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (Ibid., 130:20-21.) Perhaps it is not unwarranted to assume that by implication there is not only a loss of blessings but even disvalues or definite handicaps or disadvantages which come to man upon the disobedience of laws.

Regarding the binding nature of law, the Lord has said, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." (Ibid., 82:10.)

Law, then, seems to be not only eternal, and the basis of all blessings, and the loss of blessings, and binding upon God as well as man, but according to God is also universal. He has revealed: "All kingdoms have a law given; And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions." (Ibid., 88:36-38.) In spite of the obvious disorder and apparent chaos and meaninglessness of part and in some cases even much of man's existence, God has assured us that space and its vast continuum of kingdoms are governed by law and that each law has its own bounds and conditions.

According to Lehi the whole cosmic order is designed that man might have joy. (2 Ne. 2:25.) The ultimate realization of that joy (or its opposite, misery) seems to depend upon man's use of his agency, or power to act. Although, because of the redemption, he comes into this world innocent, he does not remain innocent because of the fact that as he grows and develops physically, his intellectual, emotional, and volitional aspects develop also, and through them he makes choices. If he chooses to yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and puts off the natural man and becomes a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becomes as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord sees fit to inflict upon him, even as a child submits to his father, then he is blessed and will find himself a new man who is happy and an heir to all the Father has. (See Mosiah 3:19.) If he rejects the enticings of the Holy Spirit and chooses darkness rather than light he receives captivity and death (misery) or whatever level of joy he is willing to receive, for the Lord has revealed that even after they have been resurrected who will go even to the lowest degree of glory "they who remain shall also be quickened; nevertheless, they shall return again to their own place, to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received." (D&C 88:32.)

Now that we have had a brief doctrinal statement regarding man and his agency let us specifically examine what might be called free agency and psychic determinism. First, what do we mean by the phrases "free agency" and "psychic determinism"? Based upon the foregoing and particularly verses 29 through 31 of D&C 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants I would define free agency as the power to act for itself inherent in intelligence (or in an intelligence). I define psychic determinism as the hypothesis that all of an intelligence's choices are irrevocably determined from the pristine existence of the intelligence by the nature of that particular intelligence.

Although free agency is defined in terms of power to act, implicit in the notion of intelligence is the power to discern. One's condemnation, therefore, lies not merely in the fact of his wrong choice but also in the fact that he had the power to discern and discerning made the wrong choice. As it is put in one place:

"Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light. And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation." (Ibid., 93 :31-32.)

As mentioned above, adults observe many discernible differences in children from their infancy. They are distinct persons when they are born, though innocent as far as this world is concerned, having made no choices here. Far more important than any biological factors which may have contributed to their being what they are are the attributes of character which they develop by their own volition as beings in their pre-mortal existence. So, though they are all innocent as regards this life when they are born they are by no means all alike. Obviously, neither are the environments of their birth and nurturing alike. The factors which influence each individual from infancy to old age are many and varied. Among them are the following: parents, brothers and sisters, other relatives, friends, members of one's peer group, teachers, neighbors, things seen, heard, and read, the things one is taught and the manner in which he is taught, the extent of his education, jobs had and things related thereto, his hopes, disappointments, aspirations, successes, concept of self, and what he thinks others think of him, etc.

It is beyond the ken of man to say categorically what constitutes an ideal set of circumstances for a given infant. We must assume that each is born into a set of mortal circumstances appropriate to whatever he became in the pre-mortal existence. Viewing temporal conditions as they are and the lives of men and women I think we must conclude that what might be an ideal set of circumstances for one worthy and deserving spirit may be radically different from those of another worthy and deserving spirit. There is no justification for one's considering those born in less favorable temporal circumstances than his own as necessarily spiritually inferior to him or those born in more favorable temporal circumstances than his own as necessarily spiritually superior to him. Generally speaking it would appear that some spirits do have a distinct advantage over others because of the environments in which they are reared, and probably generally speaking they are in that environment because it is what they deserved and that which is best for them. However, it is also a probability that some equally deserving and worthy spirits are born in a time and place and under conditions which are far less propitious viewed from our mortal perspective, and yet probably in their interests and perhaps in the interest of others they are so born.

The concept of free agency takes cognizance of these differences and acknowledges the seemingly infinite and varied influences which affect the lives of men. But irrespective of the diversity and multiplicity of those factors which may be operative in the life of a given individual the concept of free agency holds that the individual is not an inert entity pushed to and fro, or molded first this way and then that, either mercilessly or mercifully, by the necessary and inexorable combination of forces which may be operating upon it. On the contrary, the concept of free agency holds that inasmuch as one has intelligence (or basically, is an intelligence), is basically a discerning entity with the power to act, he has the responsibility to examine those things which come within his purview, and irrespective of what combination of influences may be exerted upon him, as a discerning agent, he must assume responsibility for whatever choices he makes. Essentially, whatever the influencing forces, whether construed as coercive or otherwise, the individual is regarded as the deciding agent. It is his inherent responsibility, by virtue of his being an intelligence, to discern and act in accordance with his agency, and accept the responsibility for his choice.

In one place the Lord revealed: "And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68 :25.)

This passage clearly places the responsibility for the teaching of children upon their parents. And, as observed above, there are many agents which are either potential or actual influences in the lives of adults as well as children. As agents, all of these persons, as well as parents, are responsible for the influences they exert upon others. In short, agency involves a vast complex of responsibility, essentially involving the responsibility for one's own choices and the influence of those choices upon others.

Undoubtedly the choices one makes in the early stages of his life, along with their consequences, do have their effect in making him whatever kind of person he becomes. But at each stage, or continuously for that matter, one is still a discerner and an agent. If one earnestly and honestly acknowledges the Lord and calls upon him for assistance, he can obtain guidance in the discerning and courage and strength in the acting. If he fails to acknowledge and call upon the Lord he is left to do the best he can and perhaps is influenced in lesser or greater degree by the adversary.

The Lord's admonition in the Sermon on the Mount suggests rather emphatically that one's freedom and responsibility in thinking are basically the same as one's freedom and responsibility in acting. He said: "That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matt. 5 :28.) This perhaps raises the question, is one going to be judged and held accountable for every idea or thought which crosses his mind? The answer seems to require more than a simple yes or no. It has been said, ". . . As he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23 :7.)

The Lord in giving instruction to Samuel said regarding a particular man: ". . . Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." (1 Sam. 16 :7.) Jesus said to the Pharisees: "For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. . . ." (Matt. 15 :19.) More comprehensively the Lord said to the Jews: "O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment." (Ibid., 12 :34-36.) These words from the prophets and the Lord suggest that it is not the intrusion of a thought in one's mind as it may be introduced by another, or even the uninvited flash of a notion in one's mind precipitated or provoked by any one of a number of things, for which one will be judged and condemned, but that he will be judged and condemned for those thoughts which arise out of or are the product of his heart. Or, he will be judged for those thoughts which are evil which he contemplates for whatever sense of base satisfaction he obtains from them. But what about the Lord's statement, "That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment"? Some of the synonyms for the word "idle" will help here. They are: vain, empty, base, having no value or significance, worthless, useless, futile. It appears then that one will be held accountable for the use he makes of his mind in its acts of contemplation as well as in its decisions. The thoughts one entertains not only form the mind but also are a reflection of it. Each intelligence is always the ground of his own choice.

Speaking generally, choices seem to be of three kinds: (1) arbitrary, (2) habitual, and (3) deliberate. By arbitrary I mean such a choice as when one is offered a glass from a tray filled with glasses, or a roll from a plate filled with rolls of the same kind. It is true some persons may pause and even overtly appear to deliberate before choosing, but ultimately such a choice is arbitrary. That is, there is no reason for choosing one rather than another.

By habitual I mean such a choice as when one consistently and almost without thinking always orders milk, or coffee, or some other specific thing as his drink at a given meal or meals.

By deliberate I mean such a choice as when one must decide either to go to hear a symphonic concert played by an orchestra from a remote place, or go to an important basketball game. He cannot go to both, for they are scheduled at the same time.

A given choice may be arbitrary for some persons, habitual for others, and deliberate for still others; for example, if a group of people were given their choice of vanilla or chocolate ice cream, some may be completely indifferent and choose arbitrarily; others may habitually choose one or the other, while still others may deliberately choose one or the other on the basis of what they had previously eaten, or on the basis of what they had the last time they ate ice cream, or for some other definite reason.

Past decisions undoubtedly have bearing on present decisions. Past thoughts and actions, experiences, consequences, reactions of other people, etc., all play their part as one consciously reacts to them or fails to assert his right and responsibility of agency and yields rather indifferently and/or subconsciously to those forces. One is always the agent, although by default he may have submitted himself to subversive influences which in effect may have produced in him a condition of such weakness that he has little confidence in himself and may even feel that he has no power within himself to act. Such a person, fundamentally, is in the state described by Lehi as captivity. But, his captivity does not have to be permanent, if he can be persuaded to assert himself even in a very limited way. From such an assertion of himself he can gain strength which in time may gain for him a full restoration of his agency.

To illustrate the notion of temporary default of agency on an amoral or innocuous level I would suggest the following probably not uncommon experience. One leaves his home driving his automobile with the intent of going to town to make a small purchase. En route he lets his mind wander to a number of things, and suddenly he reaches the intersection where he should turn right in order to go to town where he is to make his purchase. However, when he reaches the intersection instead of turning right he turns left, for he always (so to speak) turns left there in order to go to his office. After he turns or even after he reaches his office, he may or may not remember that it was his intent to go to town rather than directly to his office. This illustrates the fact that sometimes a given pattern of conduct is so strong that even when it is one's intent to follow a different pattern unless he consciously persists in his intent he will find himself doing the usual rather than the intended.

Of course it is on the levels of legal, moral, and religious standards that wrong decisions made consciously or by default weaken and enslave one.

There have been times when good men in high places have compromised or relaxed their standards either momentarily until they came to a sudden awareness of their mistake and fortunately found strength to correct their innovation, or have continued to compromise and make the wrong choices until they have practically made a complete inversion of their standards. But also there have been others who have had a given relatively low standard of conduct, or been given habitually to certain practices for many years who find the strength or power either to gradually or instantaneously forsake those practices and begin to take a more positive and constructive course in their pattern of life.

In either set of circumstances one who has intelligence has the power to consider, the power to discern, and the power to act. He remains responsible for the choices he makes, or for submitting to the particular influence to which he does submit.

There are three large or extensive universal enterprises among men which either explicitly or implicitly assume the reality of the capacity of man to make choices and his responsibility for them. Those enterprises are (1) education, broadly conceived, (2) civil law, and (3) religion, with its concept of rewards and punishments.

First, a word about education. Whether we think of education as that process which takes place in a formal and institutional situation, or as that which happens in the very informal circumstances of home, hogan, or igloo, the process of teaching the infant, small child, larger child, etc., has implicit within it the assumption that the person instructed can understand and make wiser choices because of increased understanding. Also, the entire system of civil law is so conceived that it assumes that men are able to understand laws and make responsible choices. Just as parents punish their children for mistakes in the moral realm on the assumption that the children do or can understand and therefore are responsible, so the civil law provides for punishment for its offenders on the same assumption that they do or can understand, and are responsible. Similarly, the concept of rewards and punishments in religion contains the implicit assumption that men are agents and are responsible for the use of their agency. Certainly the restored gospel is emphatic regarding man's agency and responsibility, the culmination of the exercise of which is assignment to one of the three degrees of glory or perdition.

It is probably also obvious that in what we have here called the enterprise of education, which is basic to the other two enterprises, there is a factor or element which is regarded by many as the cause-effect or deterministic element. It is apparent that fundamental to the process of education, again broadly conceived, is not only the assumption of a capacity to understand and to choose, but also the assumption that concepts conveyed in that process will cause the person to act or choose differently from what he would were he to remain without those concepts.

Since the days of Copernicus and Galileo there has been a progressive development in the area of cause-effect analysis in which the rather thorough-going mechanical characteristics found in or attributed to the physical universe have come to be regarded as equally applicable to the intellectual, emotional, and volitional aspects of man. Needless to say, man, having a body and operating in a corporeal context is involved in cause-effect situations just as any other body, inanimate or animate. That is, should he be outside when it commenced to rain he would become wet just as any other body which happened to be in the rain. But as an agent he may choose to stay in the rain and let the sun and atmosphere dry him later as other bodies, or he may gain shelter from the rain and dry himself. To conclude that inasmuch as man is subject to many cause-effect relationships, as are all bodies, all that he does is mechanical (deterministic) does not take sufficient cognizance of his being a causer.

Essentially, the distinction I wish to make may be summarized in the difference between two words, "cause" and "because." The basic concept of cause is to bring about, to make happen, to effect, to induce, to produce. The basic concept of because is for the reason that, or on account of, or since, or inasmuch as.

Obviously man functions as a cause. However, he also functions in the sense of because. That is, man is not merely moved as effect, which move becomes a cause of a subsequent effect, etc., but because of his intelligence which embodies the power to act, as previously noted, he causes changes because of certain things. Those things may be past, present, or future. That is, because of things which have happened he may choose to do a particular thing. Or, because of present circumstances he may choose to act in a particular way. Or, because of a desired or anticipated situation he may act in a given way. Man is not impelled to move this way and that inexorably as an inanimate object or an animate object of a low order, but as he has intelligence he can, and is, responsible to examine any given existential situation and determine what course of action to take. So, his actions are not merely caused in a mechanistic or deterministic sense, but as he has the capacity and responsibility to examine any so-called causal factors in any given situation we may suggest that his actions are becaused. Irrespective of the number, variety, and nature of the causal factors the individual is the determining factor. And although men in varying degrees may attempt to abdicate their place as agent, they remain unable to shift the final responsibility, either to another agent or to a purported process of inexorable necessity. Therefore, we may say what man does is not merely caused vis a tergo (that is, moved by a force from behind), but on the contrary it is becaused teleologically (that is, purposively).

As an eternally existing intelligence man had the power to act as God clothed him with spirit and later with mortal body. God has preserved man's freedom to act for himself. In this life man is free to choose either good or evil, but he is not free from choosing evil. God also is free to choose good or evil, but different from man he is free from choosing evil. It would be wonderful if all men would choose and assist others to choose in such a way that they would exchange their kind of freedom for God's kind of freedom.
