David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter XII THE GOSPEL AND WORLD RELIGIONS

The revelations of the Lord clearly indicate that Adam was the first man. (TPJS: 167; D&C 84:16; Moses 1:34; Moses 3:7.) As a consequence of the fall, Adam and Eve were cast out of the Garden of Eden, and in time they were blessed with sons and daughters who began to divide two and two and till the land and tend flocks; and they also were blessed with sons and daughters.

Adam and Eve called upon the name of the Lord, and he heard them and gave them commandments to worship him and offer the firstlings of their flocks as an offering unto him. Because of their obedience to the Lord's commandments an angel was sent to Adam and revealed many things to him.

Some of the principles of the gospel with which Adam was acquainted are the following:

(1) Marriage

(2) Faith

(3) Repentance

(4) Baptism

(5) The Holy Ghost

(6) The Fall

(7) The Atonement

(8) Free Agency

(9) Immortality

(10) Revelation

(11) Priesthood

(Hunter, Milton R., The Gospel Through the Ages [Salt Lake City: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945], p. 60.)

It is evident from this list, based on the limited revelation we have on the subject, that Adam had an extensive knowledge of the gospel.

Not only was he acquainted with the priesthood, but he held the keys of the priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Gen. 1:26, 27, 28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. (TPJS:157.)

Furthermore, the Prophet said that after an apostasy the keys of authority are restored from heaven by Adam's authority (ibid.:157) and that the ". . . angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord." (Ibid.:168.) Also, the Lord ". . . set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them." (Ibid.:168.)

Thus, in the words of the Lord:

. . . the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was. Amen. (Moses 5:58-59.)

Adam and Eve taught the gospel to their sons and daughter, but Satan came among them saying:

Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. And the Lord God called upon men by the Holy Ghost everywhere and commanded them that they should repent. (Ibid., 5:13-14.)

In those days mankind generally was referred to as the sons of men. Those who accepted the gospel and made covenants with the Lord were called the sons of God. Thus men and women outside the covenant were the sons and daughters of men, and those who made covenants with the Lord were the sons and daughters of God.

Adam and Eve had a language which was pure and undefiled, and they taught it to their children so they could read and write, and from that time a book of remembrance was kept in the language of Adam; and we are told ". . . for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration." (Ibid., 6:5.)

One of the greatest meetings in the history of this earth was held when Adam was 927 years of age. Concerning that meeting we are informed:

Three years previous to the death of Adam he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation. (D&C 107:53-56.)

It is wonderful to contemplate that great meeting where Adam stood before his righteous posterity including the other antediluvian patriarchs and received the Lord in their presence who administered comfort to Adam in his great age. This was a crowning recognition at the end of his mortal life of his faith and devotion.

Throughout Adam's long mortal span the sure knowledge of God was among mankind. In the second "Lecture on Faith" we find these very significant remarks:

. . . after man's transgression . . . [God continued] to manifest himself to him [Adam] and to his posterity; and, notwithstanding they were separated from his immediate presence that they could not see his face, they continued to hear his voice,

Adam, thus being made acquainted with God, communicated the knowledge which he had unto his posterity; and it was through this means that the thought was first suggested to their minds that there was a God, which laid the foundation for the exercise of their faith, through which they could obtain a knowledge of his character and also of his glory.

Not only was there a manifestation made unto Adam of the existence of a God; but Moses informs us, as before quoted that God condescended to talk with Cain after his great transgression in slaying his brother, and that Cain knew that it was the Lord that was talking with him, so that when he was driven out from the presence of his brethren, he carried with him the knowledge of the existence of a God; and, through this means, doubtless, his posterity became acquainted with the fact that such a Being existed.

From this we can see that the whole human family in the early age of their existence, in all their different branches, had this knowledge disseminated among them; so that the existence of God became an object of faith in the early age of the world. (30-33.)

. . . the testimony which these men had of the existence of a God, was the testimony of man; for previous to the time that any of Adam's posterity had obtained a manifestation of God to themselves, Adam, their common father, had testified unto them of the existence of God, and of his eternal power and Godhead. (35.)

From this account [the genealogy of the patriarchs] it appears that Lamech, the 9th from Adam, and the father of Noah, was 56 years old when Adam died; Methuselah, 243; Enoch, 308; Jared, 470; Mahalaleel, 535; Cainan, 605; Enos, 695; and Seth, 800.

So that Lamech the father of Noah, Methuselah, Enoch, Jared, Mahalaleel, Cainan, Enos, Seth, and Adam, were all living at the same time, and beyond all controversy, were all preachers of righteousness. (38-39.)

From the foregoing it is easily to be seen, not only how the knowledge of God came into the world, but upon what principle it was preserved; that from the time it was first communicated, it was retained in the minds of righteous men, who taught not only their own posterity but the world; so that there was no need of a new revelation to man, after Adam's creation to Noah, to give them the first idea or notion of the existence of a God; and not only of a God, but the true and living God. (44.)

We can see from this that Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah, all lived on the earth at the same time; and that Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Methuselah, and Lamech, were all acquainted with both Adam and Noah. (Lectures on Faith [Salt Lake City: N. B. Lundwall, compiler and publisher, no date], paragraph 43.)

Methuselah was the last of the antediluvian patriarchs to die, and he died in the 1656th year of the world's history (as per biblical chronology) which was the same year in which the flood came. (Second Lecture on Faith: 41.) Thus we see that for the first 1656 years of the world's history there was a sure knowledge of God among men.

The Prophet Joseph Smith tells us that Noah (as had Adam) held the keys of the priesthood and that holding the keys ". . . consisted in obtaining the voice of Jehovah that He talked with him [Noah] in a familiar and friendly manner, that He continued to him the keys, the covenants, the power and the glory, with which He blessed Adam at the beginning. . ." (TPJS:171.) Moses records: "And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch." (Moses 8:19.) Noah's message to his riotous generation was not merely personal and social morality (goodness) but he taught saying: "Believe and repent of your sins and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even as our fathers, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, that ye may have all things made manifest; and if ye do not this, the floods will come in upon you; nevertheless they hearkened not." (Ibid., 8:24.) However, ". . . Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God." (Ibid., 8:13.) Noah, like Adam, had a sure knowledge of God and knew that salvation comes only through Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world.

Noah and his wife, their three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and their wives, survived the flood. In the ninth chapter of Genesis there is a strange story which reports that Noah began to be a husbandman and that he planted a vineyard, became drunken with wine, and that Ham saw Noah's nakedness, and that his nakedness was covered by his other sons. As a consequence when Noah awoke from his wine he pronounced a severe curse upon Ham and blessings upon Shem and Japheth. I personally believe there is much to this story which has not been preserved for us; however, what I wish to discuss at the moment is what Noah said to his sons when he awoke. The scripture reads:

And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.

And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant. (Gen. 9:25-27. Italics mine.)

First, it is very interesting that although it was Ham who saw Noah's nakedness Noah did not say "Cursed be Ham," but he said, "Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren." Canaan, of course, was Ham's son. As observed above, Ham was acknowledged as a son of God, and he was identified as one who walked with God, as did his father and his brothers. (Moses 8:27.) However, inasmuch as he married a Canaanite, his son Canaan was subject to the curse which was carried in the Canaanite line. Therefore, as pronounced by Noah, although it was Ham who reputedly saw Noah's nakedness, it was Canaan who was cursed.

The second thing we should note is that Noah said, "Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant." It is of special interest here that in his reference to Shem, Noah used the name "Lord God," which refers to Jehovah. Of course, it was through Shem that the chosen lineage came, and it was they who were entrusted with the revelation of Jehovah, the pre-mortal Jesus.

On the contrary, when Noah spoke of the blessings to Japheth, he said: "God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant." Here he did not use the name for Jehovah the Redeemer, but he used the more generic name for God, Elohim. Japheth is the ancestor of the gentile nations and in Noah's pronouncement he used the name of Jehovah in relation to the covenant people, and he used the more generic name for the gentiles. He only pronounced a curse upon the descendants of Ham. The pronouncement upon Japheth in a way summarizes the whole. First, it suggests that Shem will be the possessor of the tents; Japheth is to be enlarged and be cared for by Shem; but Canaan will be the servant.

Chapter ten of Genesis gives us what is called the "Table of the Nations." Here we have a record of the immediate posterity of Shem, Ham, and Japheth and the parts of the world where they settled. With a proliferation of peoples came also a proliferation of religious opinions and beliefs.

One of the earliest and most influential apostates in the dispensation of Noah was named Nimrod, who was the son of Cush, who was the son of Ham. He was a mighty hunter and hero. He began a kingdom in Babel, Erech, and Accad (Shinar). Josephus tells us Nimrod excited the people to a contempt of God. He persuaded the people to ascribe their well-being to himself instead of God. "He also changed the government into tyranny, seeing no other way of turning man from the fear of God, but to bring them into a constant dependence on his power." He also said ". . . he would avenge himself on God for destroying their forefathers." Furthermore, Josephus reports that Nimrod established his kingdom through rapine, murder, and tyranny. (Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, Book I, chap. 4.) He urged the people to depart from the religion of Shem and cleave to the institutes of Nimrod. (Clarke, Bible Commentary, Vol. I, p. 84.) He tried to get men to worship great conquerors and in time the deification of humans became a chief characteristic of heathen religions in Egypt, Babylon, Greece, Rome, China, and India. He also introduced animal worship. Idolatry and adultery ("institutionalized immorality") became common religious rites. Even human sacrifices were instituted.

As nations of peoples came into being, the descendants of Japheth as well as those of Ham, they gradually lost the gospel and substituted for it strange and perverse principles and practices. Even those who were descended from Shem were not all faithful and in time God gave a new dispensation to Abraham. Still later he gave a new revelation to Moses. Eventually the Lord Jesus Christ (Jehovah) himself came into the world. He ministered on two hemispheres. After a short time even the peoples he had visited apostatized. Indeed, the story of man on the earth is one of his receiving the gospel from heaven followed by an apostasy and in turn followed by a restoration, etc.

Although the process of apostasies and restorations with which we are generally most concerned are those involving what we conventionally recognize as the chosen lineage, there have been historical changes in the beliefs and practices of peoples not of that lineage. Excluding the gospel, Hinduism is the oldest living world religion and is usually regarded as having its beginning in about 1500 B.C. Shintoism, Zoroastrianism, Taoism, Jainism, Buddhism, and Confucianism are generally dated from approximately 660 B.C. to 500 B.C. Muhammad, the founder of Islam, was reputedly born in 570 A.D. and Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, was reputedly born in 1469 A.D. Although one who believes in the gospel of Jesus Christ must look askance upon all of the other living world religions, he nonetheless must recognize some remarkable parallels (or at least analogous teachings) and that the establishment of those religions constituted a distinct moral advance for the peoples in the areas where they were established.

The estimated world population is three billion two hundred fifty million (3,250,000,000) persons. If the membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints is two million, one hundred thousand (2,100,000), the membership of the Church is only six hundredths of one per cent (.06) of the world population. At present the birth rate exceeds the death rate by approximately 150,000 persons every twenty-four hours. Consequently, the one hundred thousand (100,000) plus people we baptized last year was equivalent to the excess of births over deaths for only three-fourths of one day of the three hundred sixty-five days of the year. Although missionary work is greatly accelerated, and many would hope and pray that yet greater numbers of our Father's children will recognize the truth and hearken to it, it appears the simple truth is as the Doctrine and Covenants suggests, that the vast hordes of mankind will inherit the telestial kingdom of glory. (D&C 76, verse 109.)

I have already suggested that the story of man on the earth is one of apostasies and restorations. The restorations have been due primarily to God's patience, long-suffering, forbearance, and love. The apostasies have been due to man's rebellious, perverse, recalcitrant, and proud disposition. As before suggested, although not mentioned, many people apostatized while Adam and the great patriarchs were still among them. The children of Israel worshipped a golden calf of their own making soon after being delivered by the Lord from a terrible bondage to the Egyptians. The majority of those who saw and heard the Lord among the Jews rejected him. Those who accepted him among the Nephites as well as among the Jews soon fell into apostasy. But apostasy on the earth was not an innovation for God's children, for a third of them apostatized in God's own presence while they were still spirit beings. It is little wonder that the masses of mankind are rebellious and have no proclivity for the gospel when we examine the record of rebelliousness of even those God has designated his chosen people.

Now, before considering some of the scriptures to see what they say regarding the world religions let us say just a word about the Latter-day Saint concept of man. In the first place the Lord has revealed that the original being which is called man was an intelligence. Furthermore, we are told that intelligences were not created by God but co-existed with him. In other words, whereas man as a spirit and man as a mortal is a contingent being, man as an intelligence is a necessary being. That is to say, his initial or original existence as an intelligence was not dependent upon God. However, in order that the intelligence could become a spirit and subsequently become a mortal was contingent upon certain conditions which involved dependence upon God. We assume that as independent entities, intelligences were free beings; at any rate when they were clothed with spirits as they were begotten by God as his Spirit offspring they were free agents. In the exercise of that agency all spirits did not make the same choices. Degrees of loyalty and devotion to God and the principles he taught his children ranged from those who were denominated "noble and great ones" to those who rebelled against him and were cast out of his presence. Factors in our development as spirits seem to have suggested to God the appropriate time and place for our mortal probation. For, as Paul said, God ". . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." (Acts 17: 22-26.) Moses had previously said: "When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance."(Deuteronomy 32:8-9.) These statements by the prophets also suggest that God's spirit children would be born as mortals at times, in places, and environments, etc., in some way commensurate with their development in the pre-mortal spirit world. I believe we must assume that the statement in the Doctrine and Covenants that all blessings are predicated upon law and that ". . . when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:21), obtains with reference to the pre-mortal spirit world and coming into this world as well as while we are in this world, and when we enter the post-mortal spirit world and resurrected state. However, I also believe there are complex factors involved and that we must avoid the hasty and perhaps unwarranted and erroneous assumption that circumstances in this world which from a mortal perspective would normally be considered most favorable, less favorable, and least favorable necessarily mean that every individual who comes into those circumstances was necessarily most valiant, less valiant, and least valiant in the spirit world among those who will be permitted to become souls, or acquire physical bodies.

Irrespective of the complexities involved here it is a fact that the Lord has restored his gospel to the earth and that there are also many religions and sects within religions now among men. Ignoring the primitive or tribal religions and only considering the so-called world religions, or possibly "higher" religions, it is interesting to observe that they have something of a common denominator in a principle which variously approximates the second of the two great commandments. With the diminishing regard of Jesus Christ as divine and as literally the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, etc., by some so-called Christians in our century, and the growing tendency to regard him as a great moral teacher only, perhaps the greatest, has naturally led to a more compatible theological relationship between what the world calls Christianity and the other world religions. In effect, theology bows out to morality, thinking of theology as the science or study of God and morality as the science or study of human conduct. Too often theology is now considered a sterile enterprise either on the grounds that God does not exist and man has no future beyond mortality, or on the grounds that if God does exist, all is relative anyway and all that really matters is human conduct—man's relation with man. The truth of the matter seems to be that the theology which is known to the world in general is a sterile enterprise, but because mankind in general is in an apostate condition, the truth perverted, and the light of revelation lost among them, rather than on the grounds they assume.

Let us consider a few passages of scripture given to the world in this dispensation and see what they say which relates to the so-called world religions. Here are some of the things Nephi recorded:

Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and that I speak forth my words according to mine own pleasure. And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man, neither from that time henceforth and forever.

Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written.

For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written.

For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it.

And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews.

And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever. (2 Ne. 29:7-14.)

There are many ideas in these verses upon which one is tempted to ponder, but here I merely wish to enumerate several points from these verses:

King Benjamin declared:

For behold, and also his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned.

But wo, wo unto him who knoweth that he rebelleth against God! For salvation cometh to none such except it be through repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ.

And the Lord God hath sent his holy prophets among all the children of men, to declare these things to every kindred, nation, and tongue, that thereby whosoever should believe that Christ should come, the same might receive remission of their sins, and rejoice with exceeding great joy, even as though he had already come among them.

Yet the Lord God saw that his people were a stiffnecked people, and he appointed unto them a law, even the law of Moses.

And many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows showed he unto them, concerning his coming; and also holy prophets spake unto them concerning his coming; and yet they hardened their hearts, and understood not that the law of Moses availeth nothing except it were through the atonement of his blood. (Mosiah 3:11-15.)

Again, let us enumerate only a few points:

Our record is incomplete regarding the declaration of the gospel to every kindred, nation, and tongue, but the revelations are clear that all men will have the opportunity of accepting or rejecting it prior to their final judgment.

Alma gives us this significant insight:

For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true. (Alma 29:8.)

There are two points here I wish to emphasize:

In another place Alma gives us these very helpful words:

It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him.

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell. (Ibid., 12:9-11.)

Let us note these points particularly:

I believe the Lord gave us an illustration of the general principle which is involved here through Mormon. Some readers will recall that Mormon records the following, speaking of our Book of Mormon:

And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them.

And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation. (3 Ne. 26:9-10.)

I would summarize the foregoing briefly by saying God created all men, that he grants all nations prophets of their own to teach his word, that men are commanded to write the words he speaks to them, that if they are hardhearted they receive a lesser portion, and if they are not hardhearted they receive a greater portion, that salvation comes only to those who repent and have faith in Jesus Christ and his atonement, and finally God grants to nations all that in his wisdom he seeth fit that they should have, and that according to their heed and diligence.

There are eleven living world religions and a host of churches, sects, and cults, and yet the angel of the Lord told Nephi the son of Lehi that there are only two churches. He said:

Behold there are save two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil; wherefore, whoso belongeth not to the church of the Lamb of God belongeth to that great church, which is the mother of abominations; and she is the whore of all the earth. (1 Ne. 14:10.)

Nephi comments:

And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the whore of all the earth, and she sat upon many waters; and she had dominion over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people.

And it came to pass that I beheld the church of the Lamb of God, and its numbers were few, because of the wickedness and abominations of the whore who sat upon many waters; nevertheless, I beheld that the church of the Lamb, who were the saints of God, were also upon all the face of the earth; and their dominions upon the face of the earth were small, because of the wickedness of the great whore whom I saw. (Ibid., 14:11-12.)

There are only two churches, the church of the Lamb of God whose numbers are few, and the church of the devil whose numbers have dominion over all nations, etc.

Now, just what is meant by the two churches when we apply that concept to all of the nominally religious institutions, formal and informal, which are found on the earth?

I am sure that there are some who would choose to interpret this in what I have chosen to call the humanistic sense. According to that interpretation the church of the Lamb of God would be identified as all of those persons who are striving to promote goodness in the moral sense—personal and social—irrespective of institutional affiliation, etc. Similarly the church of the devil would be those who fail to promote goodness and those who promote evil.

The other interpretation is what I have chosen to call the legal one. According to that interpretation the church of the Lamb of God is that institution established by the Lord which through him possesses the power to make its adherents become heirs to the celestial kingdom. Correspondingly the church of the devil consists of those institutions which purportedly have within them the power of salvation but which in truth lack the power to make their adherents heirs of the celestial kingdom. Simply put, the gospel of Jesus Christ is designed to change the lives of men through the redemption of Christ so they can enter the celestial kingdom. Any institution which has not the power to open the door of that kingdom falls short of being the church of the Lamb of God and therefore constitutes a part of the church of the devil. This means in effect, that apostate Christianity and all of the world religions with their various cults and sects constitute parts of the church of the devil. God wants his children to heed his word and develop themselves so they love the law and adhere to the law and can enter his presence as celestial beings. Lucifer wants to thwart the work of God and strives to keep men and women from achieving the celestial kingdom.

It should be pointed out here that when the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were given the vision of the three degrees of glory they were shown that those who reject the gospel as mortals but receive it afterwards, the honorable men of the earth, and those who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus, will inherit the terrestrial kingdom. (D&C 76:71-80.)

Also, they wrote the following with regard to the telestial kingdom:

For these are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas.

These are they who say they are some of one and some of another—some of Christ and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some Enoch;

But received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets, neither the everlasting covenant. (Ibid., 76:99-101. Italics mine.)

It is likely that if one should oppose this interpretation and prefer what I have called the humanistic interpretation or some modification of it, he would offer in his defense a passage from Alma. It reads:

For I say unto you that whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil. (Alma 5: 40.)

This is the type verse which is so often lifted out of its context and when used in isolation is either wittingly or unwittingly given a different meaning from that of its context. Here is the verse in its context:

Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd.

And now if ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd, of what fold are ye? Behold, I say unto you, that the devil is your shepherd, and ye are of his fold; and now, who can deny this? Behold, I say unto you, whosoever denieth this is a liar and a child of the devil.

For I say unto you that whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil.

Therefore, if a man bringeth forth good works he hearkeneth unto the voice of the good shepherd, and he doth follow him; but whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of the devil, for he hearkeneth unto his voice, and doth follow him. (Ibid., 5:38-41.)

The first thing one should observe here is that good is identified with hearkening unto the voice of the good Shepherd and recognizing that he calls in his own name which is the name of Christ. Second, it should be observed that either one is of the fold of Christ or he is of the fold of the devil. (Please keep in mind that the principles and ordinances of the restored gospel are not requirements for entrance into the telestial glory or the terrestrial glory, but for the celestial glory.) The third thing we should observe in Alma's passage is that he is distinguishing between good and evil, not good and bad. This is a technical distinction, but I believe it is a very important one. The contrast between good and bad is generally thought of as describing human values, or perhaps it would be better to say values viewed from a human or temporal perspective. This would be applicable if the humanistic interpretation of the two-church passage were the correct one. On the contrary, the contrast between good and evil is generally thought of as describing values as viewed from a divine or eternal perspective. This is applicable in the legal interpretation of the two-church passage. Another way of trying to make the point that is involved here is to say that personal and social morality are not all that are required of one to be a member of the church of the Lamb of God and enter the celestial kingdom. Surely one must keep those commandments which have to do with human conduct (or morality in the generic sense), but he must also be willing to take upon himself the name of Christ and do all of those things which are appropriate to the privilege of bearing that sacred name.

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord said the following, which has bearing on this point:

For whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin.

And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of me.

And by this you may know the righteous from the wicked, and that the whole world groaneth under sin and darkness even now. (D&C 84: 51-53. Italics mine.)

Let me illustrate further from the Sermon on the Mount. In the King James version we find the following:

Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. (Matt. 5:10.)

This suggests the promises are conditioned upon the defense of goodness, righteousness. Certainly I do not want to minimize the necessity of goodness, but I believe that what the Lord said when he gave the same sermon to the Nephites indicates that he was speaking of something more comprehensive and inclusive than goodness or righteousness in conduct alone. To the Nephites he said:

And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. (3 Ne. 12:10.)

Men and women must be willing not only to stand firm in the defense of and be persecuted if necessary for righteousness or goodness, but they must be willing to bear his name (Jesus' name) valiantly.

I hope it is not assumed from the foregoing that it is the intent of this chapter that we must conclude that all persons outside The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are evil. We must distinguish between the institutions which constitute the church of the devil and the individuals who have not yet made covenants with the Lord at the hands of his authorized servants. I believe we must recognize the religions of the world (excluding the gospel) as substitutes for the gospel. No doubt many good or righteous men have been raised up among the peoples of the earth and have striven to obtain as much light and truth as they could. No doubt some of these men have been rewarded for their earnestness and have been blessed by the Holy Spirit. That is, they have been given the gospel through the power of the Holy Ghost, but through the Holy Spirit which is available to all men they have been given that which was appropriate for them and for their contemporaries. They were given principles according to their heed and diligence as the Lord in his wisdom saw fit. This view does not contradict the fact that they still belong to the church of the devil for although they have been blessed to receive light through the Holy Spirit which has helped them to improve themselves and others, they still lack certain principles and the ordinances, which are necessary to enter the church of the Lamb of God.

To some this may seem harsh. But we must recall that on one occasion when the Lord was explaining certain doctrines, many of his disciples said: "This is an hard saying." But the fact that it was thought to be a hard saying in no way altered the truth of the matter.

When the Lord spoke to Joseph Smith in the first vision he spoke plainly with regard to the sects of the day. The Prophet reports:

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight. . . . (Joseph Smith 2:19.)

We should also remember that the Lord declared to Nephi that men should write the words which he would speak unto them and that out of the books which would be written he will judge the world, "every man according to their works, according to that which is written." (2 Ne. 29:11.)

But we must not lose sight of the fact that there is a chosen people by covenant. The Lord said to Abraham:

My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. (Abr. 2:8-11.)

These great verses are significant not only because they clearly point up the patriarchal covenant which Jehovah made with Abraham and his seed, and the priesthood nature of that covenant, but because they also clearly indicate that as many as will take the covenant upon themselves, be they literal descendants and natural heirs of the house of Israel or not, if they will receive the gospel shall be called after Abraham's name, be accounted his seed, and shall receive all of the blessings of the covenant. Being born outside the natural lineage of Abraham does not preclude one's obtaining the blessings of the covenant through faithfulness any more than being born within the natural covenant of Israel is an irrevocable guarantee that one will receive the blessings of that covenant. As Nephi said:

For behold, I say unto you that as many of the Gentiles as will repent are the covenant people of the Lord; and as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be cast off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his Son, who is the Holy One of Israel. (2 Ne. 30:2.)

Also, the word of the Lord to Nephi was:

. . . I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have.

Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost. (Ibid., 28:30-31.)

We live in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, and with the wonderful physical blessings which have come to the world in our time there are greater facilities for giving all mankind an opportunity to hear the gospel than the world has ever known. As the Prophet Joseph Smith declared:

We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may,

but we must distinguish between tolerance, indifference, and acceptance. (See 11th Article of Faith.)

Men are free to worship as they please, but the price or blessing of that freedom is that they must accept the consequences of their choice.

The Lord has given the following charge to the Latter-day Saints:

Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together.

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.

And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them.

Behold, this is mine authority, and the authority of my servants, and my preface unto the book of my commandments, which I have given them to publish unto you, O inhabitants of the earth.

Wherefore, fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed in them shall be fulfilled.

* * *

What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same. (D&C 1:1-7, 38.)

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints declares to the world that salvation comes only through Jesus and his restored gospel. As King Benjamin said:

. . . there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.

For behold he judgeth, and his judgment is just; and the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy; but men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. (Mosiah 3:17-18.)

There is only one true gospel, and as President Brigham Young proclaimed in unmistakable language:

The gospel which we preach is the gospel of life and salvation. The Church which we represent is the Church and Kingdom of God, and possesses the only faith by which the children of men can be brought back into the presence of our Father and God. The Lord has set his hands to restore all things as in the beginning, and by the administration of His Holy Priesthood, save all who can be saved, cleanse from the world the consequences of the fall and give it to the hands of His Saints. (JD 12:205 or DBY:4.)

Furthermore, he said:

. . . we have something more than morality alone to teach the people. What is it? It is how to redeem the human family. (JD 19:47 or DBY:5.)

I will now say to my friends—and I call you all, and all mankind, friends, until you have proved yourselves enemies,—you who do not belong to this Church, that we have got the gospel of life and salvation. I do not say that we have a gospel, but I say that we have the definite and only gospel that ever was or ever will be that will save the children of men. (JD 12:313 or DBY:5. Italics mine.)

And he also said:

We declare it to all the inhabitants of the earth from the valleys in the tops of these mountains that we are The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—not a church but the Church—and we have the doctrine of life and salvation for all the honest-in-heart in all the world. (JD 12:173 or DBY:7.)

As recorded by John, the Lord himself announced:

I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me. (John 14:6.)

In order that there may be no mistaking the fact that it is through him and him alone that one can be forgiven of his sins, the Lord said:

. . . for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. (Ibid., 8:24.)

The central place of the Lord Jesus Christ is made very emphatic when he declared "he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me" (ibid., 13:20) but perhaps the strongest statement attributed to the Lord is where he said "He that hateth me hateth my Father also." (Ibid, 15:23.) Inasmuch as God is the God and Father of all, this seems to suggest in no uncertain terms that those who talk about believing in God and loving God and things of that kind but who reject the Christ know not whereof they speak and can only mean that their belief and love is centered only in some creature of their own imagination and hopes.

All of the foregoing should cause a Latter-day Saint to realize in some measure what a tremendously grave responsibility rests upon him as one of the infinitesimally small number of God's children upon the earth who have made covenants with him. In the partial realization of the remarkable blessings which are his, he must not permit himself to fall into the trap of pride. He must strive to be humble in all that he does from day to day and continuously seek the incomparable companionship of the Holy Ghost. He must remember that God is the Father of all men. All men are brothers. God loves all of his children. The gospel is a message to all of God's children, and each man and woman will be blessed to the extent that he or she strives to do the Lord's will, and every man will ultimately receive all that he will receive. (See D&C 88:32.)

As individuals, blessed as are the Latter-day Saints, they must manifest an attitude of love, compassion, patience, and understanding toward all who do not know the truth and strive in the spirit of those attributes to teach them the gospel by precept and example. In the words of the prophets, the Saints must be "nursing fathers" and "nursing mothers" to them.
