David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter XIII GOD AS CREATOR AND MAN AS CREATOR

When we speak of God as Creator, what do we mean? John the Apostle, in the first chapter of his gospel, speaking of the "Word" that was in the beginning with God and was also God, says: "All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:1-3.)

Similarly, Paul, in writing of God to the Hebrews, said: he "hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds." (Heb. 1:2.)

In our own dispensation Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were given a glorious vision in which they heard a voice bearing record of the Son, Jesus Christ, saying: "That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:24.)

In a great ancient vision given to Moses he beheld the earth, all the inhabitants thereof, and also "beheld many lands," each of which was called earth and saw their inhabitants. (Moses 1:29.)

Moses said to God: "Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?" Then as Moses talked with God face to face, the Lord said unto him: "For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

"And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

"And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (See ibid., 1:27-33.)

Further, the Lord continued to Moses by telling him many worlds have passed away by the word of his power and many now stand and that although they are innumerable unto man they are numbered unto him (God). (Ibid., 1:35-38.)

Among the things we learn from these passages which we should note here are the following:

In another verse in this same passage the Lord revealed the purpose of creation unto Moses when he said: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Ibid., 1:39.)

It seems, therefore, when we speak of God as creator, we are suggesting a causal relation between God, and the worlds and their inhabitants, in which God is cause and the worlds and their inhabitants are effects.

Though this is the case, it should not be assumed God is the Absolute or Sole Cause.

As is well-known, the Prophet Joseph Smith said ". . . the word create came from the word baurau, which does not mean to create out of nothing; it means to organize; the same as a man would organize materials and build a ship." (TPJS: 350.)

Here "create" does not mean bring into being in the sense of bringing into existence from total nonexistence, but on the contrary it means bring into being in the sense of to form, organize, reorganize, or structure that which already exists in a state of chaos, or in some other elementary condition.

The Lord has either revealed, or from his revelations it can be reasonably inferred, that all of the following are eternal, that is, have always existed:

At present we can only concern ourselves with the first two, element and intelligences.

In a very profound revelation given to Joseph Smith in May of 1833 the Lord declared: "The elements are eternal. . . ." (D&C 93:33.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith, in a discourse, said, "Element had an existence from the time he [God] had. The pure principles of element are principles which can never be destroyed; they may be organized and reorganized, but not destroyed. They had no beginning, and can have no end." (TPJS:351-352.)

That which we think of as the common stuff out of which the things of the world are made is eternal. We experience the natural things called the soil, rocks, hills, mountains, streams, rivers, lakes, and oceans, with numberless hosts of vegetable, insect, and animal life upon or in them, and we are given to understand the physical stuff which constitutes these sensible realities is eternal. God is their Creator in the sense that he is responsible for their having been organized, but they were organized from eternally existing elements and according to eternal law.

The Lord has also revealed that the original "you," or the original "me" is an entity called an intelligence. In one place he says: "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." (D&C 93:29.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared God is a self-existent being and that man exists upon the same principle. (TPJS:352.) Further, he said: "The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end." (Ibid.:353.) "Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit [entity, individual] from age to age, and there is no creation about it." (Ibid.:354.)

Essentially the revelations and the Prophet Joseph Smith declare that the original beings, which in our present estate we speak of as mortals, are uncreated. The intelligences, or the original entities, were not formed, organized, structured, made, created, nor begotten of God. They have co-existed with God from eternity.

Although God provided bodies of spirit for the intelligences, and provided this earthly abode for them, as well as the means for them to come here, along with a program for their individual development and progression, he did not originate, create, nor bring them into being or existence.

The creature we call man, therefore, consists of three fundamental realities: intelligence, spirit, and body. The body consists of physical element which is eternal but is produced or formed through the process of mortal begetting. The spirit also, according to revelation, consists of physical element, which is more fine and pure than that of ordinary mortal experience, and is also eternal; but the spirit is produced or formed through a process of divine or celestial begetting or procreation. On the contrary, the intelligence is not begotten but is that entity which is clothed with a body of spirit by celestial parents.

Man as mortal is therefore a contingent being. Man as spirit is likewise a contingent being. But man as intelligence is a necessary being.

Mortals should take no special pride in the necessity of their original being, however, for they share this characteristic in common with all other things which exist. Furthermore, they would have remained in that original state were it not for God's goodness in having provided spirit bodies, the light of eternal truth, and opportunities for progression.

From the foregoing it is apparent that God is man's Creator, but not in the sense of having brought him into being out of non-existence, but in the sense of having begotten him—having provided the eternally existing intelligence with a tabernacle of spirit.

The revelations declare God is the Creator of heaven and earth and all things that in them are. The world and its embellishments are the handiwork of God through eternally organizing processes; however, man is his son. The worlds are God's domain. Mankind is his family.

When we look at the world, using the word "world" here to mean the animate and inanimate physical environment in which mortals live, we find that creative processes, in the sense of organizing, forming, producing, etc., manifest themselves on a continuum of levels of complexity.

In a modern revelation the Lord said, in speaking of the kingdoms of man's eternal habitation:

All kingdoms have a law given;

And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom.

And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions." (D&C 88:36-38.)

The context of the passage seems to indicate the Lord was speaking explicitly regarding the macrocosm; however, man's limited finite experience suggests that the same principle obtains for each microcosm.

The following is an interesting example which illustrates the complexity and creativity which is characteristic of the cosmic arena in which we live.

The fig tree, to take a third example, bears a complex flower, actually a collection of small flowers within the synconium or receptacle. The orifice of this receptacle is very small. The flowers almost fill the entire cavity. The female flower consists of a pistil and ovary, containing a single ovule. Some kinds of figs have two different forms of female flowers in the same synconium—some with short styles (the terminals of the ovaries) and short stigmas (the part of the pistil that receives the pollen). These latter are called gallflowers because they are produced for the use and convenience of the gall wasp, a very small insect. The gallflowers are, as a rule, placed low in the synconium, and the male flowers, which consist of only a single stamen, are near the mouth.

The gall wasp enters the fig by the orifice, crawls down until it reaches the gallflowers and sinks its ovipositor, a specialized organ for depositing its eggs, down the style canal. It then lays an egg close to the nucleus of the ovule. Later the larva of the wasp feeds on the substance of the ovule, which is sufficient for its development.

The male wasps emerge from the ovules earlier than the females. Beings wingless, they do not leave the synconium, but visit the gallflowers, containing female wasps, and fertilize them. When the fertilized females emerge, they crawl up the synconium and become dusted with pollen from the male flowers. When their wings have expanded and dried, they seek out other fig flowers which are at an earlier stage of development. They lay their eggs in the ovaries, being careful to select only the gallflowers with undeveloped stigmas—which seem to have been specially developed for them.

The true female flowers with long styles are, however, also dusted by the pollen. Should the wasp make a mistake—which is doubtful—and lay an egg in a true female flower, the egg will not develop, because the style is too long for the wasp's ovipositor to reach the ovule upon which the larva feeds. In short, the egg is left in an unfavorable place. The gallflowers with short styles and stigmas, on the other hand, are well adapted to receive the egg and seem to have been specially provided by the fig for the wasp's convenience. In return for this service, the wasp carries the pollen from one flower to another. (See E. L. Grant Watson's, "The Hidden Heart of Nature," Saturday Evening Post for May 27, 1961, pp. 91-92.)

There may be some persons who would protest by saying there is no creativity involved in that illustration. The growth of the tree with its flowers and the laying of the eggs of the wasp, etc., are at most natural and instinctive processes, respectively. In my opinion, the fact that the processes described are natural and instinctive in no way means that they are not also creative. In fact, each, in contributing to the fulfillment of the other, concomitantly contributes to the development of itself.

But, some of those persons may say, "real" creativity belongs only to man—the rational animal. To which, I respond, Yes, man is a rational being, and should be grateful for rather than proud of his rationality, and should be humbled by the tremendous blessing and responsibility of this endowment.

But, I must ask, "What do you mean by `real' creativity?" To which a multitude of answers may take the general form of, "The creation of the artist, the musician, the sculptor, the writer, the inventor, the research scientist," etc.

This has a familiar ring to it and seems to be obvious. However, upon inquiry I wonder if even the remarkable contributions of persons of the types enumerated can qualify as examples of "real" creativity.

First of all, although the so-called creative one is a rational being, as compared to the tree and the wasp, is he not essentially, like them, engaged in a process of fulfilling or realizing his own capacities or potentialities as he gives of himself in his own enterprises?

We speak of the processes such as those manifest in the growth and development of trees as natural, and those of insects and animals as instinctive, and those of man as rational, progressively rising on the ontological ladder. However, in the larger sense of the word, are not all of these kinds of things engaged in kinds of processes which are natural to them and consistent with the word of the Lord that there is no space without a kingdom and that unto every kingdom a law is given.

Obviously, if we think of man as a species, his creativeness is manifest in a multitude of ways as compared with the rigorous limitations in other species.

Second, although the so-called creative one is a rational being, as compared to the tree and the wasp, and creates new art pieces, invents new devices, or makes great discoveries, his creative acts can hardly mean "real" creativity if by "real" we mean original, for as great as the particular contribution may be, it is not original, for it was found in the encyclopedia of the universe.

The laws and principles of all things are eternal, and man through his ardent searchings and other creative skills is able from time to time to penetrate some secret corner of some page of that vast eternal volume. But, as the Apostle Paul said in another context, ". . . now we see through a glass, darkly." (1 Cor. 13:12.)

Just as God did not create element and intelligences ex nihilo, or out of, or from nothing, but organized them according to eternally existing laws and principles, so man should not be grieved to be told that he is not "really" the originator or discoverer or creator in any ex nihilo sense, but only in some secondary sense of being an organizer, a former, a structurer.

Creativity, in this sense of the word, has revealed itself among men in a host of ways. It manifests itself in the fine arts, the pure sciences, the applied arts, applied sciences, the humanities, the social sciences, the medical arts, etc. Creativity may be primarily a product of the mind, it may be also a product of manual dexterity, or it may require skills in human relations. Too often the word "creativity" is conceived so narrowly that it precludes all but a few limited skills or abilities. But this kind of narrowness implies an inherent exclusiveness which is a source of great satisfaction to some egos.

However, it is my opinion that life itself is a creative process. And that far more important than any particular single creative achievement which might be heralded in the world is the creative process which occurs in the individual human being, not as a so-called great event for the world, but as the fulfillment of self, or development of one's capacities, or realization of one's potentialities. Creativity in the fullest sense of the word, as I conceive it, has to do not with the creation of things but with the fulfillment of self.

The revealed gospel of our Lord emphasizes the point that it has been given to mankind that he might become God's sons and daughters in very deed in addition to being his spiritual offspring. Being his spirit offspring is not enough to be like him. We must become like him, and that is a process. Therefore, if man's creative interests and efforts are merely or primarily absorbed in the things being created rather than in what is happening to human beings, his creativity has gone awry.

Why should man be a creator or be creative? Summarily, because it is his nature and his destiny.

We have already stressed the point that all of creation, so to speak, is creative.

The magnitude of the vast complex of creative forces in the world is so multitudinous that it is almost overwhelming to try to contemplate it.

And inasmuch as man is not merely a thing nor an "it," but belongs to the race of God, as his offspring, he is more greatly endowed with creative capacities than things.

Furthermore, the Lord has revealed that his children who are most responsive to the most important eternal principles will be most richly blessed thereby and will discover the effect of divine-creative forces within them as mortals and will eventually realize their ultimate destiny in becoming not only blessed sons and daughters of God, but they shall pass by the angels and even become gods. (See D&C 132.)

From that great perspective, surely some of man's mortally regarded great creations must appear as simple as the small infant's fumbling effort to say "da-da," or "ma-ma."

Be humble, O man, and glory not in thy mortal greatness. Turn thy heart to God, bow the knee, and use the haughty reason to worship him and give him praise.

As one contemplates the scriptures, he thinks of many phrases which describe or characterize God. A few of these are: "Life," "Light," "Truth," "the Way," "Love," "the Creator." All of these terms are dynamic. They are pregnant with meaning. All of them are illustrative of the principle of creativity. That is, regardless of how one thinks of God, in terms of mortal life, resurrection, physical, intellectual, or spiritual illumination, the truth, the means of salvation and exaltation, supreme affection, and so on, the context is always one of potency.

Belonging to the race of God, man is endowed with these same qualities or attributes in some latent or elementary form. God has provided us with the opportunities of mortality that the seeds or rather dormant powers within us may receive stimulation and development and come to full fruition of their possibilities.

In striving to live each day to the fullest and have a full measure of happiness in the process, we must not ever lapse into the notion that life is only a game. For life is serious business, and not only for the here and now but for the anywhere and eternity. If thought of in terms of a game, it must be realized we are playing for keeps and not just for fun.

So, as one strives to apply the revealed word of God to his own life, he should not overlook the multitude of creative dimensions of God and their mortal counterparts in himself, nor should he forget that in all of his efforts to be creative, whatever they are, there is nothing he can do which is greater than strive to help others as well as himself in achieving their and his greatest possibilities which have been made available to him through the endowment from his celestial parentage and the all-important creative act of redemption by the Lord, Jesus Christ.

PART III TRUTH
