David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter XIV TRUTH AND METHOD

The opening sentence of Aristotle's Metaphysics is the now famous statement "All men by nature desire to know." The obvious implication is that what man by nature desires to know is the truth. Of all the statements men have recorded about truth it is likely that none is better known than the following one which is attributed to the Lord in the Gospel of John: "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) This saying, like many others, is used out of its context perhaps more often than it is used in its context. Knowing the truth is heralded on every hand. Being free is likewise applauded. But the question must be asked, Free from what? I expect most men in our day would rather instantaneously respond by saying free from ignorance. But as Immanuel Kant demonstrated, such a statement is merely an analytical judgment and not a synthetic one for this answer is implicit in the former subject. Knowing the truth implies freedom from ignorance. The Savior's statement means that, but it means much more than that.

When we continue the scripture, to see what it was that the Christ spoke about from which knowledge of the truth would free man, this is what we find, ". . . Verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. . . . If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." (John 8:34-36.)

This says very clearly that the freedom Christ had in mind was freedom from sin. Now as we read these verses we find these propositions:

Therefore we may conclude that:

The truth is the Son, and, It is the Son that makes men free.

This conclusion becomes the focal point of the entire gospel. We should note that it is the gospel of Jesus Christ and not the gospel of Elohim, the Father. The gospel and the Church have always borne the name of the Son, and not that of the Father. It was the Son who organized the earth when it was formed. It was the Son who gave commandments to the antediluvian patriarchs. It was the Son who commanded and directed the prophets in ancient Israel. It was the Son who gave vision and revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is the Son who leads the kingdom today. But, it was the earthly mission of the Son which provided the infinite means of freedom which he offers to all mankind. The two comprehensive freedoms which he offers the family of Adam are freedom from death, and freedom from sin. I called these freedoms comprehensive. Have you ever seriously contemplated the magnitude and meaning of either of them? By revelation we learn that through Jesus' atonement there will be a universal resurrection. No one has to do anything to receive that gift. Resurrection is a free gift.

Even with this marvelous gift, however, man might remain in bondage both here and hereafter. But that man might be free from sin, the most heinous of all kinds of bondage, the Christ also provided the means that men might be forgiven of their offenses, through humility and repentance, and therefore liberated from their bondage. Then, we see, he offers us freedom from death and freedom from sin.

Let us recall that the Lord proclaimed himself to be "the way, the truth, and the life." (John 14:6.) Notice that here he does not merely say his words are true, as he does say in some places, but here he declares I am the truth—I am the truth.

Now as we return to our original verse "Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free," I believe it will have more meaning. For now we can see that he who knows the Christ is free. Here we must quote that precious statement from John "And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments." (1 Jn. 2:3.) Keeping his commandments, then, is not only the way to know him, but it is the way by which we may know that we know him.

The concept of the Christ as the Truth obviously involves more than temporal implications. With only a moment's reflection we call to mind that revelation teaches us that he was a Great Spirit, even a Creator, before our world was organized. The plan for the redemption of mankind, and for his progression here and hereafter, was laid in the eternal past, and Jesus the Son was its Advocate. The plan bore his name. It bears his name. He is the Redeemer and God of this Earth. He is the Eternal Truth.

When we think of the Christ as the, or a physical embodiment, or personification of truth we must remember that there are passages of scripture which refer to his teachings, or the gospel, also as truth.

For example, we have a definition of truth given by revelation and recorded for us in D&C 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants. It reads: "And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (Verse 24.) We should notice that according to this definition truth is not an attribute of things. Ontologically speaking, truth does not belong to the realm of being. But truth does belong to the realm of discourse. More simply put things or objects logically cannot be said to be true or false. Truth and falsity do not enter until one thing is predicated of another thing. When such a proposition is asserted its congruence with the order of things in the existential world will determine the truth or falsity of the proposition in question.

Notice that in the revelation it does not say truth is things as they are, etc., but it says "truth is the knowledge of things as they are," etc. Here then we see that truth is not the external order of existence. Truth is knowledge. And knowledge is basically organized symbols. Whether the symbols be graphic or phonetic they must be rooted in some kind of concept. And the concept mentioned here is broad in scope. It is not limited to the here and now. Truth is more comprehensive than a mere this and a mere that. It involves an infinite past and an infinite future. Here again we see the plan of God implicit in this revealed definition of truth—his plan of the past, of the present, and for the future. His plan constitutes his truth. When we begin to understand his plan and have some knowledge of things as they are, as they were, and as they are to come, to that extent we have the truth.

When Adam was placed in the garden, he was given the charge to subdue the earth. Since then man has struggled with the elements to sustain himself. From generation to generation what man learned through his experience was passed down to his heirs. The heritage was considerably more than physical goods. The most significant part of it was a body of accumulated experience. This accumulated experience has come to be what we call knowledge. Some have even called it truth. Philosophically, it may have its methodological source in scepticism, authoritarianism, rationalism, empiricism, mysticism, pragmatism, revelation, or in some combination of these. Each of these methods has had its protagonists. Each has been strongly condemned and criticized. Some have believed there are positive characteristics in each of the methods as well as inadequacies or limitation in each of them.

Be that as it may, since the renaissance and the rise of humanism, there has been a predominance of thinkers who have approached the militant in advocating that men study the universe, not only for the joys of understanding and aesthetic appreciation which would come from such study, but that through studying the world she might be known and also exploited.

During recent centuries the method of empiricism seems to have emerged, unquestionably, as a superb means of producing in men new insights into the nature of things. Through the application of its principles men have been able to penetrate many facets of the surface of physical reality.

Perhaps the majority of mankind are little concerned, if at all, with the theoretical aspects of these contributions. The masses of men are more impressed by the physical benefits which come to them personally because of our highly industrialized society with its skilled researchers, designers, engineers, technologists, etc.

Because of the marvelous things which have been revealed, or come to man, through this method, many have enthroned empiricism as the only source of truth and consequently have rejected all other methods. Analogously, one might say, it would be just as reasonable to say, I have eyes and can see, therefore I can abandon my other senses—hearing, smell, taste, and touch. Obviously by such self-imposed limitations one would not be able to grasp the whole of his object. The part that he perceives might be perceived very clearly. But how much more clearly the whole object could be understood had the other available tools been employed rather than condemned and abandoned.

We do not live in a narrow world. We live in a broad and complex world. Its complexity so impressed William James that he called it a multiverse rather than a universe. We need to draw upon all the resources available to us in attempting to understand the order of things.

It is appropriate here to point out with reference to empiricism, that John Dewey, one of its greatest and most influential proponents said, "Science is not constituted by any particular body of subject-matter. It is constituted by a method, a method of changing beliefs by means of tested inquiry as well as of arriving at them. It is its glory, not its condemnation, that its subject-matter develops as the method is improved." (John Dewey, A Common Faith [New Haven: Yale University Press, 1947], pp. 38-39.

Science, he says, is a "method of changing beliefs." Furthermore, he says the beliefs are arrived at and changed by tested inquiry. These statements are very important in a consideration of what constitutes truth.

The fact that a belief is arrived at by "tested inquiry" would seem sufficient to label that belief "true." But by the same reasoning if with further "tested inquiry" a new belief is arrived at it too must be designated "true." Consequently, by analysis, and by Dewey's own description, science is a method of changing beliefs. When that is translated into terms of "truth" I believe it would be accurate and consistent to say science is a method of changing truths. Or, as James suggests, it would be better to speak in terms of truer and less true.

My own belief is that we must agree with Dewey when he says of science "It is its glory, not its condemnation, that its subject-matter develops as the method is improved." But the question which naturally presents itself here is, What is the advisability of placing one's total reliance upon a method which admittedly yields beliefs which are impermanent, and changing?

A partial answer to this question may be stated, Reliance upon any method involves a certain amount of confidence or faith in the method itself. In the case of empiricism, if one accepts it for what it is, and for nothing more, all is well. If the empiricist transcends his object and reifies his concepts, he is subject to the antinomies of the rationalist who begins with reason only.

However, just because the empiricist supplants a particular belief with another belief does not necessarily mean that there was no truth value in the first belief. Perhaps the first is subsumed in the second. The subsumption is realized when upon further investigation a more comprehensive view is obtained. Obviously, by means of a theoretical extension of this process it is conceivable that much of the order of existence might be revealed to man. It is appropriate to say here as was said earlier, to the extent that men by this or any other method come to a knowledge of things as they are, as they were, and as they are to come, to that extent will they have arrived at truth.

We recall that Nephi, the son of Lehi, in prophesying said the time would come when some would say ". . . A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible. . . . Thou fool, that shall say: A Bible, we have got a Bible, and we need no more Bible." (2 Ne. 29:3, 6.)

I wish to paraphrase these verses as follows: A method! A method! We have got a method, and there cannot be any more method. . . . Thou fool, that shall say: A method, we have got a method, and we need no other method.

Surely John Locke had the right idea when he said ". . . he that takes away reason, to make way for revelation, puts out the light of both, and does much what the same, as if he would persuade a man to put out his eyes, the better to receive the remote light of an invisible star by a telescope." (John Locke, Essay concerning Human Understanding, Book IV, Chapter XIX, paragraph 4.)

All of our faculties are to be used. All of the methods which man can devise for the obtaining and promulgation of truth we should employ.

Let us not reject all methods of knowing but one just because we happen to be familiar with that one. Let us keep God's commandment to subdue the earth. And to subdue it we must have knowledge. Let us continue to seek truth and to apply the truth which is already ours.

Here it has been my intent to examine a few of the many considerations which are involved in Truth. In summary, this chapter has dealt principally with three concepts: first, Jesus Christ the Son of God as the Truth, which Truth liberates men from death and sin; and second the definition of truth from The Doctrine and Covenants which indicates that truth as knowledge does not have the ontological status of the existential world, but subsists as accurate conceptualizations of the order of existence. And third, we have briefly discussed empiricism as one of the avenues to truth because of its widespread acceptance today and urged the utilization of all sources of truth and the recognition of the limitation of the methods unless they reveal all that is, has been, and will be.

Whether one's life work is academic or non-academic, he will find the quest discussed here a real one. It is not a thing for university classes alone. It is a daily quest in all walks of life. All that one thinks, all that he says, and all that he does becomes a part of the quest.

One should strive to attend the affairs of his life in such a way that he will so integrate his intellect, his passions, and his will, that he will be able to utilize the potential that is within him and attune himself to the sources of truth which are available to him.

One should never forget this counsel from the Lord:

"And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (D&C 50:23-24.)
