David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter XV EXPERIENCE, REASON AND REVELATION

Experience is a product of intelligence. That is, where there is no intelligence there is no experience. Man's thought and symbol structures reflect intelligence. The simplest word, uttered or written, indicates intelligence. I suppose the essential idea here is found in Descartes' famous "I am" doctrine, "I think, therefore, I am." Experience then requires the existence and presence of an experiencer. We are all experiencers.

Whether or not we as experiencers understand the intricate and delicate inner- and inter-relationships within the functioning processes of our beings, through some of these processes, we all have what can be called an awareness of an external world. That is, outside of the "me" appears to be the "you," and outside of the "you" there appears to be the "me." We, as experiencers, are almost constantly perceiving things external to ourselves. To say that we only experience ideas about things or ideas of the external world, or that all we know, or think we know, is ideas, means very little in a practical way. Surely as we hold an object (say a music box) in our hands and see it with our eyes, and hear it with our ears, we are confident that it is actually in our hands and external to ourselves, although we acknowledge an idea of it within ourselves mediated to us via our sensory apparatus. We have the feeling then, whether one wishes to call it a sensitive or a rational feeling does not matter at the moment, that there is a vast complex of things outside ourselves. As we come into conscious relationships with some of those things, be they experiencer-things or non-experiencer-things, we have what becomes for us an experience. That is, when our sensory apparatus gives us the perception of other persons (experiencers), or material and manufactured things (non-experiencers), and the perception is given conscious attention, then we have an experience. Stimuli from the external world are constantly impinging upon our sensory apparatus but until we give them our attention or they become so strong that they cannot be resisted (as the blast of a horn nearby or the heat from a flame) they are not registered within us, and can hardly be regarded as experiences.

All of the foregoing has dealt with our experience of the external world but we also have experiences which are predominantly reflective.

In fact, it seems to me that all of our experiences may be encompassed or classified within one or more of the following categories: (1) physical, (2) aesthetic, (3) reflective (including intellectual), (4) moral, and (5) religious.

These, then, we may consider the categories of experience. There is probably no experience which belongs exclusively in one category or which in some way does not have elements within it which belong in another category. This means, essentially, that an experience should be classified according to the predominant element within that experience. The predominant element must be determined by the experiencer and therefore involves or reflects in some measure the meaning or interpretation of the experience to the experiencer. It is well to note here that the categories constitute an analytic device only. For, as a matter of fact, the experiences we have are had with a mixture of these elements within them, and our classifying them in one category or another is dependent upon the influence or particular aspect of the experience which impresses us most; for example, when one is particularly entranced by a beautiful sunrise or sunset over the mountains, or across a desert or sea, he has what I would call an aesthetic experience. Upon analysis however, one would have to acknowledge the physical element in the sun, the sky, the mountains, or desert or sea. Hours or days after the experience, as well as at the time of its occurrence, one may enjoy contemplation and then we find the reflective element. For some persons it may provide what they might wish to call a religious experience.

For another example let us consider the appearance of the resurrected Lord to the ten apostles as recorded in the 24th chapter of the Gospel of Luke. The Lord declared that a spirit has not flesh and bones as he had, and invited his disciples to handle him as a witness of his physical being. He likewise asked for food, "And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he took it, and did eat before them." (24:42-43.) Surely this was a physical experience, for to the apostles, the Lord was physically present and gave ample evidence of his identity. But, regardless of the other elements or factors which are to be found in this experience, it seems rather obvious that the best classification, because of the implications, as well as the circumstances per se, is that of religious experience.

We must recognize also that there are some experiences which are predominantly reflective. There are at least three constructive (positive) types within this category. First, there is the enjoyment or satisfaction which comes from recollection or reminiscence. Secondly, there is the intellectual stimulation one may obtain in reading or discussion, etc.; and thirdly, the imagining, or speculating or hypothetical and practical reasoning one may do in an effort to understand better existing or impending circumstances and find means to advance mankind or aid man in achieving noteworthy goals. The range of elements other than the reflective that may be found in what I have suggested, here may extend from the complete unawareness of one's surroundings as he sits comfortably in a lounge chair in deep thought with his eyes closed to one who is in the physical or biological laboratory very much engrossed in apparatus and physical stuff as well as in thought.

Experience includes not only thought and things but also desires, ambitions, sufferings, sorrows, loves, joys, disappointments, and fulfillments. Experience is grounded in life. Rational beings are not only rational, but living, and life involves and requires many things for its fulfillment. Therefore experience is a variegated or complex thing, and we must not let life become subordinate to thought, reason, or intellect, for these must be subordinate to and instruments of the more inclusive category—life. That is, reason does not exhaust life by any means. Thought for the sake of thought may be all right as one proximate end, but thought for the sake of thought can never be the ultimate end.

Now, let us consider reason and its role in experience. Epistemologically speaking, the word "reason" is ordinarily or frequently used as the name of the method which is employed with the source of knowledge termed "rationalism." However, the title "Experience, Reason, and Revelation" is designed to give a broader meaning to the word "reason," as is done not infrequently. In fact, some have used rhetorical and slanted phrases such as "the method of intelligence" to convey their meaning. But there can be little question that throughout the centuries reason has been the citadel of philosophy. Too, it has been the pride of philosophy.

Since the historical beginning of western philosophy reason has been lauded (and sometimes criticized) but particularly from the time of Aristotle's analysis of anima, or life or soul, into three levels, the vegetative, sensitive, and the rational, and his definition or description of man as a rational, two-footed mammalian, viviparous, animal, living being, this has been the case. As Aristotle found man's rationality to be the characteristic which distinguished him from all other things, he determined that man's virtue or excellence lay in reason. As the saw that cuts well is the good saw and the eye that sees well is the good eye, so the man that reasons well or is truly rational is the good man. We must not overlook the fact that Aristotle taught the now famous golden mean as constituting moral virtue but supreme happiness for him lay not in moral virtue alone but in the higher or intellectual virtue. Be that as it may, reason has continued to be the special claim of all philosophers in the West.

In the sense in which we use the word "reason" here one would probably include rational, empirical, and pragmatic sources of knowledge. That is, sources and methods of knowledge would be included which concern themselves with propositions which are capable of public verification. There can be little equivocation about the potential within these sources of knowledge and methodology (when applied) to increase our awareness of the complexity and intricacies of the world and also our understanding of how to use the stuff of the world. The changes which have been made in the last few centuries, which changes we sometimes call progress, have come about practically by what is called scientific method or, shall we say, reason.

However, as we think of scientific method and/or reason we should be reminded of what Aristotle said about first principles. He observed, and probably indisputably, that basic truths or first principles cannot be demonstrated. For, by definition or description, were they demonstrable they would not be first principles. If they were capable of demonstration the principles used to demonstrate them would be prior to them and more sure than they and would therefore be more first, as it were. Obviously, this means that in any field of intellectual endeavor one begins by believing something, or at least acting as though he believes something. Or, to put it differently, one trusts, has confidence in, a faith in, accepts, or believes, certain first principles, or as Aristotle chose to call them, basic truths. This suggests that what we conventionally call knowledge rests upon faith, or belief, or confidence or trust, if some prefer words with fewer religious connotations.

Some persons apparently trust only themselves, their own senses, their own reason, and their own memories. Some philosophers have exalted reason and derogated the senses. Others have rejected (or disparaged) reason and exalted the senses. Still others have found a reputable place for both reason and the senses. Some have embraced reason and mysticism. Some have believed reason to be incompatible with mysticism. But regardless of the source, or combination of sources, of knowledge philosophers have relied upon, each has believed that his own system was reasonable.

And if one thinker charges another with unreasonableness all he really does in essence is say, "What is reasonable to Philosopher X is not consistent with my experience, or my postulates, or there is nothing in my experience to confirm him, therefore, his position is unreasonable to me." The principal criterion of reasonableness then is consistency with experience, or consistency with postulates. Admittedly, there are vast cultural differences in the world and also differences within cultures. Because of these differences, ideas and actions which are accepted as reasonable in some places are regarded as unreasonable in others and vice versa. Who is to say what is true or false, right or wrong, or even better or worse, if reason or reasonableness constitutes the sole criterion?

Certainly this does not mean that we should disregard reason. We must rely upon our reason and experience, but we must make room or some allowance for the experience of others. The further we go in school and the older we get the more dependent we are upon the reliability of others for what we call our knowledge. The student of chemistry or physics does not have time nor does he feel it necessary to perform all of the experiments which have been done by his predecessors. The same is true for the biological student. And the student of history does not have the time nor feel the necessity of searching for all of the historical documents or evidences for the histories he reads. As one reads newspapers, magazines, books, see movies, TV shows, drama, and the events of everyday life, much of what seeps into his mind and gets labeled "knowledge" comes from vicarious experience.

Some of the large libraries of the world have several millions of volumes within them. But if we assume that one began reading a book a week, just one a week, or shall we say fifty books a year, at the age of twenty, and continued that practice until he was eighty, he would have read only three thousand books. And how many persons achieve this? If one should read one book a month during that period he would read only seven hundred and twenty books. How many persons achieve even that? If one should read one book a month during that period he would read only seven hundred and twenty books. How many persons achieve even that? If there were only one million books that could be read, the seven hundred and twenty would be only seven one hundredths of one per cent. Although we only scratch the surface of what men have written, we are still influenced in great measure by what others have done, said, and written. The problem becomes one of choosing what one shall agree with or believe. It is not simply a matter of rejecting all authorities or experts. The authority which is accepted is the one whose ideas or expressions are consistent with the one who chooses. That is, where one who is recognized as an expert or an authority says something which agrees with the experience of a chooser, the latter has no inclination to reject it. The statement is reasonable to him.

But the glory of the method of reason or the method of science, as it is perhaps better known, is testing. Unquestionably, one of the principal differences between ancient and modern science, and one of the reasons for the rapid and almost incredible developments of modern science, is that the ancients were primarily observers of nature, and the moderns are testers or experimenters.

From the time of Aristotle (4 c.B.C.) until that of Galileo (16th and 17th c.A.D.) there was no appreciable progress in the way of scientific knowledge, except in mathematics if one should wish to so classify it, and that was not a western contribution. But Galileo developed an experimental method and used it. Others had written and spoken of experimental science but he used experiments and caused a marvelous revolution and from his day until our own there has been one development after another until the acceleration has become so great that the branches of science have become very highly specialized. But with all of the benefits, as we may call them, which have come and, continue to come to us from these sources of knowledge, the answers to man's ultimate questions are still wanting. It is true enough that some have reasoned conclusions to those questions, but in this as in other matters reason does not seem to dictate the same answers.

This leads us to a consideration of revelation, the third part of our chapter title. At the outset it must be clearly recognized that belief in revelation requires belief in God. Some people say the believer in God merely assumes there is a God. Can they not in turn be charged with merely assuming there is not God? Furthermore, if they honestly and sincerely want to find out whether there is or is not a God the reasonable thing is to follow the instructions of those who claim to have found him—to have experienced him. The primary ones who have had such experience are the prophets. Many of those who are now dead have left writings. Others are yet among us.

If one believes (or assumes) that God exists, and will follow the counsel of those who have found him, he, too, can find God.

Likewise, if one believes (or assumes) that God does not exist, and does not follow the counsel of those who have found him, he, too, will not find God.

If one is to find God, he must at least want to find him. Some apparently prefer not to find him, feeling that it is easier to assume he does not exist, and they somehow also assume that this relieves them of any allegiance or responsibility to him and will in some way exonerate them if some day in the distant future, even after this life, they find that there really is a post-mortal life and a God after all.

The unbeliever who accuses the believer of assuming the existence of God may be in error because the believer may have found God and experienced him and therefore speak and act from knowledge rather than assumption. And on the contrary, the unbeliever is left only to assume there is no God. So actually, the believer can act from knowledge on this matter and the unbeliever from assumption only.

Certainly the prophets are among those who have had experience of, with, or from God. Those experiences are revelations. It is well here to distinguish between revelation and mysticism. Frequently these words are used synonymously, but there seems to be a justifiable and genuine distinction between them. There are two fundamental differences I shall mention. The mystics claim their experiences to be (1) non-sensory and, (2) ineffable. That is, whatever their experiences are they are immediate; they are not mediated via the senses. And also their experiences are ineffable, or indescribable. There is no specific communication that is received beyond the feeling produced within the mystic that all is eternal. But in the cases of the prophets their experiences have been sensory and communicable. The senses of sight, hearing, and touch have all been employed and sometimes two or three simultaneously. Furthermore, the prophets have stated what they have experienced and sometimes in great simplicity.

To some, then, revelation has been and is a source of knowledge. It has been and is more than reading a book written by predecessors or contemporaries. And thus to those who experience it, it is something dynamic and real and reliable.

Some have chosen to deny revelation because they have never recognized any in their own lives. But just because one person does not receive revelation is certainly no reason to deny that others have it.

Too, although revelation is generally private experience, that makes it no less real. Or to say that revelation is subjective does not condemn it, for what experience is not subjective? By the very nature of experience, if it is not personal or subjective, it is not experience. Surely it is recognized that revelation is not the kind of experience that can be reproduced at will as a demonstration for the unbeliever. But we should remember that even in the case of the physically demonstrable one must at least be willing to test a proposition. So in the realm of that which is not publicly verifiable or demonstrable one must at least be willing to test a proposition. For testing produces testimony.

In conclusion let me say, rationalism, empiricism, pragmatism, authoritarianism (the opinions of the experts), all have their place and perform useful and necessary functions within the lives of men. These sources and methods supplement and complement one another in giving men knowledge, just as the various crafts supplement and complement one another in giving men dwellings. But no one of these human sources of knowledge, or any combination of them, has been able to give man knowledge of ultimate things. For that knowledge we are dependent upon revelation. And there are those who have had revelation in the past, and there are those who do have revelation at the present—men who are sound in body and in mind. Certainly they are men who are as reliable as those who would deny and even ridicule such claims. And surely denial and ridicule in no way change the fact of communication from man to God and from God to man.

And where there are those who in the pride of their own intellects or reason, will not humble themselves sufficiently to recognize their own finitude, and honestly and perseveringly strive to find God by heeding the counsel of the prophets, they apparently find themselves estranged from the spirit of revelation and are left to satisfy what yearnings they may have by the exercise of their own feeble reason. For as strong and capable as men's minds appear to be in some things, when it comes to the ultimate things no one mortal mind, nor any group of them, has been able to learn and know those things which God has chosen to reserve to be revealed according to his will. So, if one, anyone, wishes that knowledge, the way is available for him to obtain it, and that way he must learn from the prophets, those who have found it. For as Paul wrote to the Corinthians, we know the things of man by the spirit of man and the things of God by the Spirit of God.
