David H. Yarn, Gospel: God, Man, and Truth ( 1979)

Chapter XVII "YE SHALL KNOW THE TRUTH . . . "

The Lord said, ". . . ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) Probably there is no verse of scripture which has been taken out of context and been given private interpretation more frequently than this verse. It is granted that when this verse has no context but is isolated the apparent meaning is an appealing one. I suppose it is accurate to say that this is particularly true for the academician—the scholar and the scientist. I likewise suppose there is a sense of mission and a special kind of satisfaction which comes to one who feels he is engaged in an enterprise which makes men free. Furthermore, I believe there is a general sense in which knowing the truth does make one free. This has been one of the fundamental assumptions of the advocates of liberal education. But after one has said this, and a host of other things which might be said in defense of the isolated statements "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free," what can be said for the nature of the freedom which is envisioned here? Regardless of how else this freedom might be described, I think it can be asserted with considerable confidence that its primary benefits are temporal, that is, they belong to this world. Or, putting it another way, there are many who think of man's existence as being limited to mortality and therefore their aspirations are to make man free during the only existence they think he has. There are others who do not conceive of man's life as being limited to mortality but who apparently obtain a special kind of solace in the hope that their academic knowledge, or knowledge of the world, may be the means of their obtaining freedom in their post-mortal existence. We are not altogether free of those who hold this view. I shall return to this point later.

Now, if this common interpretation of this passage, stripped of its context, is not what the Lord meant by the quoted words, just what did he mean?

When one reads the Lord's words in their context it becomes clear that he was not speaking of truth in the abstract general sense which I have just described. On the contrary, he was speaking specifically. In the first place he was speaking "to those Jews which believed on him." In the second place he said, "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed," and then thirdly he promised "And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free." (See ibid., 8:31-32.) So the truth to make men free was promised to those who believed on him, but further, only to those who believed on him who continued in his word.

But, what did the Lord mean by the word "truth"? As he continued his explanation he said, "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." (Ibid., 8:36.) It is obvious that he was equating himself with the truth, as he did at least on one other occasion when he said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." (Ibid., 14:6.)

Further examination of the context under discussion, as well as many others, makes it evident that the freedom man was assured through the truth, namely Jesus Christ the Lord, was freedom from sin and freedom from death. These constitute freedoms of incomparable magnitude, freedoms which knowledge, in and of itself, is utterly helpless to yield.

Jesus, in his classic misused statement, has a concept of truth and freedom that is ultimate in its meaning and significance, and infinitely beyond the proximate, but sometimes hopeful, meaning and significance, given it by perhaps well-meaning but misinformed or uninspired men.

There is a marked tendency among men to dissociate truth and Jesus. Sometimes even among the Latter-day Saints there are those who in emphasizing the breadth of the gospel somehow seem to forget that it is the gospel of Jesus Christ. The Lord has been sufficiently emphatic regarding his identification with the gospel. The gospel bears his name; the Church bears his name; he was the Creator of this earth; he is Jehovah, the God of the Old Testament; he is the Redeemer, and also the great Judge. We have been told to do all that we do in his name. We must not forget that when we speak of truth in any ultimate sense it cannot be dissociated from Jesus Christ.

One may speak of truth in some abstract absolute philosophic sense and revel in his discoveries which may approximate that truth, but then what? As I said above, there may be and are distinct temporal advantages which accrue to man in the pursuit and acquisition of truth in this general abstract sense, but in order for one to be free, in any ultimate sense, he must come to know the truth, that is, Jesus Christ the Lord.

In addition to speaking of himself as truth the Lord also refers to his word, or his gospel, as truth. That is, in addition to his power as the Redeemer over sin and death and therefore the truth or power which frees man, the everlasting principles which are for man's benefit in his striving to become like the Lord, and his and our Father, come from him who is truth and therefore they are denominated truth. More simply put, the word "truth" is applied by the Lord both to himself and to principles.

Mankind ordinarily uses the word in a way somewhat related to the second usage of the Lord. Technically, truth is regarded as a characteristic of propositions. That is to say, truth does not belong to things but to statements or propositions. Things simply are; they are not true or false. This point is made rather clearly in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in which we find, "And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) So truth is not things as they are, were, and will be, but truth is knowledge of things as they are, were, and will be. Things are what they are, were, and will be, regardless of what men believe or say about them.

If we consider truth in this propositional sense it is well for us to make a distinction. It is an assumption, but one with which I believe most, if not all, men will agree, that all true propositions are not of equal value. That is to say, all truths are not of equal value. They range in worth from the trivial to the sublime. They may be classified in various ways. However, perhaps the most important classification is to recognize that some truths are secular and others are redemptive.

To call some truths secular does not mean they are valueless. It means they have a different value from those called redemptive. We know secular truths do have value for mortals. They may have value for postmortals, and probably do, but to what extent they are needed we do not know. Redemptive truths have value not only for mortals but are essential for post-mortals if they are to fulfill the true purpose of their being.

From near the beginning of man's sojourn on earth he has sought secular and redemptive knowledge. Adam was told that the earth was cursed for the man's sake or benefit, and he was commanded to subdue it. From that time man has struggled in his so-called pursuit of truth in trying not merely to understand but to overcome nature to make his lot easier. Also Adam, after manifest faithfulness, was given knowledge of redemptive truth. Since that time man has had his ups and downs in pursuit of redemptive truth.

We declare in all soberness that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to the earth through personal manifestations of the Father and the Son, and a host of other beings, and yet there are those among us who are so enraptured with the so-called pursuit of knowledge that they exult in the choice revelations of the Lord regarding knowledge, and at the same time minimize the very existence of the Father and the Son to the point not only of neglect in acknowledging them, but to the point of seeming embarrassment if not disgust if others mention them.

In the Doctrine and Covenants there are some glorious passages which admonish man to seek knowledge; for example:

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms— (D&C 88:78-79.)

As one reads these two verses experience suggests that it is natural for him to begin immediately to identify certain recognized academic disciplines. The next step is for him to assume that the knowledge in these disciplines is saving knowledge, that is, either assures him of, or strongly contributes to his chance of being saved in God's kingdom.

However, if such an one should read the next verse he would discover he had erred in his interpretation of the previous verses. The passage continues:

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you. (Ibid., 88:80.)

The Lord makes it quite clear that the purpose for one's learning the things suggested in the other verses is that he might be better prepared to accomplish the purposes of the Lord.

Here is another frequently quoted verse:

And set in order the churches, and study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people. (Ibid., 90:15.)

Here again is a passage which is often used to suggest that, after all, becoming acquainted with all good books, with languages, tongues, and people are in and of themselves means of salvation. Once more, the advocate of such a view should read on, for he would find the Lord saying to the Prophet Joseph Smith and his counselors:

And this shall be your business and mission in all your lives, to preside in council, and set in order all the affairs of this church and kingdom. (Ibid., 90:16.)

The purpose of their studying good books, languages, etc. was that the Prophet Joseph Smith and his Counselors might be prepared to more efficiently and effectively build the kingdom of God for the salvation of God's children.

Examples of this kind could be multiplied, for throughout the scriptures as God counsels his children to seek knowledge it is always for the express purpose of being better prepared to do his will.

A corollary of this misuse of the scriptures concerning knowledge is the deceiver I call the gospel of success. Deep in our national culture as well as deep in our religious culture is the concept of industry. Nurtured on the concept that this was a country of free men with all of the natural resources a beneficent God could bestow upon a people it was only natural that men should give rise to the concept which in turn would become equally prevalent that any man who was industrious could become a success. From childhood we are taught in this American culture that if we work hard, apply ourselves with mind and might, we can really become somebody; we can become wealthy, or famous, or even the President of our country. There are hosts of wonderful success stories which stir young and old alike.

Certainly it is not my intent to discourage anybody from working, or being industrious. However, when one's work, his vocation or profession, and all of his industrious effort is expended in the acquisition of temporal goods, possessions, and positions, there is cause for alarm.

During the last fifty years the worldly fortune of the Latter-day Saints has changed. Already there is a list of names of considerable size of Latter-day Saints who have been successful in the world. I am sure we are grateful and happy for their achievement and recognition. More and more the young people of the Church, and particularly of the university, are becoming acquainted with the names of these successful persons and in some cases have the good fortune to see and hear these persons themselves. Inasmuch as most of the "successful" Later-day Saints about whom we hear are active members of the Church, and inasmuch as they frequently attribute their success in the world to being a member of the Church, there is the implication that if one is a good member of the Church he will be a success in the world. And, irrespective of the reasoning, whether valid or invalid, the reverse of the conclusion is assumed to follow, namely, if a member of the Church is a success in the world he is a good Latter-day Saint. Both of these conclusions are false. Being a good member of the Church is no guarantee of worldly success. There are many wonderful folk worthy of the name Latter-day Saint who have achieved little by the standards of the world. Likewise, worldly success is not certain evidence of one's worthiness before the Lord.

We cannot afford to be seduced by the glamorous appeal of worldly success to become so enthralled with her charms that we permit ourselves to be lulled into the belief that worldly success is synonymous with the gospel. Everyone should work, and work hard, but in all of his striving he should never cease to be actively conscious that God is very probably not nearly so aware of and pleased with his worldly accomplishments as are he and his mother.

It seems to me that there are three kinds of success. I have been speaking of worldly success, but I believe this can be divided into two kinds. The first I call success of the body. Much of man's endeavor as a mortal is devoted to acquiring those things which satisfy the needs and desires of the body. To the extent that one is able to obtain the means to satisfy those needs and desires, to that extent he achieves success of the body. This kind of success is primarily proportional to one's economic success.

The second kind, which I consider a division of worldly success, I call success of the spirit. By the word "spirit" I do not refer to the spirit being which is tabernacled in mortal bodies, nor do I mean those things which Latter-day Saints generally consider enduring or eternal. On the contrary, inasmuch as I am describing a kind of worldly success, I use the word "spirit" here to conform more closely to the kinds of things which seem more and more extensively meant by or associated with this word, that is, I am giving it temporal limitations. It is maintained that not only does man, as man, have basic physical needs but he has some basic psychic needs also, for example, the need to belong, the need for love and affection, the need for acceptance and recognition, and others, including what Aristotle and other philosophers have called a natural desire to know. To the extent that one is able to satisfy these and similar needs, to that extent he achieves success of spirit.

Fundamentally what I have included here in success of the body and success of the spirit are those things which belong to this world, even the most positive things which men cultivate without God. For the Lord himself has said in our day:

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God. (Ibid., 132:13.)

Or, as the Lord warned his disciples against the false teachings of the Pharisees,

Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up. (Matt. 15:13.)

It is granted that many things have value for man and give him satisfaction in this life. As a matter of fact, many of the things involved in success of the body and success of the spirit are essential to mortal existence, and must therefore be had in some degree by all men. However, there are increasing numbers of men and women who at least in act have denied anything else and have completely given themselves to mortality. But the important thing each person should ask himself, in the words of the Lord, is, what kinds of plants am I planting, cultivating, and nurturing? Will my harvest, if I have one, be mortal? Will all of the plants I cultivate eventually be rooted up? Will all of my efforts, and I, come to naught? Or, am I planting those plants which will bear eternal fruit and find a glorious fulfillment in my soul? Everyone makes the choice.

In one of the revelations of the Lord he declared, "And the spirit and the body are the soul of man." (D&C 88:15.) This statement from the Lord gives rise to my third kind of success, success of the soul. All of God's children stand in need of understanding certain principles which God has revealed expressly for their welfare. Not only must the principles be understood but they must be applied to produce the effects which are needed in the lives of men.

Consistent with what was said above regarding truth, secular and redemptive, or temporal and eternal, one may achieve remarkable success of the body and success of the spirit in this life without achieving success of the soul, but their having been won, then what? Certainly we would wish for every man, success of the body, success of the spirit, and success of the soul. We are concerned with man's temporal and eternal well-being. When we declare we are working for the salvation of the souls of men, it means we are striving to save the bodies of men as well as their spirits. Success of the soul in the lives of mortals manifests itelf in living in the world without being of the world. We must overcome the world, as the Savior said. But we must not mistake "overcome" to mean triumph over the world in terms of worldly success.

The following verses from the revelation of the Lord in D&C 50 of the Doctrine and Covenants bear on this point.

. . . why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth?

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together.

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. (Ibid., 50:21-24.)

There are many things worthy of comment in these precious lines, however, I shall only emphasize a point from the last verse. "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light and continueth in God, receiveth more light." Remember, the Lord has told us that he is the light, and his principles are also called the light. (Ibid., 6:21, John 1.) In this verse he declares "he that receiveth light," etc. He says "receiveth," not ignoreth, not amendeth, not quibbleth about, not is embarrassed about, not rejecteth, but receiveth, and "receiveth" means to take into one's possession, to make one's own. "Receiveth" here implies much more than intellectual assent. The structure of the passage suggests emotional and volitional assent as well. Thus, he that receiveth the light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light, and reciprocally as the light grows brighter and brighter the individual more and more overcomes the world and achieves success of the soul.

There seems to be an additional meaning, or, should I say, application of the word "light." In an oft-quoted verse of scripture the Lord says, "The glory of God is intelligence." (D&C 93:36.) This is certainly a beautiful statement, one which immediately finds lodgment in the mind of one who loves the things of the mind. Aristotle's conception of philosophic wisdom and Spinoza's intellectual love of God cannot compare with it. But that is not the complete passage. It reads:

The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth.

Light and truth forsake that evil one. (Ibid., 93:36-37.)

In view of what the scriptures say regarding light and truth it is evident that by "intelligence" the Lord does not mean knowledge of encyclopedic proportions. Here in using the word "intelligence" it appears that again the Lord is not speaking merely of what men call the processes of thinking, but also includes the processes of feeling and doing. Or, to put it differently, it appears to me the Lord is saying the glory of God is celestial character, for celestial character forsakes that evil one. Yes, man needs knowledge, here and hereafter, but regardless of how much knowledge he has he needs intelligence—character.

For example, the Lord has said:

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. (Ibid., 130:18-19.)

Consistent with the foregoing, and for the purpose of trying to understand this passage more clearly, let us use the word "character" for "intelligence."

Here it may be helpful to recall that in a glorious revelation to Abraham God referred to man's basic and original being as an intelligence—an intelligence. (Abr. 3:18-23.) What I am proposing here is that regardless of man's state, as an intelligence, a premortal spirit, a mortal, a post-mortal spirit, or a resurrected being, that which he is at any given time may be called his character. Therefore, I am not using the word "intelligence" to mean learning, nor even wisdom, as usually conceived, for these are particular characteristics, whereas character means that which one really is.

With this concept in mind the passage reads: "Whatever principle of character we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection." Or, putting it in other words, whatever we become in soul, that is precisely what we will be in the resurrection. And continuing, "And if a person gains more knowledge and character in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come."

It is obvious in this verse that the Lord is talking about something more than knowledge, for he speaks of knowledge and intelligence (or character), and it is clearly evident throughout the revelations that God's primary concern with man is not with what he knows but what he is.

On one occasion the Prophet Joseph Smith declared "A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge,. . ." (DHC 4:588.) This statement, too, has been taken out of its context often and used to support a "knowledge for the sake of knowledge" concept, or a "knowledge is salvation" doctrine. No one should permit himself to fall into such an error. Knowledge for the sake of knowledge is a phrase which may have meaning in some formal empty sense. Perhaps the closest thing to knowledge for the sake of knowledge which is significant is what is called pure research, an endeavor in which one is not concerned about uses or application of the principles discovered or formulated, but solely with finding out that which was formerly unknown. But even here the phrase is not accurately applicable, for the searcher is not in pursuit of knowledge for the sake of knowledge, he is in pursuit of knowledge for the sake of satisfying some hunger or thirst he has for knowledge. The same principle obtains in the case of so-called art for the sake of art, and even virtue for the sake of virtue.

Fundamentally, all three of these for the sake of's have the same form and have real meaning only when it is realized that their basic structure is knowledge, or art, or virtue, for the sake of value. That is, they are not knowledge for the sake of knowledge, nor art for the sake of art, nor virtue for the sake of virtue, but each for the sake of value. For value, that is, values, are for persons, and must not be abstractly conceived as independent of or divorced from persons, but acknowledged by and grounded in persons. (Values have a logical being all their own, but that is another matter.) Here value is not conceived in any economic or instrumental sense, but in the sense that persons are motivated to pursue them, in knowledge, art, or virtue, on the assumption that there is intrinsic value in the pursuit and in its consequences. But even though we speak of intrinsic value it is always value for persons.

We must not be deceived and believe that when the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge," he meant knowledge per se. The context from which this statement comes makes this plain. But as we are tempted to equate knowledge with salvation let us remember the mighty Lucifer, one who had and has great knowledge, probably knowledge beyond our present capacity to imagine. Yet that great knowledge is not going to save him, but on the contrary it has been already the means of persuading one-third of God's children to forsake their Father, and is still being use to dissuade God's mortal children to forsake him. Knowledge is necessary, but knowledge is not enough! Knowledge and intelligence (character) will rise with us in the resurrection.

The Prophet Joseph Smith also received a revelation which included the words "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." (DHC 5:392. D&C 131:6.) These words, as others previously discussed, have been used extensively to encourage people to seek excellence in the traditional academic disciplines with the express intent that these were the things of which man could not be ignorant and be saved. And yet the context of this revelation, which is almost enthusiastically ignored, has little if any relation to the traditional academic disciplines, but does speak of one of the most sublime things available to mortals.

The knowledge of which man cannot be ignorant and be saved is knowledge of the truth, that is, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world, and the principles which he has revealed. Not just the principles, but he in addition to the principles does and will make men free. The point is, even with the principles, and without him men could not ultimately be free.

Man finds value in secular truth and no doubt will continue to find value in it; however, without redemptive truth ultimately secular truth will be esteemed as less than sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal by him who has it.

Let us all enthusiastically pursue knowledge, but let us not be deceived by equating knowledge with salvation, nor permit ourselves to be led gently down to hell by equating the gospel of success with the gospel of Jesus Christ. Let us continuously strive for success of the soul. May we desire with all our hearts, in addition to our love of and eager strivings for knowledge, to become in our natures of a celestial character. May we follow the simple yet profound admonition, "seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness." (Matt. 6:33.)
