In 2003 I was in Saint Petersburg, Russia, visiting some precious art collections from one of the great museums in that country. What impressed me the most, by its beauty and elegance, was the Fabergé eggs collection. At that time, I learned these eggs were carefully crafted under the supervision of the famous jeweler Peter Carl Fabergé as Easter gifts to the Tsar (imperial) family members. The one which especially captured my attention was the “Blue Enamel Ribbed,” for it is open with nothing inside which immediately reminded me of Christ’s empty tomb. After all, this ancient tradition of giving decorated eggs was created to symbolize the actual Resurrection of Christ.

With the passing of time, this custom ended up being swallowed up by commercial interests, thus distorting the original idea. However, through the restored gospel we receive more powerful practices and symbols through which we can regularly experience this rebirth by coming unto Christ therefore being born again through His infinite sacrifice and Resurrection.

Daily we can have a new encounter with the Savior and His teachings and be renewed spiritually by studying the scriptures, especially the Book of Mormon, which is another testament of Jesus Christ. This practice will expose us to His doctrines, ordinances, and teachings, thus strengthening our testimonies, answering our questions, and refreshing the soul. President Thomas S. Monson (1927–2018) said in the April 2017 general conference: “My dear associates in the work of the Lord, I implore each of us to prayerfully study and ponder the Book of Mormon each day. As we do so, we will be in a position to hear the voice of the Spirit, to resist temptation, to overcome doubt and fear, and to receive heaven’s help in our lives. I so testify with all my heart” (“The Power of the Book of Mormon,” Liahona, May 2017, 87).

Every week we can be “born again” through partaking worthily and attentively of the sacrament as if we are receiving our ordinances once more. We renew our covenants to take upon ourselves the name of Christ, always remembering Him and keeping His commandments. When we eat the bread that signifies His body and drink the water that represents His blood, we become unified with Him and receive the promise to always have with us the company of the Holy Ghost. Our thoughts during this ordinance must be directed to His suffering in the Garden of Gethsemane, His physical ordeal on the cross, and His glorious Resurrection.

As we receive more elevated covenants in the temple and perform the same ordinances for the dead therein, we experience and provide for others an opportunity to go through a powerful change of heart, which, in itself, is a spiritual regeneration process that helps us (and others) become new and better creatures. The temple experience, when fully appreciated, will always cause one’s heart and mind to receive revelation from heaven and approximate us to Heavenly Father and the Savior.

Many of us sometimes say: “I wish I could go back in time and do things differently.” Well, the good news is that because of Jesus Christ and His Atonement, we can be born again and again! Studying the Book of Mormon daily, partaking of the sacrament weekly, and worshipping in the temple frequently, will expose us to His power to heal and be sanctified.

May all of us, during this Easter season, ponder about these wonderful blessings and opportunities to gradually become new and better creatures.
