President Henry B. Eyring, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, taught in general conference that “every [child] of God listening to my voice has received a call from the Lord Jesus Christ. …

“… The covenant daughters and sons of God … all share one important and joyful call. It is to serve others for Him.” That call is true for covenant keepers at any age—whether eight or 108.

Ninety-nine-year-old Louise Allred has spent most of her life serving others, and recently she learned a new way to serve from her daughter, Mary Helen.

Three years ago, Mary Helen was not looking for anything specific when she signed on to JustServe.org. Browsing around, she saw a need for a nonprofit group of volunteers who turn donated wedding gowns into bereavement clothing for newborns who never leave the hospital.

With a conviction in her heart that she had found something she wanted to do, Mary Helen and her local Relief Society contacted the organization director. An activity was planned for the sisters of the ward, and 10–12 wedding gowns were taken apart at the service project. Mary Helen took the pieces home and created baby gowns from them.

As Mary Helen made each gown, she prayed for each parent and family who would use the gown she was making. It felt deeply satisfying to her spiritually, drawing her closer to the Savior by following His admonition to love one another (see John 13:34–35; see also 1 John 4:11). Very quickly, Mary Helen realized a one-time activity was not going to be enough for her. She found that JustServe.org would be a partner for many projects for her.

Mary Helen’s mother, Louise, also began helping. She takes apart the wedding gowns stitch by stitch. Everything is then washed, cut, pieced, and sewn to create the baby gowns, and then embellishments are sewn on by hand. Each baby gown takes about two hours to create.

Together, this mother and daughter produce over 100 gowns for deceased babies each year. Hospitals all over Alabama, USA, welcome these donations.

Mary Helen says she and her mother enjoy this time they spend together serving Heavenly Father’s little ones and their families as time permits. As President Russell M. Nelson taught: “Our greatest joy comes as we help our brothers and sisters, no matter where we live in this wonderful world. Giving help to others—making a conscientious effort to care about others as much as or more than we care about ourselves—is our joy. Especially, I might add, when it is not convenient and when it takes us out of our comfort zone. Living that second great commandment is the key to becoming a true disciple of Jesus Christ.”

In addition to the joy this service brings, Louise loves the challenge and the feeling of accomplishment she experiences. Mary Helen says this bond between her and her mother has also become a most cherished shared experience.

“Anyone can serve,” Mary Helen says—you just have to find what works for you!

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="155186551" id="aside1_p1">In areas where JustServe.org is available, it provides a wonderful resource to find the needs of others around you. But we can also look for ways to serve in our own neighborhoods and in our own homes. As President James E. Faust (1920–2007) taught: “Often the greatest service to others is one-on-one. It need not be on a grand scale, and it is noblest within the family.”<a class="note-ref" href="#note3"></a> As you pray and seek for inspiration in your service, Heavenly Father will guide you to those who need your service most.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
