HOW TO STUDY AND TEACH THE BIBLE

Because the Bible is God's written message to us, it is important to read and understand it. But many cannot make sense of the Bible and apply it to their daily lives. This book is written to help people study the Bible to understand its message. Then this book will help them go a step further; it will help them share its message with others. Therefore, this could be the most important book you’ve ever read because it will help you understand and teach the most important book in the world.

I feel that every book I have ever written could be the most influential. Like every mother dreams her baby will the president of the United States or a great medical doctor, I dream that every new book would bless the world. This project is no exception. The church of Jesus Christ could be transformed if everyone learned how to study and teach the Bible.

This book was first a video project filmed in June, 1996 for Gospel Light/Regal Books and released in the Fall of that year. The video had eight lessons, each one designed to be used as a teaching tool in leadership meetings or the eight lessons could be an all-day training seminar.

These lessons are different than most books that tell you how to study the Bible. This book begins where they leave off with general principles of hermeneutics (principles to interpret the Bible). This book tells how to study different kinds of Scripture. Therefore, this will be a specific book to help you Study and Teach the Bible.

Ch. 1 Studying the Bible

Ch. 2 Studying a Biography

Ch. 3 Studying a Doctrine

Ch. 4 Studying the Bible Devotionally

Ch. 5 Studying a Parable

Ch. 6 Studying a Chapter or Book from the Bible

Ch. 7 Studying a Story/Narrative

Ch. 8 Studying Prophecy

This book goes beyond Bible study. It will help you teach the Bible. Whereas most authors do not put "study" and "teaching" together in a "How to" book, I felt it was necessary to put the two together. My definition of teaching first includes studying the Bible and second, teaching the Bible.

Definition of Teaching

Teaching is the preparation and

guidance of learning activities.

There are three ingredients to this definition of teaching. These three explain the uniqueness of this book.

When going fishing in the North Woods, if you’ve not been there before; you need a guide. Without a guide, you may not get started properly, or you may not find your way, or you may not catch any fish. A teacher gets students started properly, guides class activities and helps students catch the fish of learning.

A teacher does not learn it for pupils, the pupils must learn for themselves. A teacher guides the process.

DUAL GUIDE IN LEARNING

In a Christian context, the Holy Spirit is a guide to help us learn the Scriptures. Jesus promised, “The Holy Spirit will guide you into all truth” (Jn. 16:13). The Holy Spirit working through a human guide is illustrated by Philip helping the Ethiopian eunuch learn the Bible as through a human guide is illustrated by Philip helping the Ethiopian eunuch learn the Bible as they rode in a chariot. The Ethiopian had been reading the book of Isaiah but didn’t understand they rode in a chariot. The Ethiopian had been reading the book of Isaiah but didn’t understand what he was reading. Philip ran alongside to ask,

what he was reading. Philip ran alongside to ask,

“Understandeth what thou readest?” (Acts 8:30).

“Understandeth what thou readest?” (Acts 8:30).

The eunuch was returning from Jerusalem where he probably went to worship God. But The eunuch was returning from Jerusalem where he probably went to worship God. But he was blinded to spiritual truth and couldn’t understand the Scriptures. The eunuch answered, he was blinded to spiritual truth and couldn’t understand the Scriptures. The eunuch answered,

“How can I (understand) except some man guide me” (Acts 8:31). “How can I (understand) except some man guide me” (Acts 8:31).

The eunuch was asking for help to understand what he was reading. The human teacher The eunuch was asking for help to understand what he was reading. The human teacher must guide the thinking of pupils by explaining to them the basic content of the lesson. As they must guide the thinking of pupils by explaining to them the basic content of the lesson. As they do that, the Holy Spirit removes spiritual blindness so the pupil understands the Bible. do that, the Holy Spirit removes spiritual blindness so the pupil understands the Bible.

This means the human teacher and the divine teacher must work together to produce This means the human teacher and the divine teacher must work together to produce learning when the Bible is taught. They are dual-leaders in the learning process. learning when the Bible is taught. They are dual-leaders in the learning process.

Learning results from teaching experiences. Teaching is not telling, it is guiding

pupils through experiences designed for their learning. Listening is not learning. When pupils experience the truth of God’s Word, they learn its lessons.

WHEN STUDENTS EXPERIENCE THE BIBLE

PRAYER

My prayer for you is threefold. First, may you better understand the Bible as you

learn to study it. Second, may you learn how to guide your students in learning activities from the Bible. This is a prayer that you will be a successful teacher. Third, may your students learn how to study and teach the Bible. My ultimate success as an author will be measured by your success as a teacher. May God prosper our efforts and may many grow in the knowledge of the Bible.

APPRECIATION

I want to thank the editorial staff at Gospel Light/Regal Books for their help in filming the video, which became the source of this book. I appreciate their continued confidence in me and their commitment to producing the very best Bible study and teaching resources.

Thanks to my long-time friend, Dr. Douglas Porter, Professor at Canada Christian College, Toronto, for his help in research and preparing this volume from the video tapes. Also, thanks to my office staff, Linda Elliott and Amy Marston for typing this volume.

May you discover many principles in the Bible as you learn HOW TO STUDY AND TEACH THE BIBLE.

Sincerely yours in Christ,

ELMER L. TOWNS

Summer, 1997
