STUDYING THE BIBLE

Teaching the Bible is one of the greatest privileges available to the Christian. A Sunday School teacher explaining a Bible story to a group of young children is communicating a message that will influence them a lifetime. The Bible study group leader guiding a discussion in a comfortable living room is helping people discover God’s answers to the pressing questions in their life. Those who teach the Bible are investing their lives in a ministry with eternal results. Only two things last forever, the Bible and people. Therefore, when we help people understand the Bible, we influence eternity. We communicate the eternal Word of God to people who will live forever.

One of the best-known biblical preachers of this century is Dr. W. A. Criswell who pastored First Baptist Church of Dallas, Texas, for almost 50 years. Over a period of thirteen years, he preached through the entire Bible passage by passage, beginning at Genesis 1:1 and ending at Revelation 22:21. Early in his ministry he became convinced that the best investment of his ministry was to teach the Bible to his people. The success of his ministry in Dallas, Texas, suggests his conclusion was accurate. Criswell gave the following explanation why he made such a big commitment to Bible teaching.

WHY TEACH THE BIBLE?

The life of God is in his Word; the Word is quick and living (Heb. 4:12-13). The Word of

God is a mirror (James 1:23); it reveals to us our true selves. The Word of God is a seed

(Luke 8:11); it contains the life and vitality of the Lord. The Word of God is a sword

(Eph. 6:17); it pierces the heart and lays bare and naked our sinful souls before him who

only can save us from death. The Bible is a life-giving Word (1 Peter 1:23); it is the

vehicle for imparting that life to us which is in Christ Jesus the Incarnate Word. Eternal

life for the individual soul begins through believing the testimony of God.1

The study of the Bible is foundational to our growth as a Christian. Therefore, every Christian should plan to study the Bible, similar to the way one eats food to grow physically. Actually, several parallels may be drawn between good eating habits and a healthy approach to Bible study. First, eat enough because eating too much or too little has long term implications on both the body and spirit.

Second, eat a balanced meal. Just as one does not grow strong physically by eating only desserts, so a Christian will not grow strong in the faith without a balanced approach to Bible study. Third, eat rightly rather than simply stuffing your mouth, or swallowing without chewing. We need to both devour and digest the Scriptures as we study.

In the fourth place we must eat healthy food and avoid a constant diet of junk food. Many Christians get side-tracked in their Bible study by becoming involved in speculation and meaningless side issues, such as prophecy or an endless study of numbers.

Fifth, we should eat with dignity, not like a dog or a pig. One way to accomplish that goal is to eat routinely rather than only when you want to eat. Eating balanced meals at regular intervals is one key to long term good health. Likewise, getting into the Scriptures on a daily basis is a good discipline to encourage ongoing spiritual growth. The secret of our future spiritual maturity lies in our daily routine of Bible study.

The secret of our future,

Lies in our daily routine.

Ten Things Bible Study Will Do For You

The Bible is a book about God. It is not just history with references to God’s people nor is it a record of poetic songs of religious people. The Bible is a book about God. It is not just a book about the birth, life and death of God’s Son, nor is it a story of the subsequent spread of Christianity. It includes all these, but it is a story about God, given to us from God, written by God through His servants and points us to salvation and worship of God.

The Bible is God's revelation of Himself to you. When you understand this principle you begin to understand the Bible. Since God is who He is, then what is true of God must also characterize the Book that describes Him. God is the Source of this revelation (Deut. 29:29). Christ, the Son of God, is the central theme of the Bible (John 5:38). The Holy Spirit is the divine Author of Scripture (2 Peter 1:20, 21). Therefore, the Bible is the revelation of God, Christ is the message of the Bible, and the Holy Spirit is the author of the Bible.

The Greek word inspiration, that Paul used to describe how the Bible was written, literally means "breathed-out from God," i.e. “all scripture is given by inspiration of God” (2 Tim. 3:16). Jesus spoke of "every word that proceeds from the mouth of God" (Matt. 4:4). Therefore, when you pick up the Bible to study its pages, you have God’s book in your hands. Determine to get God’s message into your mind.

WHEN TO STUDY

review before the exam).

First, the Bible is your source of strength in your Christian life. John wrote, “I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the Word of God abides in you" (1 John 2:14). As you consistently study the Bible, you will be strengthened to meet the challenges you encounter in life.

Second, the habit of personal Bible study strengthens your personal assurance of your relationship with God. In the same epistle John also wrote, "These things I have written to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, that you many know that you have eternal life" (1 John 5:13). Christians who tend to struggle with the assurance of their salvation also struggle with the discipline in personal Bible study.

Confidence in your relationship with God is a third benefit from personal Bible study. According to the Apostle John, "This is the confidence that we have in Him . . ." (1 John 5:14).

Fourth, personal Bible study is an important key to effectiveness in your prayer life. You get answers when you come to God by the Bible. Jesus told His disciples, "If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, you will ask what you desire, and it shall be done for you" (John 15:7). This promise extends beyond those gathered in the Upper Room that evening. It is a promise to be claimed by every Christian involved in the discipline of personal Bible study.

A fifth benefit realized through personal Bible study is the experience of overcoming sin . The Bible describes itself as "profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness" (2 Tim. 3:16). As you study the Scriptures, you learn doctrines which are the principles of Scripture to govern the way a Christian should live. Occasionally, these principles reveal how you live contrary to God’s way. The refore the Scriptures correct the wrong way you live and instruct you in the correct way of righteousness. As you respond to this fourfold ministry of (1) learning doctrine, (2) learning reproof, (3) being instructed, and (4) being instructed in righteousness; you deal with sin in your experience. Jesus told His disciples, "You are already clean because of the word which I have spoken to you" (John 15:3).

Internal joy and peace are the sixth and seventh benefits from personal Bible study. Jesus said, "These things I have spoken to you, that My joy may remain in you, and that your joy may be full" (John 15:11). Joy comes from Jesus’ words. Then He added, "These things have I spoken to you, that in Me you may have peace" (John 16:33). Also, peace comes from Jesus’ words. The joy of the Lord and peace of God are two experiences that come from the Word of God planted in your life.

An eighth reason for personal Bible study is that it helps you make good decisions. The Psalmist observed, "Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path" (Ps. 119:105). The principles you learn through the daily study of the Scriptures will guide you through the issues involved in each decision you make. Many Christian businessmen have developed the habit of reading one chapter from Proverbs as they begin each day. They read the entire books of Proverbs once each month by reading one chapter a day. As they make decisions throughout their business day, they do so with the added advantage of God's wisdom to help them evaluate each situation they face.

Ninth, personal Bible study will help you explain your faith to others. The Apostle Peter urged Christians to "sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and always be ready to give a defense to everyone who asks you a reason for the hope that is in you" (1 Peter 3:15). The better you understand the Bible, the easier it will be for you to explain the message of the Scriptures to others. Those who are most effective in sharing their faith with others are those who have gone one step further in their Bible study. As they come across verses which summarize the teaching of Scripture on various subjects, they commit these verses to memory to be used in later conversations about their faith.

Ultimately, personal Bible study leads to success in every aspect of your Christian life. The word "success" occurs only once in Scripture and it is found in the context of meditating on the Scriptures. God promised Joshua, "This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate in it day and night, that you may observe to do according to all that is written in

it. For then you will make your way prosperous and then you will have good success" (Josh. 1:8). Many successful Christians have proved God honors this promise, because they have given priority to personal Bible study in their life.

How to Get a Hand on the Bible.

As a young minister, I was called to the home of Mrs. Van Brackle late one evening. She was 82 years old and partially blinded with cataracts. She had been told her lack of faith kept her from being healed. She asked me,

“How can I get more faith?”

It was a question that intimidated me. At first I didn’t know how to answer the question. Then God brought a verse to mind that answered her question. “Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God” (Rom. 10:17).

“The more you get the Bible in your life,” I told Mrs. Van Brackle, “the more faith you will have.” I told her she could have strong faith if she learned the Bible, obeyed the Bible, and let the Bible fill her life.

“You have to get a grip on the Bible to get a grip on faith,” I explained to this elderly woman who was looking for a touch from God.

I held my hand out toward Mrs. Van Brackle to show her five fingers. Then I told Mrs. Van Brackle, “It takes five fingers to get a strong grip on the Bible.” Then I held my Bible with all 5 fingers.

I explained, “Holding the Bible with one finger” is not enough. Then I compared one finger to using only one method to get hold of the Bible. Then I went through an exercise of holding the Bible with one finger . . . two fingers . . . three fingers . . . four fingers, and finally I demonstrated the strong grip I had on the Bible when I used my entire hand to hang on to the Bible. Then I explained to her,

“There are five things that will help you get a grip on your Bible.”

understand" (Mark 13:14).

The Bible is a big book. Actually, it is a collection of sixty-six books containing 1189 chapters, 31,175 verses. Like exploring the Canadian North Woods, the Bible is so big, you would get lost if you didn’t have a plan to guide your study. To begin the discipline of personal Bible study without a plan could result in one becoming overwhelmed. You might get discouraged and give up or you might end up chasing rabbits on rabbit trails that lead nowhere. As you proceed through this book, you will discover several unique approaches to Bible study as you consider teaching different expressions of truth from the Bible. At this point in your study, it would be good to consider a few preliminaries which apply to each approach to Bible study.

As you personally study the Bible use a pen or pencil and paper. Write as you study.

Someone said, “You don’t have a thought until you can write it down.” So write out your insights and fndings. Don’t rely on your memory.

A short pencil is better than a long memory.

As we study the Scriptures, we will gain various insights into the meaning of verses or the character of people. By writing out these insights on paper, we preserve them for future use. When you get ready to teach, review all of the notes you have written; organizing them into a lesson plan. Do not try to teach a lesson from the notes you make each day. Again you will want to write your study notes into a lesson plan.

Keeping notes of your Bible study not only assists you in remembering what you have learned, it also helps the learning process. You don't really understand your thoughts until you express them in words.

Thoughts disentangle themselves over lips and finger tips.

As you attempt to explain an idea to someone else or record an idea on paper, it helps you to clarify the idea in your own mind. Many teachers attempt to write the key thought from their Bible study in one or two lines as a first step before attempting to share that truth with others in a lesson.
