HOW TO STUDY

THE BIBLE

Years ago I began my Bible study with four questions. These were given to me by a mature Christian who was mentoring me in Bible study. I didn't have a real plan by which to study, so these four questions gave me a specific daily plan to Bible study.

As you study the Bible, you need to constantly ask the question, "What is the POINT of the passage?" Most students of the Bible find there is far more truth to be gleaned from the Scriptures when Scriptures are allowed to speak for themselves, than when you go looking for things that are not there, or things that really are not that important.

Each gospel describes the Feeding of the Five Thousand, but each time the miracle is recorded, there is a different emphasis. We gain a more complete understanding of what happened when we read all four descriptions of the miracle.

Sometimes, the New Testament makes reference to Old Testament events. As you read and study both, you gain insight into the passage before you teach it.

As you look for parallels, also search for verses that teach the same principle or give additional insights on the same issue. Peter explained the reason for this approach to Bible study when he wrote, "Knowing this first, that no prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation" (2 Peter 1:20). The word private means no thought of Scripture stands alone, it will be reinforced at other places in Scripture. Therefore, the Bible describes the process of comparing Scripture when it directs us to “Compare spiritual things with spiritual” (I Cor. 2:13). The word private also, means we interpret Scripture in fellowship with other believers. The Holy Spirit has only one meaning, and we are to find His interpretation of the Scriptures. If you have a private interpretation different from every other believer it's probably wrong. Another way to study using the parallel approach, look for ways key words are used in other Scriptures or look for similar events in the lives of different people.

The first step in applying the Scripture is to pray and ask God for help. Actually, you will want to pray for three things. First, you will want to pray for the Holy Spirit to teach you the lesson you are studying. “When he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth” (John 16:13). The Holy Spirit can take away your blindness and help you understand the Bible. Second, ask God to help you in actual lesson preparation. You will want divine help in arranging your lesson plan. Thirdly, pray for your students. Ask God to help them learn and apply the lessons you will teach.

PRAYER PREPARATION

Pray for the Holy Spirit to teach through you.

Pray for your preparation.

Pray for your pupils.

God has given us a revelation of Himself in the Bible. He did not give it to us to frustrate us with something we could not understand. So, God intends for us to understand the Bible and learn from it. God also gave each Christian the Holy Spirit to illuminate the Scriptures, so that the

message of God could be understood. As we study the Bible, we need to apply sound principles of interpretation.

LEARNING FROM THE BEREANS

The example of the Berean Christian’s model for us is a good approach to personal Bible study. "These (Bereans) were more fair-minded than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily to find out whether these things were so" (Acts 17:10).

The first description of the Berean Christians suggests they were yielded to God in their approach to the Scriptures. They "received the Word." As we approach Bible study, we also need to do so on the of being willing to receive and apply any and all biblical principles found in the Scriptures.

PRAYER

Lord, I will receive and study Your Word. I receive the Bible from You and will reverently study its meaning. Amen.

Second, the Bereans were intentional in their approach to Bible study. They came to the Scriptures "with all readiness" looking for truth. They had an eager mind, also described as a hungry spirit. It was not a matter of reading a chapter to fulfil their Christian duty but rather a desire or pursuit of a better understanding of the truth of God.

PRAYER

Lord, I love Your Word and want to know it better. But since I'm human, and have limited understanding, be my teacher. Give me a deeper hunger to know You by studying the Scriptures. Amen.

In the third place, the Bereans approached Bible study with a word by word study of the Scriptures. They "searched" the Scriptures in their pursuit of truth. Theirs was not a superficial reading, but digging into the meaning of words. The word searched means "sift" as a baker sifting flour to separate every particle from one another. When you study the Bible "word for word," you are "sifting" every particle of Scripture to make you understand what God is saying. As we invest time looking up the meaning of words and expressions used in Scripture, we gain insights missed by those who gloss over details in their study of the Scriptures.

PRAYER

Lord, I commit myself to study to understand your words and may I grow to

maturity. Amen

The fourth characteristic of the Bereans was their routine of "daily" Bible study. Each day these Christians had a fresh encounter with God through their study of the Scriptures. On a daily basis they were reminded of God's merciful compassion toward His people (Lam. 3:22, 23). Just as Jesus instructed His disciples to pray for daily bread (Matt. 6:11), so we need to go daily to the Scriptures which are the Bread of Life to the believer.

PRAYER

Lord, I commit myself to daily Bible study. Give me discipline to

study and learn more about You. Amen.

The fifth characteristic of the Bereans was their purpose in Bible study. There was something the Bereans wanted to know as they came to the Scriptures. They studied "to find out whether these things were so." This verse tells us they were concerned with content and assurance. They wanted confidence from their Bible study. Likewise, we would be wise to follow that example in our own Bible study.

PRAYER

Lord, help me focus my investigation so I can know exactly what You want me to know and what You want me to do. Amen.

When we study the Bible, we are looking for the content of a message from God. We want a message that can be trusted. With that attitude, we want confidence in what we hear from God. Ask God to open your eyes and give you insight into what you read. The Psalmist prayed, "Open my eyes, that I may see wondrous things from Your law" (Ps. 119:18). If sin is hindering your relationship with God, it should be confessed to Him that we might be cleansed (1 John 1:9). Then as you read, you need to listen carefully to what God is saying to you (1 Sam. 3:10). Even as you begin, you need to be prepared to obey what God tells you through your personal Bible study (Acts 9:6).

Getting Ready to Teach

The goal of your personal Bible study is not merely the acquiring of new knowledge, neither can it be limited to the benefits you realize in your own life. The ultimate aim of your personal Bible study is to share insight with others and see the Scriptures change their life.

Paul urged t his two-fold action on the Colossian Christians, "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord" (Col. 3:16). Just as the principles you learn in your Bible study helps you grow, so you can help others experiences significant spiritual growth in their life as you share what you are learning with them.

Therefore, teaching the Bible is your goal in personal Bible study. Teaching is the means by which you help others learn what you have learned in your Bible study. But remember teaching is not talking and learning is not listening. Learning is actively being involved with the Bible. With this in mind, I have defined teaching as "the preparation and guidance of learning activities.”

Simply surveying the Scriptures is not Bible study; nor is it Bible teaching. Many teachers do this in their Sunday School class or home Bible study. They think they are teaching or leading a Bible study because they fill a class room with talk. But you have not taught until the pupil has learned, and the real key to learning is active involvement. Therefore, teaching involves "learning activities."

How you study determines how you teach. Therefore, you must become actively involved with the Word of God as you study. Then you must guide your students to become actively involved in your teaching process.

The real role of the teacher is that of a guide. That was Philip's role as he taught the gospel to the Ethiopian eunuch. He began by asking the eunuch, "Do you understand what you are reading?" (Acts 8:30). The eunuch did not understand the text and knew that he was having difficulty understanding the Scriptures. He responded to Philip's question with a question of his

own. "How can I, unless someone guides me?" (Acts 8:31). The eunuch used the word guide as a synonym for teacher. He was asking, “How can I understand the Bible except someone teach me.”

Human teachers cooperate with the Divine Teacher to change lives. Jesus told His disciples, "But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all in My name. He will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all things that I said to you" (John 14:26). The Holy Spirit is the Divine Teacher, but He is also a guide. Later that same evening Jesus added, "However, when He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth" (John 16:13). The Holy Spirit is the real teacher in our Sunday School class or Bible study group. Our teaching is most effective as we cooperate with the Holy Spirit in teaching what He wants taught during each session.

PRAYER

Lord, I yield myself to You so I can learn Your Word and grow in grace. Teach

me everything I need to know. Then fill me with the Holy Spirit and teach others

through me. Amen.

TOOLS FOR BIBLE STUDY AND INTERPRETATION

I have not attempted to list all the Bible study tools available, but those that have been the most helpful in my study. The annotation is personal, I have commented where the tool helped me.

LaHaye, Tim, How to Study The Bible for Yourself. Eugene, Oregon: Harvest House, 1976.

Practical lists with good study helps and charts. This is the one I recommend first to a new believer.

McQuilkin, Robertson, Understanding and Applying The Bible. Chicago: Moody Press, 1983.

Dr. McQuilkin was my theology teacher at Columbia Bible College where I appreciated his

love and commitment to God’s Word. This book has more on interpreting the Bible, than studying it.

Pierson, Arthur T., Knowing The Scriptures. London: James Nisbet and Co., 1910. I learned a

“heart hermeneutic” from this book. It gives the overflow of a life-time of studying the

Bible, including principles that only the knowledgeable student will appreciate and understand.

Pink, Arthur, Interpreting the Scriptures. Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1972. Dr. Pink’s

written sermons are among the best in interpreting and applying the Bible. He has been one

of my reliable tools for help in lesson preparation. Not a book on Bible study but interpretation.

Ramm, Bernard, Protestant Biblical Interpretation. Boston: W. A. Wilde Company, 1950. I love

and trust this earliest printing of Ramm’s book because of its great allegiance to the

inerrancy of Scripture. I used it for years as a text in hermeneutics. Revision raises

questions of interpretation and weakens the book so that I no longer use it. Smith, Wilbur M. Profitable Bible Study. Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1963. (First

appeared in 1939). Dr. Smith taught with me at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School,

Deerfield, IL where his love and warm application of the Scriptures attracted large classes.

This book shares eight basic Bible study techniques and ways to apply them. Thomas, Griffeth, Methods of Bible Study. Chicago: Moody Press, 1926. Most of the book gives

the results of Bible study. A summary of Bible topics for the average believer and how to

study the Bible to arrive at these doctrines.

Traina, Robert A. Methodical Bible Study. New York: Ganis & Harris, 1952. This is a

foundational book for all the methods of study in this volume. The author does not apply

Bible study to the various areas as this volume does, but teaches how to observe Scripture,

interpret it, and apply it to life. This was the foundational book I used at Dallas Theological Seminary.

Wald, Oletta, The Joy of Discovery. Minneapolis: Bible Banner Press, 1956. This is one of the

few books that ties Bible study to Bible teaching. Excellent on inductive study.
