INTERPRETING A BIOGRAPHY

person(s) from the passage of Scripture and the principles by which they lived.

found on this person.

universal promises or threats that apply to your life.

principles that should be avoided.

How To Teach A Biography

Because of the natural tendency of people to identify with other people, the teacher is more likely to attract and maintain interest in a biographical lesson than in other approaches to Bible study. Still, care should be taken on the part of the teacher to introduce the person being studied in a relevant context. This may be done in one of several ways. First, you might suggest a case study of a living person. This living person should have a similar “life-message” to the person being studied. The problem that is addressed in the life of your character will answer the problem raised in the case study.

A second way to begin might involve asking the question, "What would you do if you found yourself in a situation where . . . ?" Complete that question by describing some contemporary context similar to the experience of the character being studied. Then turn to a biblical character to demonstrate how he or she responded in a similar situation. When a children's worker was called upon to teach a group of children living in foster homes, she told the story of a boy named "Danny" who as a young boy was taken from his parents and forced to live in a different culture. Immediately, the children identified with the life of Daniel the Prophet and many were responsive when challenged to "dare to be a Daniel" by determining to serve the Lord rather than conforming to the world.

A third approach to introducing a biographical study might involve identifying a positive character trait that Christians struggle with in their life. A teacher might ask, "What do you think faith would look like when facing this problem?" The discussion could lead into a study of how Abraham expressed faith in God to solve a variety of problems.

As you prepare your lesson plan, outline the life of the person being studied. Much of this work has already been done in your personal Bible study, but consider the group you are teaching as you prepare this outline. What approach to this person's life will help them best grasp the principle you are trying to communicate? Sometimes, you will outline the person's life in chronological order. On other occasions, start with a significant event in the person's life and then review the various steps that led up to that event. A third approach might identify an attitude or value and then trace the development of that attitude or value through the various events of that person's life.

Next, identify the primary lesson or lessons to be drawn from this person's life. In each person, his or her life message will be reflected in a different way. Is this person a negative example to avoid? Is this person a positive example to imitate? Is there a guiding principle or proverb, i.e. “life-message,” which seems to guide this person's life? Are there steps revealed as the person grows in some area?

In teaching a biography, it is important to remain focused on the subject of your study. In his book on biographical preaching, Andrew Blackwood warned, "In preaching such a sermon there is a tendency, if not a temptation, to show how much one knows about other men of the Bible."4 Taking time to draw parallels between your subject and other similar men and women in the Scriptures will cut into the time you have available. If there is a need to consider other similar characters, a better approach would be to teach a series of biographical studies with a focus on a specific character in each study session. The following chart lists several examples of biographical series you may wish to consider to teach.

TEACHING A BIOGRAPHICAL SERIES

Joseph and His Brothers (Sons of Jacob)

People Who Changed Their World (Judges)

First Ladies (Queens of Israel & Judah)

The Hand that Rocks the Cradle (Mothers)

The Master's Men (The Twelve Disciples)

Paul's Ministry Team (Paul's Companions)

As you look toward the conclusion of this lesson, suggest ways the “life-message” is can be applied in the life of your students. Once again, a series of questions may help you find specific applications of the “life-message” or principle of someone’s life. How would this “life-message” affect my relationships? How would this “life-message” change my character and/or personality? How would this “life-message” help me accomplish a worthy goal? Usually, it is best to focus your application in the specific area most applicable to the members of the group you teach.

When you teach this lesson, help your students become "doers of the word and not hearers only" (James 1:22). Encourage a specific application of a “life-message” that can be accomplished by your students within the month. Sometimes this will involve identifying a specific action or behavior to copy, i.e., to follow the example of Daniel by praying three times daily throughout the week. On other occasions, this will involve addressing a specific attitude, i.e., to begin overcoming personal bitterness by asking God to remind you of His sovereign control over your circumstances just as He reminded Joseph of that important truth. A third approach may involve making a significant lifestyle change, i.e., to submit yourself to a Barnabas as did Paul in his early ministry, who will hold you accountable in the development of spiritual disciplines and help you experience significant spiritual growth.

If you study and teach biographies often, you will want to periodically take time to evaluate what you have done to stretch yourself to be the best student and teacher possible of the Scriptures. All of us have a tendency to slide into a routine comfort zone, which if unchecked, can cause us to abandon our pursuit of excellence in all we do for God. Blackwood, concerned that preachers of biographical sermons may also become complacent in their work, developed a series of questions he called "The Tests of a Completed Sermon."5 Blackwood's questions are listed to help you evaluate yourself as you study and teach biographies.

BLACKWOOD'S TESTS OF A BIOGRAPHICAL SERMON

the horizontal level?

Tools for Biographical Studies

If you study and teach biographies on a regular basis, you may want to invest in a few good biographical collections. These books will serve as reference tools in the process of developing your biographical studies of biblical characters. While not exhaustive, the following list identifies several leading books in this field. David Barnard, Biblical Women (Cincinnati: Hart & Company, 1863). Edith Deen, All the Women of the Bible (New York: Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1955). James Hastings, The Greater Men and Women of the Bible (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark Co.). Abraham Kuyper, Women of the Old and New Testament (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House, 1934).

Herbert Lockyer, All the Apostles of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House). Herbert Lockyer, All the Children of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House). Herbert Lockyer, All the Kings and Queens of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House).

Herbert Lockyer, All the Men of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House, 1958). Herbert Lockyer, All the Women of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House). Elmer L. Towns, What the Old Testament is All About: A Study of the History Makers of the Old Testament (Lynchburg, Virginia: Elmer L. Towns, 1995).

Elmer L. Towns, What the New Testament is All About: A Study of the History Makers of the New Testament (Lynchburg, Virginia: Elmer L. Towns, 1995).

Alexander Whyte, Bible Characters (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House).
