STUDYING A DOCTRINE

Have you ever had someone from a cult come to your front door to try and persuade you to join their movement? Their movements use Christian words, events and even sing Christian hymns. But they are not Christian when they deny the deity of Christ, that Jesus is the God-Man. These cults have many members who once attended an evangelical church. What ever else these people may have learned in Christian churches, it is evident they did not learn biblical doctrine. The fact that cults and many other movements like them win converts each year from evangelical churches, suggests we are not doing a good job of teaching doctrine.

Biblical doctrine is the foundation of our Christian life and ministry. In the early church, "they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine" (Acts 2:42). One of the marks of spiritual maturity among Christians was "that we should no longer be children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by trickery of men, in the cunning craftiness of deceitful plotting" (Eph. 4:14). Instead, the church was commanded to examine the doctrine taught by various teachers to determine if it was true or not (1 John 4:1; Rev. 2:2). Part of the responsibility of the pastor was to "speak the things which are proper for sound doctrine" (Titus 2:1).

Unfortunately, that has not always been the practice of the evangelical church. A. W. Tozer lamented,

DOCTRINE IS ROOT STUDY

One of the marked differences between the faith of our fathers as conceived by the fathers and the same faith as

understood and lived by their children is that the fathers were concerned with the root of the matter, while their

present day descendants seem concerned only with fruit. 2

A more contemporary writer seems to agree with Tozer in his evaluation of the church today when he notes,

DOCTRINAL NEGLECT

Many Christians never leave the first principles of the Gospel. Still spiritual infants, they must be bottle-fed the

same formula. When confronted at the door by a representative of another sect, they are helpless to give a

reason for the hope that is in them. In the basis of their faith, they are speechless, yet on the reasons for their

choice of a house or a car they can discourse at length. This sinful negligence by even one member of the

church can cause the whole body to suffer. 3

Many of your strongest lessons as a teacher will be doctrinal lessons. Doctrinal teaching is the skeleton on which hangs practical Christianity. A body is flabby without the hard bones of a skeleton, so the Christian with a doctrinal foundation is a flabby believer. Philips Brooks' commented on the value of doctrinal preaching applying it to those who would teach a doctrine. According to Brooks,

DOCTRINAL VALUE

Preach doctrine, preach all the doctrine that you know, and learn forever more and more, but preach it always,

not that men may believe it, but that men may be saved by believing it.4

Why Study Bible Doctrine

There are many reasons why Bible doctrine should be taught in the evangelical church today. First, teaching doctrine is compatible with the purpose of the Scriptures. "All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine" (2 Tim. 3:16). You are not teaching the Scriptures as they were intended to be taught if you are not consistently teaching doctrine.

Second, doctrine is foundational to the Christian life. Describing the conversion of the Romans, Paul wrote, "But God be thanked that though you were slaves of sin, wt you obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine to which you were delivered" (Rom. 6:17). It was by "continuing steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine" that the early Christians experienced stability in the Christian life (Acts 2:42).

Paul told Timothy, "Hold fast the pattern of sound words which you have heard from me, in faith and love which are in Christ Jesus" (2 Tim. 1:13). It is the responsibility of teachers to teach sound doctrine (2 Tim. 1:13), but the purpose of teaching doctrine is not only to teach doctrinal truth. The goal of doctrinal teaching is to help students adopt the Christian lifestyle most appropriate to sound doctrine (Titus 2:1).

When you teach doctrine, you follow the example of our Lord. Jesus, the Master Teacher and our teaching model, was a doctrinal teacher. Jesus told those who followed Him, "My doctrine is not Mine, but His who sent Me. If anyone wills to do His will, he shall know concerning the doctrine, whether it is from God or whether I speak on My own authority" (John 7:16, 17). The people who heard Jesus teach marvelled at His doctrine (Mark 1:27). This was particularly evident when Jesus concluded His Sermon on the Mount. "And so it was, when Jesus had ended these sayings, that the people were astonished at His teaching, for He taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matt. 7:28, 29).

STEP ONE HOW TO STUDY A

DOCTRINE

The English word "doctrine" is derived from a Latin term which means "teaching." When you study and teach a doctrine, you are studying and teaching the biblical teaching on some topic or theme. Doctrinal teaching is not an expression of our thoughts on a subject nor is it an expression of the thoughts of others. Rather, your objective in studying a doctrine is to find out what the Bible teaches about the theme under consideration and to communicate it as accurately as possible. The Scriptures are your source in both the study and teaching of doctrine.

One of the expressions used in the Bible to describe doctrine is "the faith." The word faith can be either a noun or verb. When faith is a verb, a person affirms what God has said in His Word (Heb. 11:1). When faith is a noun, it is usually preceded with an article the and refers to the context of Christianity. "The faith" refers to those things commonly believed by Christians, sometimes called a statement of faith or doctrinal statement. Because doctrinal faith and your personal expression of faith are so closely related, you should not be surprised that the study of doctrine begins with an act of faith. The relationship between faith and doctrine is seen in at least three areas.

First, only believers have the spiritual insight necessary to understand the things of God. Paul emphasized this truth in his first epistle to the Corinthians. "But the natural man (unsaved) does not receive the things of the Spirit of God for they are foolishness to him; nor can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he who is spiritual judges (understands) all things (I Cor. 2:14, 15). The Holy Spirit is given to help believers understand the Scripture. "But the Comforter, who is the Holy Spirit, He shall teach you all things" (Jn. 14:26). Believers must exercise faith to allow the Holy Spirit to teach them spiritual truth.

Second, the student of doctrine must believe in the existence of God, before studying the nature and worth of God. "But without faith it is impossible to please Him, for he who comes to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of those who diligently seek Him" (Heb. 11:6). Those who believe in God will be rewarded by God.

In the third place, the student of doctrine must believe God has revealed Himself to us. "The secret things belong to the LORD our God, but those things which are revealed belong to us and to our children forever, that we may do all the words of this law" (Deut. 29:29). God has revealed Himself to us through the Old Testament prophets and more fully in the person of Christ described in the New Testament (Heb. 1:1-3).

Growth in the Christian life also involves a growing ability to discern doctrine. Paul rebuked the Corinthians because he "could not speak to you as to spiritual people but as to carnal, as to babes in Christ (1 Cor. 3:1). The Hebrew Christians were also urged to leave "the discussion of the elementary principles of Christ" and go on to greater maturity in Christ (Heb. 6:1-3).

As you approach the study of doctrine, it is important that you know how it relates to theology. Doctrine is the study of the Bible to learn about God, His work and His world. Theology involves studying the Bible, plus any and every other source to learn about God and His world. Lewis Sperry Chafer, founding President of Dallas Theological Seminary, defined systematic theology as "the collecting, scientifically arranging, comparing, exhibiting and defending of

all facts from any and every source concerning God and His works."5 This definition identifies five steps involved in the study of a topic. They include (1) collecting data from every source concerning God and His works, (2) scientifically arranging these facts into a logical order, (3) comparing and evaluating our study to determine if they are consistent with the Bible and correspond to reality, (4) exhibiting our conclusions (such as writing them in a doctrinal statement) (5) defending what we believe from alternative views on that doctrine.

As suggested in this working definition, the process of putting together what we believe tends to be somewhat comprehensive, perhaps even too technical for the average believer. Maybe this is why some students of the Bible are hesitant to study doctrine. They are concerned that doctrinal study might be beyond them and leave them swamped. But, there are ways to overcome this problem and still gain the benefits associated with the study of doctrine. When beginning to study doctrine, it is sometimes best to set limits so as to not become bogged down. Only study a small point of one doctrine. This allows you to develop your skills without being swamped with data. The following chart is an example of doctrinal studies which have been limited in this way.

BASIC DOCTRINAL STUDIES

The Doctrine of the Holy Spirit in Ephesians

The Return of Christ in the Thessalonian Epistles
