As you approach the study of a doctrine, write a list of all the biblical passages that relate to your topic. You will want to take several steps in compiling this list. First, search a concordance for key words relating to that doctrine. Next, consult a good topical Bible under the heading of the doctrine you are considering. Many study Bibles (Reference Bibles) include cross-references designed to lead the reader through a study of biblical topics. This is another good source to compile your list.

Once the list has been compiled, read each passage and make your own brief notes concerning the topic. Remember, the study of a biblical doctrine is built on certain presuppositions. First, your doctrine should be based on the literal interpretation of the Bible. Second, your doctrine should be limited to the Scriptures themselves. Every effort should be made to avoid building doctrinal on speculative writings of people or "fancy," ideas that appeal to you imagination.

Having completed your study of the biblical data, arrange your basic doctrinal principles in a logical order. In the study of most doctrines, the logical order will become obvious. You will treat it with the same importance people in the Bible treat it. Sometimes, it may be helpful to trace doctrinal content in chronological development. Using this approach, Moses' understanding of a certain doctrine becomes foundational to understanding Paul's interpretation of the same doctrine. Occasionally, you may want to highlight and arrange doctrinal emphasis by various biblical writers or biblical books. A doctrinal study of the church could be arranged to illustrate the unique emphases of Jesus, Peter and Paul.

When you arrange your conclusions, take time to look over all the contents. Here is where you harmonize any apparent contradictions. Review key texts where there is an apparent contradiction, never try to make a verse say more than it means. If a conflict remains, there are a couple of principles that will help you resolve it. First, where two verses appear to say different things, the last verse written probably has the fuller revelation of that truth. Give priority to the New Testament over the Old Testament. Second, where one verse appears to say something different than several others, the consistent teaching of many verses is preferred over an interpretation of just one verse. Perhaps, there something about the context of the odd verse that may explain why it is expressed that way. By checking the context more closely, the problem with the verse often disappears.

HOW TO REALLY LEARN THE BIBLE

By copying a Bible passage.

By diagramming sentences.

By looking up the meaning of words.

By looking for relationships between people.

By reading dictionaries for background.

By finding the meaning of people’s names.

By summarizing passages in your own words.

By outlining the passages.

By writing out how you will apply.

By asking for illumination (John 16:13).

No biblical doctrine stands alone, "No Scripture is of private interpretation" (II Pet. 1:20). If people are created "in the image of God" (Gen. 1:27), what we believe about God is related to what we believe about people. If Christ came to "save His people from their sins" (Matt. 1:21), then our doctrine of Christ is related to our view of salvation and sin. As you review your doctrinal study, consider how your doctrinal conclusions are related to other doctrinal truth taught in the Scriptures. All truth comes from God is consistent, just as God is a unity (one), He never contradicts Himself. Therefore, our doctrine should be systematic. This means each doctrine should be consistent with others in our doctrinal system.

As you conclude your doctrinal study, read back over your notes. List each principle in an order which best fits the doctrine itself and your approach to studying doctrine. This outline should be helpful in explaining your conclusions to others. Then, identify the biblical text from which you have drawn each principle. If your doctrine is biblical, you should be able to find support for each principle in the Scriptures. Also, others will be able to verify your conclusions by checking the appropriate biblical text.

PRINCIPLES FOR

INTERPRETING DOCTRINAL PASSAGES

How to Teach a Doctrine

Some teachers approach the teaching of a doctrine apologetically. This means they begin by defending their beliefs from attacks. Sometimes it is necessary to build a strong defence, especially when your students are filled with doubt or questions. However, most of the time you will begin like building a house. You begin with a foundation. I said ask, “Whom shall we teach doctrine?” (Is. 28:29). He answers His question with the process of learning doctrine, “precept upon precept, line upon line" (Is. 28:10). Teaching doctrine is explaining truth revealed by God in a systematic and understandable way. Teaching that does not include foundational doctrine is teaching without credibility or believability. You must begin where people are and build a foundation on which you can change their lives.

As you begin your doctrinal lesson, begin in a relevant context. Different teachers accomplish this goal in various ways. You may wish to suggest a problem people force or a decision they have difficulty making. Then note the key to making a proper decision is understanding the doctrinal issues surrounding the decision.

Another way to introduce a doctrine is to raise the "Why?" question over common practices in the Christian life and/or society at large. You may wish to ask a question like, "Why do Christians worship on Sundays instead of Saturday," to introduce a lesson on the resurrection of Christ. You may ask, "What percent of your money belongs to God," to introduce a lesson on God's ownership of all things. (The answer is ALL!) When you begin your session with a "Why?" question, the question should be designed to introduce the doctrinal study as the foundational reason why we express our convictions.

A third way to introduce a doctrinal lesson is to identify a contemporary issue which divides society. At present, issues such as abortion, homosexuality legalized gambling and various approaches to education and welfare reform fall into this category. A doctrinal study could be designed to identify biblical principles could help group members determine a Christian perspective on these issues.

As you prepare to present your doctrinal lesson, consider your students and remember the principle of progressive revelation. Progressive revelation describes the process how God revealed truth over 1600 years. The Old Testament foundation was established slowly before the more complete revelation of God was revealed in Christ, "Long ago God spoke many times and in many ways . . . now in these final days He has spoken to us through His Son" (Heb. 1:1,2 NLT). How does this principle of progression revelation relate to your class? First, if many of your students are unsaved or only new Christians, they need to know that God gave people everything they needed to know, and everyone had enough information about God to be saved. Second, they need to know that Christ is the final revelation of God, and in Him there is all we can know of God. Regardless of the maturity level of those you teach, there is rarely any value in dealing with speculative ideas. Therefore, minimize time spent in these areas.

Take time to consider the best way to present your doctrinal summary. Usually this will involve one of three approaches. One approach defines the doctrinal words and explains the implications of your statement. A good working definition of a doctrine will suggest its own teaching outline. A second approach is to begin with the "first mention" of a doctrine in Scripture. You begin your lesson where the Bible first introduces a topic. This is usually an embryonic statement that will have fuller explanation at another place in Scripture. Using this approach, other verses are consulted to draw out the fuller meaning of the text. In a third approach, you explain a doctrine in the context of its "full mention" in Scripture. There is usually a chapter or book which emphasizes that doctrine. When using this approach, the doctrinal lesson may not be much different from a chapter or book study described in a later chapter in this book.
