Love I Corinthians 13

Faith

Hebrews 11

Resurrection

I Corinthians 15

The Lord's Table I Corinthians 11

The Old Nature Romans 7

The Holy Spirit Romans 8

The Millennium Revelation 20

The Rapture

I Thessalonians 4

Take care to present a strong case for your doctrine. Several guidelines will help you as you prepare your presentation. First, be careful not to weaken good Scripture texts by using weak texts that stretch a point. Second, be certain to define technical terms clearly and accurately. It's all right to use doctrinal terms, just make sure people understand them. Do not spend too much time trying to explain away "hard" verses. Also, avoid the trap of making a minor doctrine the key to all others. Finally, place your doctrinal lesson in the larger context of the important issues of Christianity, i.e. salvation, knowing God, serving God and loving others.

Biblical doctrine should make a difference in our life. Therefore, when you teach a doctrine, suggest ways your doctrine can be applied to the lives of your students. A believing doctrine is a behaving doctrine. The logical application of a biblical doctrine can usually be uncovered quickly by asking a couple of key questions. First, "How is this doctrine most likely to be expressed in the Christian life?" Second, "What changes need to be made to bring my life in line with the teachings of this doctrine?"

As you ask yourself these questions, consider a special project that would help you and your group apply the doctrine. Encourage a specific application of the doctrine which can be accomplished by your students within thirty days. If you are teaching a lesson on the doctrine of Revelation, consider challenging your students to begin reading a chapter of the Bible each day for the next month. After studying the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, ask your students to yield themselves to be filled with the Holy Spirit. In response to a study on the attributes of God, ask your students to begin each day by singing a hymn or praise chorus to worship God by recognizing one of His attributes.

God inspired the Scriptures making them "profitable for doctrine." As we study and teach the Bible doctrinally, we can do so with the assurance we are studying and teaching the Bible in a manner consistent with God's purpose.

Tools for Doctrinal Studies

If you study and teach doctrine on a regular basis, you may want to invest in a few good theology books. These books will serve as reference tools in the process of developing and evaluating your doctrinal studies. While not exhaustive, the following list identifies several leading books in this field.

Lewis Sperry Chafer, Systematic Theology [2 Volumes] (Wheaton, Illinois: Victor Books, 1988). Walter A. Elwell, Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House). Millard J. Erickson, Christian Theology (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House). Herbert Lockyer, All the Doctrines of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House). Charles C. Ryrie, Basic Theology (Wheaton, Illinois: Victory Books).

Henry Clarence Thiessen, Lectures in Systematic Theology (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1951).

Elmer L. Towns, What the Faith is All About (Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers, Inc., 1983). A Bible doctrine book for lay people.

Elmer L. Towns, Theology for Today (Lynchburg, Virginia: Elmer L. Towns, 1994). A systematic theology for college and seminary students.
