The end in view in all devotional Bible study is the improvement of the individual's spiritual life by discovering in the Word the claims of God upon the believer and His instructions for living and enhancing the Christian life . . . The devotional method may be effectively executed by means of a careful study of words, verses, paragraphs, chapters,

books, Biblical characters, and Christ in a given portion. 7

You will use a variety of approaches to study and teach the Bible, but ultimately you will be most concerned with life application. As you use the various methods of Bible study and teaching to communicate biblical content, you will lay a foundation in the life of your students. When you have laid that foundation, the devotional approach to the Bible will help us guide students to apply their biblical knowledge to life. When this is done, the Holy Spirit who is our Teacher, will use the Scripture to effectively change our students' life. That is the ultimate goal of our Bible teaching ministry.

Why Study the Bible Devotionally?

There are several good reasons to use this effective approach to Bible study. One of the most significant relates to what Jesus called "the great commandment." When challenged by a Pharisee just a few days before His death to identify "the great commandment in the law" (Matt. 22:36), Jesus responded, "You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind. This is the first and great commandment" (Matt. 22:37, 38). A devotional understanding of the Scriptures helps us love God more and more as we grow in Him.

One of God's purposes in Scripture is to help us overcome sin. The Psalmist wrote, "How can a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed according to Your word. With my whole heart I have sought You; Oh, let me not wander from Your commandments! Your word I have hidden in my heart, that I might not sin against You" (Ps. 119:9-11). The person was right who wrote in the flyleaf of the Bible of Evangelist Dwight L. Moody, "This book will keep you from sin, or sin will keep you from this book." Studying the Bible devotionally will help us achieve victory over sin in our life.

A third reason for the devotional approach is found in the benefits of meditation. Meditating on the Scripture is one of the biblical keys to success in life. God told Joshua, "This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate in it day and night, that you may observe to do according to all that is written in it. For then you will make your way prosperous, and then you will have good success" (Josh. 1:8). Also, meditating on the Scriptures is one of the keys to personal fulfilment in life. The "blessed man" is described in the first psalm. "But his delight is in the law of the LORD, and in His law he meditates day and night" (Ps. 1:2).

As mentioned above, the goal of studying and teaching the Bible is to introduce significant change in the life of a student. More than other approaches to the Scriptures, this approach relates directly to the practical expression of our faith in living for Christ. Therefore, this approach will help us accomplish the work we are most committed to doing.

STEP ONE HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE DEVOTIONALLY

Before we can consistently TEACH the Bible to change the lives of our students, we must first learn to STUDY the Bible devotionally. Unlike other approaches to Bible study, the key to studying the Bible devotionally is not so much in methodology as in attitude. According to Merrill C. Tenney,
