Devotional study is not so much a technique as a spirit. It is the spirit of eagerness which seeks the mind of

God; it is the spirit of humility which listens readily to the voice of God; it is the spirit of adventure which pursues

earnestly the will of God; it is the spirit of adoration which rests in the presence of God. 8

One way you can help insure you are coming to the Scriptures with the right attitude is to begin our Bible study time with prayer. As you pray, focus upon who God is and express your appreciation to Him for revealing truth to His people (Deut. 29:29). Many teachers find it helpful to pray a prayer similar to that of the Psalmist as he approached the Scriptures. "Open my eyes, that I may see wondrous things from Your law" (Ps. 119:18).

As you begin studying the Bible devotionally, you should take time to choose a passage that lends itself to this approach. While the focus of all Scripture tells us about God, certain parts of Scripture tend, to be better suited to devotional study than others. The Psalms lend themselves to this approach because they were written passionately for God. The Psalmist is concerned about knowing God experimentally, so your students can seek God with that same passion. Also, extended passages such as the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5-7) or the Upper Room Discourse (John 13-18) lend themselves to application. Normally, you will study shorter passages when approaching the Bible devotionally.

Next, be sure to give yourself time. One pastor commented he took an extended time Monday to study and apply devotionally the passage he would preach next Sunday. He said it was more important to feel the Lord speak to him through the passage before he prepared a sermon to speak to others.

Most will want to read the passage several times, perhaps emphasizing different verses and/or words during each reading. Also, you may wish to commit parts of the passage to memory so you can meditate on them. When you commit the Scriptures to memory, you can meditate on them even outside of your study time. The four best times of the day to meditate on Scriptures you have memorized are (1) when you find yourself sitting and waiting, (2) when you commute from place to place, (3) when you go to bed each evening and (4) when you wake up each morning (Deut. 6:7). Memorizing and meditating on a verse.

8 STEPS TO APPLICATION

TRUTHS TO BELIEVE

ACTIONS TO IMITATE
