It is not necessarily true, "Every promise in the Book is mine, every chapter, every verse, every line." While all Scripture has principles to guide our lives, we cannot claim every promise, because some promises do not apply to us. When can we claim a Bible promise?

shall set upon thee to hurt thee" (Acts 18:9,10).

(Prov. 3:6).

of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given you" (Joshua 1:3).

(James 4:8).

doesn't answer your prayers is, "Ye have not because ye ask not" (James 4:2). 7. It is for you, if you know God's principle that is taught in the passage and you apply it to your time and culture.

As you continue your devotion study, look for things in this passage which address special concerns in the Christian life. Once again, several questions can guide us in this aspect of our study. Is there an example to follow? Is there an error to avoid? Is there a responsibility to fulfil? Is there a promise to claim? Is there a prayer to pray? As you list the answers to these questions, you are identifying specific applications which can be made to life.

It is important to be discerning in applying the Scriptures devotionally to your life. If you have not been careful in your study of the Scriptures, you may find yourself attempting to apply something which violates a biblical principle or may not be the teaching of that passage. First, distinguish between what the Bible describes and what it dictates. David's marriage to eight wives is descriptive. You should not follow his practice, the Bible describes both the positive examples and negative deeds of God's people. The Scriptures dictate monogamy rather than polygamy as the pattern for a healthy marriage. Next, specific commands to individuals do not necessarily apply to everyone. Jesus command to "tarry in Jerusalem" does not mean every Christian should go to the Holy Land to seek God's power and the filling of the Holy Spirit. Third, distinguish between cultural expressions and eternal principles. The Nazarite Vow is a cultural expression. The Nazarite Vow was made under the law in the Old Testament for certain purposes. The eternal principle is for people to make an outward commitment to God when they want to make an inward decision to follow Him. Men who want to be more committed to God do not need to grow beards or long hair, today as did the Nazarite. In the further place, be sure of the meaning of the context of and conditions associated with a promise before claiming it in your life. Is the promise universal or limited in scope? Is the promise personal or applicable to all? Is the promise conditional or unconditional? Is the promise for us or for people of another time?

Some Christians use a devotional approach to Bible study as an excuse to find deeper truths and hidden meanings in a passage. Someone once said of a devotional preacher, "He can find hidden things in the Bible that God never put there." As we look for deeper truths and hidden meanings in a passage, you should be conservative and exercise caution. That does not mean there are no deeper truths to explore. On the contrary, sometimes the meaning of names shed light on the character of people. There may also be significance attached to the use of certain numbers in the Bible. Throughout the Scriptures, various types are suggested in people and events which illustrate truths concerning Christ, the church and/or the Christian life. Also, some things mentioned in Scripture are described as symbols or mysteries of some other deeper truth. The safe approach in these areas is to let the Scriptures interpret themselves in the light of other Scripture.
