INTERPRETING DEVOTIONAL STUDY

applications.

written to guide our lives.

lives.

How to Teach the Bible Devotionally

Just as attitude is important in studying the Bible devotionally, so our attitude is of imperative when teaching the Bible devotionally. Our goal is to lead students deeper in their love for and commitment to God. The old farmer said his Christianity was better "felt" than "telt." Teachers who will be effective in the devotional approach to Bible teaching will find value in being transparent with others. They must share their devotional life with their students.

In using this approach, begin with a commitment to teach the Bible devotionally, rather than trying to cram the Bible into a devotional thought. Avoid taking a phrase from the Bible because of its wording and using it in a different sense than it was intended. Also, avoid imposing a meaning on the Scriptures that was never intended. A third thing to avoid is treating the Scriptures as an allegory (like a fairy tale) and emphasizing a speculated message over the clear teaching of Scripture.

How you introduce a devotional Bible study will either stimulate interest or discourage further investigation. Therefore, begin a devotional lesson by talking about something relevant to their Christian life. Raise issues of worship before studying a worship Psalm. Raise the issue of the students' relationship to others, before the study of a passage that discusses our relationship with God and others.

Usually, you begin your study by outlining a passage, so begin your teaching by doing the same thing. Then show your pupils the context of the passage. Next, focus on a key character in the passage. Point out to your students the key verse in this passage. Tell them why the verse is a key verse and what it means to your life. Next point out the significant words in this passage. Have them find the words and circle them in their Bibles.

As you teach this lesson, lead your students to discover special applications that are relevant to their Christian life. Help them find the answers to important questions. Point out examples to follow? Point out a responsibility to fulfil. Point out a promise to claim. Finally, focus on a prayer to pray. Then pray it with them.

As you continue to guide students in their study, discuss ways the principles can be applied by the students to their lives. Ask which principle they would rate as most important in their life right now. Then ask them how this principle would improve the quality of their Christian life. Guide them to identify and state the steps they could take to implement this principle this week. Once those steps have been identified, you must challenge them to begin taking those steps this week.

Conclude your devotional lesson by expressing your devotion to God. There are several ways to do this. Some may share a testimony of what God has done in their life. Some may make a public vow. Their promise grows out of the lesson. Some may want to closing the lesson in quiet meditation. Some may choose to express their commitment to pray privately or quietly, in a hymn or praise chorus. Some may be more comfortable praying together with others about the things they are planning to implement in their life. A wise teacher will vary these approaches periodically as he or she teaches the Bible devotionally.

On some occasions, a teacher might want to teach the Bible devotionally by modelling their own devotional study. One college Bible teacher concerned his students were beginning to treat the Bible as just another textbook, took a class to work through a passage of Scripture. The teacher helped students uncover life-changing truths from the Scriptures for themselves. On another occasion, a pastor knew several seminary students were having difficulty with maintaining a personal time alone with God each day. When the pastor spoke in seminary chapel, he explained how his personal devotions for that day related to his chapel message of that day. He showed the students how to do it so they could be encouraged to do the same thing in their own life. Both Jesus and Paul used this approach to teach others some important principles of the Christian life.

Tools for Devotional Studies

Those teachers committed to studying and teaching the Bible devotionally on a regular basis may want to develop a good library to assist them in their study. These books will serve as reference tools in the process of developing and evaluating your own devotional studies. There are many authors and publishers of devotional commentaries and books on the Christian life. While not exhaustive, the following list identifies several leading books in this field.

Our Daily Bread (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Radio Bible Class)

Oswald Chambers, My Utmost for His Highest (New York: Dodd, Mead & Company). Matthew Henry, Commentary on the Whole Bible (Old Tappan, New Jersey: Fleming H. Revell Company). H. A. Ironside, In the Heavenlies (Neptune, New Jersey: Loizeaux Brothers, Inc.). [Ironside wrote devotional commentaries on many biblical books although his commentary on the Epistle to the Ephesians may be the best known.] Andrew Murray, Absolute Surrender [Murray wrote many other books on the Christian life which the teacher using the devotional method might find helpful.]

Charles Haddon Spurgeon, The Treasury of David (Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, Inc., Publishers). Elmer L. Towns, Understanding the Deeper Life: A Guide to Christian Experience (Old Tappan, New Jersey: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1988).

A. W. Tozer, The Knowledge of the Holy (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1961). W. E. Vine, Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words (Old Tappan, New Jersey: Fleming H. Revell Company).
