A traveller who is beaten and robbed by thieves is helped by a stranger. A farmer casting seed in rocky soil. A woman misplacing a coin and later finding it. A sheep that wanders off into danger but is later found by the shepherd. At different times, Jesus used each of these common stories to teach people truths about God and His work in our lives. The stories He built around these common everyday things in life are called parables.

One day, an expert in Jewish law challenged Jesus with the question, "Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" (Luke 10:25). Knowing He was being set up, Jesus asked the expert a question of his own, "What is written in the law? How readest thou?" (Luke 10:26). The man responded with a widely accepted summary statement of the law. "You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself" (Luke 10:27). Both Jesus and His challenger found agreement in the statement, but to each it meant something different. Jesus knew the law was written to show us how far short we fall of God's standard of righteousness. The challenger viewed the law as a tool to demonstrate just how righteous he was. One more question was all it took to demonstrate just how far apart these two views were. Jesus asked, "And who is my neighbor?" (Luke 10:29).

In response to that question Jesus told what has become His best known parable, the Good Samaritan. It is the story of a traveller who is robbed, beaten and left to die. Two religious leaders who might be expected to help him saw the man in need but passed by. In contrast, a Samaritan, a member of a race which normally had nothing to do with the Jews, saw the man in need but took time to care for him. When the Samaritan had to move on before the man was completely recovered, he paid someone else to continue caring for the man who had been left to die. Jesus never answered the challenger's question, but by the end of the story the answer was evident to everyone listening.

Jesus used parables throughout His teaching ministry to communicate significant truths in a simple way. "All these things Jesus spoke to the multitude in parables; and without a parable He did not speak to them, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying: 'I will open My mouth in parables; I will utter things kept secret from the foundation of the world'" (Matt. 13:34, 35).

What is a Parable?

At its very core, a parable is simply a story. It is a drama recording of actions that leads to a conclusion. It describes characters who interact with one another or have significant things to say. The parables of Jesus are true to life, but they were not narratives of actual events. They were not myths about flying horses or talking objects in nature. Neither are they necessarily based on specific historical events. The story may not have actually happened as told, but the story was realistic enough. It may well have happened just as they were described. While story telling has been a form of entertainment for generations, the primary focus of biblical parables is the teaching of some spiritual truth. These truths are drawn from the similarities between events in the story and life in general. Parables are one of the means God has chosen to reveal Himself and His truth to us in both the Old and New Testaments.

Someone has described a miracle as the truth of God in works. In a different sense, a parable may be described as the truth of God in words. While Jesus often used miracles to draw attention to some specific principle He was trying to teach, when using parables He chose not to include any miraculous acts. Also, just as miracles were effective in drawing large crowds to Jesus, so the people gathered to hear Jesus teach in parables. Parables became one of His most popular forms of teaching.

In parables, the infinite and unlimited God condescended to convey infinite truth to finite and limited people in a very finite and limited way. These parables included familiar events, places, things and different types of people. This teaching tool may well have been the best available tool that Jesus used in his teaching methods. Despite their effectiveness in both the Old Testament and during the ministry of Jesus, extended parables were not widely used after the death of Christ. Perhaps the parables of Jesus set such a high standard that other teachers in the succeeding ages since have been reluctant to place their own stories along side His.

The word "parable" is derived from the Greek word parabole which is a compound of two other words. The Greek preposition para means beside. The Greek verb bole means to cast or throw down. The word parable literally means to place one thing by the side of another. These stories were designed to encourage the application of truth from parallel observation. Those who heard Jesus teach in parables were motivated to learn more. They came to Jesus and asked, "Explain this parable to us" (Matt. 15:15). Jesus used parables to apply important spiritual truth to life. He taught His disciples, "Now learn this parable from the fig tree . . ." (Matt. 24:32). After making His point in the Parable of the Good Samaritan, Jesus challenged His would-be challenger, "Go and do likewise" (Luke 10:37).

An Earthly Story with a Heavenly Meaning

Many have attempted to define parables in a popular manner that makes it easier for people to remember. They have been called "an outward symbol of an inward reality." A more technical description suggests a parable is "a metaphysical figure that teaches spiritual truth by contrast or similarity." Perhaps the definition most people find easiest to remember is that which encourages us to think of a parable as "an earthly story with a heavenly meaning."

Why Study the Parables?

Jesus, the Master Teacher, used parables widely and effectively in His teaching ministry. That fact alone should motivate us both use this method to teach our stories and to teach the stories of Jesus. Even if Jesus had not effectively used parables in His ministry, there would still be valid reasons why we should teach the parables. Many of these reasons may have motivated Jesus Himself in choosing these effective methods.

One good reason for teaching the parables is enduring quality that they possess. Cultures and times have changed significantly in the past twenty centuries, yet these stories Jesus told in First Century Israel continue to be relevant in American towns and cities today. These stories transcend cultures because they are about people. While the trappings of our culture change from generation to generation, people remain essentially the same.

Further, people tend to remember stories better than abstract ideas or propositional truth. This is why pastors use illustrations in their sermons. While ministers are primarily concerned with teaching a biblical principle, they understand this is often best communicated when illustrated with stories. When Jesus was asked, "Why do You speak to them in parables?" (Matt. 13:10), Jesus gave an application and concluded with the words, "Therefore I speak to them in parables" (Matt. 13:13). The word "therefore" implies Jesus' plain language had been ineffective in communicating truth to the people. Parables helped Him overcome this problem.

Parables were also effective in motivating people to learn. People like to learn when teachers make learning interesting to people. Jesus used parables to make new truth interesting to His hearers. In doing so, He applied a principle that is widely applied today in the entertainment industry. People will read a novel, listen to a song, or watch a movie or video because they are interesting, but in the process they will also learn information and adopt the values that the author communicates through that media. George Bernard Shaw once boasted he could teach people anything so long as he kept them laughing. By this he meant that he could communicate values people would normally reject and they would accept them if his stories maintained a high quality of entertainment.

Parables were also effective in keeping attention. There were times when people would interrupt Jesus in the midst of a sermon if they disagreed with his conclusions. The apostles often found themselves "disputing" in the synagogues as they attempted to explain the gospel to those gathered. But there is no recorded instance of anyone interrupting a parable. A good story told by a good storyteller would both arrest and hold the attention of the hearers. Jesus told the best stories in His parables and He taught them well.

Parables were also an effective tool to help people gain and remember significant truth. These stories force people to think through the principle. In doing so, the principle becomes a part of who they are. The adventure of discovery is part of the learning process itself. When Jesus told parables, He used a teaching method that insured the lesson would be remembered longer.

As effective as parables are in teaching truth, they are also effective tools to hide truth from those who are resistant. "Why do You speak to them in parables?" Jesus was asked (Matt. 13:10). One reason was to conceal truth from the disinterested or those in rebellion against Him. "Because it has been given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given" (Matt. 13:11). Jesus used parables to teach the teachable and hide truth from those who hardened their hearts to His message.
