PARABLE

Throughout the years, students of parables have taken great liberty in interpreting the "hidden meanings" in these simple stories. In the fourth century, Augustine was doing no more than his contemporaries when he "discovered" deep theological truth in the Parable of the Good Samaritan. As the man went "down from Jerusalem", he became a vivid picture of Adam leaving the presence of God in the garden. Jericho became the city of mortality. The Devil himself became part of the drama as thieves appeared on the scene. The beating the man received was a picture of the Adam being persuaded to sin. The failure of a priest and Levite to assist demonstrated the inability of the Old Testament to assist man in his sinful state. The binding of wounds marked the restraint of sin. The oil was a symbol of good hope. Wine represented a fervent spirit. The beast upon which the injured man was laid was the flesh of Christ. The inn became the church. The next day was said to refer to a time "after the resurrection." While much Augustine had to say may have been doctrinally sound and edifying to those who heard him preach, it is doubtful if Jesus had all that in mind when He first told the story.

When interpreting parables, it is important to discover the one central truth that the parable is designed to teach and base our interpretation on that fundamental principle. Usually, the context points to the interpretation. The Parable of the Good Samaritan was told in response to a question. "Who is my neighbor?" (Luke 10:29). Jesus told this parable to answer that question. Therefore, our interpretation of this parable should focus on His answer. Care needs to be taken to interpret each part of the parable that needs to be explained in harmony with that answer.

Often an important step in discovering the primary focus of the parable is to consider how much of the parable is interpreted by Jesus Himself. On various occasions, Jesus explained His own stories in greater detail, often in response to questions from His disciples concerning the meaning of the parable. In the case of the Parable of the Good Samaritan, both the introduction and conclusion of the story suggest the primary interpretation which should be sought. Jesus concluded the story by asking the question, "So which of these three do you think was neighbor to him who fell among the thieves?" (Luke 10:36). That conclusion addresses the same subject raised by the lawyer which prompted the story.

NOT Who is my neighbor?

But Am I neighborly?

In the event there is no clear interpretation given in Scripture, an attempt should be made to determine if there are other clues in the biblical context which might suggest the emphasis of the parable. To do this, you may need to research details about the customs and practices of that time and other matters raised in the story. When Jesus chose not to interpret His parables further, it was probably because so clearly understood what He said. When He told the Parable of the Sower and the Seed, everyone who heard it could picture the farmer scattering seed across his fields. Today, a prairie farmer may have difficulty understanding why that farmer got such a low percentage of return on his seed because he thinks of sowing seed using modern technology which is more efficient than the Palestinian method of the first century. It is important to interpret parables in the historic context in which they were told, rather than impose our contemporary cultural models.

Balance is an important concept when it comes to interpreting parables. Many teachers err by interpreting too much of the parable, or by not interpreting enough of the story. As you study parables, work hard to avoid both of these extremes. First, don't make the parable walk on all fours. It is not necessary to force an interpretation of the parable on every point of the story. When Jesus said, "Consider the lilies of the field" (Matt. 6:28), He was not suggesting there were deeper truths hidden in each petal of each flower. Neither was there any apparent attempt to teach a spiritual lesson from the soil types in which lilies are most likely to grow. These details are like the drapery in a room, which gives background. Drapery is seldom ever the focus of a room. When we look at the way Jesus Himself interpreted the parables, it is clear that we should avoid this extreme of insisting on every aspect of the parable being interpreted for its "deeper meaning." Interpreting every point of a parable is like trying to make every part of a ball touch every part of a flat plane. When you do that, a ball is no longer a ball. Likewise, when we force every point of a parable, we are no longer have a parable. According to Habershon, who was considered an authority on parables, "Every comparison must halt somewhere."

The second extreme to avoid in this matter is that of supposing that only the broadest issues of the parable should be interpreted. Sometimes, the context of a parable makes it clear that certain details are significant in the intended message. The Parable of the Sower and the Seed was apparently intended to tell us more than the basic message that the gospel seed should be sown widely in the world. Jesus Himself explained to His disciples the significance of four different types of soil in which the seed was sown. Jesus was suggesting there was truth to be learned in those details. In our zeal to avoid the extreme of finding hidden truth where truth was never hidden, let's be careful not to over react and neglect the truth that has been included. In most cases, how much of the parable should be interpreted becomes clear as we consider the context carefully.

Ultimately, each parable has its own lesson that is based on the original intent of the Lord in telling the story. This meaning will be reinforced by the similarity between the story and the interpretation. But this similarity must be real, not imaginary. According to Habershon, "Interpretation is limited to the original intent of Jesus. Application is not limited, it tells us how God works in our life, to express emotions in response to His truth, and to decide to obey His principles."

"All the Bible is for all of us, but it is not all about us."

- Graham Scroggie

There is only one interpretation to each parable, however, that interpretation may have many applications in different settings. The mature student knows the difference between application and interpretation.

Applications are many, principles are few;

Applications may change, but principles never do.

Perhaps one additional caution should be noted before concluding our discussion of this approach to Bible study. Be careful of the doctrinal use of parables. In the past, some biblical interpreters have made the mistake of using parables to teach new doctrine. It is unwise to form doctrinal conclusions on the basis of apparent implications suggested in a parable. It is important that doctrines look to the clear teaching of Scriptures such as the epistles or recorded sermons of Jesus. While a parable may be consistent with doctrine, don't make it the basis for doctrine. It is always best to draw doctrinal principles from the direct teaching of Scriptures. If a parable is referred to in a doctrinal study, it should not be considered as more than an illustration of the clear teaching of Scripture elsewhere.
