individual, including how they lived out their purpose?

the parable.

secondary aspects.

interpretation or application.

predictions that are made elsewhere in Scripture.

How to Teach a Parable

While there are many different ways to teach biblical truth, there is one teaching method which lends itself particularly well to the teaching of parables. Teachers who teach parables often will want to master the art of story telling. From generation to generation, culture to culture, deep abiding truths have been taught through stories that capture the imagination of the listener. Parables themselves are good examples of the powerful effect a good story can have on others.

When telling the stories of Jesus, care should be taken to capture the interest of your students quickly and maintain it throughout the story. While the stories of Jesus are interesting enough in themselves, many are so well known that people assume they already know all there is to know about the story. As soon as they begin to hear you talk about a man beat up on the road to Jerusalem, they know where you are going and may begin to tune you out. That's why it is important to remember the Disney principle of story telling.

Walt Disney built an entertainment empire around the telling of stories. Many of the Disney company's most significant hits were stories which had been told for years before Disney began telling them. So how did Disney build the world's largest entertainment company with a bunch of old and familiar stories. The secret was creativity.

One of Disney's first great films was the story of Snow White. While many had told the story before, no one had ever done it before with animation. Telling "the same old story" in a new and different way has captured the imaginations of younger generations. Today, leading musicians, actors and actresses count it a privilege to be the voice behind a cartoon caricature in a Disney feature film, and families line up to what the movie on the big screen or purchase the video as soon as it is released.

When teaching a parable, take time to retell the story in a creative setting or from a creative perspective. What would a Good Samaritan look like in your community? How would the lost sheep helplessly separated from the rest of the flock describe his rescue by a Good Shepherd? If coins could talk, how would the lost coin describe the house cleaning by a frantic woman from his perspective from under a couch?

Sometimes, creativity can be achieved through costumes and/or drama in recounting the facts of a story. As part of a lesson on the Parable of the Prodigal Son, a teacher might arrange for others to re-enact the story to help people better visualize what is taking place. Sometimes the study group itself might prepare a drama based on a parable to be part of a special program at a local nursing home. Another teacher might want to interview the primary character describe in a parable.

One problem with creativity is that it is only creative when it is fresh. No matter how well your approach to a story works this week, it will loose its effectiveness quickly if it is the only approach you use. Variety is the key to maintaining your creativity in teaching. By using different approaches to tell different stories each week, you can continue to capture the interest of your students week after week.

While creativity will help you communicate the facts of the story in an entertaining way, as a teacher you are interested in doing more than simply sharing content. Your ultimate aim is to change lives. This can only be done as you take time to apply the story to the life experience of those you teach. As you tell the story, be sure to tell what it means. Different teachers do this in different ways. Some pause momentarily at various points in the story to emphasize a specific principle that needs to be learned by the students. Others wait to the end of the story to emphasize several important principles that can be drawn out of the story. The means by which you help those you are teaching identify the specific truths hidden in the parable will depend upon the approach you feel most comfortable with and that which your students respond to best.

Once the principles have been communicated, help your students make specific application in their life by adopting an appropriate project. For some Bible study groups, it would be appropriate for a study of the Parable of the Good Samaritan to conclude with a challenge to prepare Christmas gift baskets for families of prisoners. Another group might find value calling those who have been absent from church in recent weeks in response to their study of the Parable of the Lost Sheep. In teaching the parables, as in all Bible study, it is important that we help our students become more than hearers only, but also doers of the Word of God.

Tools for Studies in the Parables

If you study and teach parables on a regular basis, you may want to invest in a few good books on the parables. These books will serve as reference tools in the process of your own studies of the stories of Jesus. While not exhaustive, the following list identifies several leading books in this field:

William Barclay, And Jesus Said: A Handbook on the Parables of Christ. A. B. Bruce, The Parabolic Teaching of Christ: A Systematic and Critical Study of the Parables of Our Lord.

Marcus Dods, The Parables of Our Lord.

G. H. Lang, Pictures and Parables: Studies in the Parabolic teaching of Holy Scripture. Herbert Lockyer, All the Parables of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing Company).

G. Campbell Morgan, The Parables and Metaphors of Our Lord.
