STUDYING A CHAPTER OR BOOK FROM THE BIBLE

"Where are my keys?" the man called out as he frantically looked in several of the usual places he might have left them. "I can't find them and I'm going to be late for work!" he exclaimed in frustration.

"Have you checked your coat pocket?" his wife asked trying to be helpful.

"Oh," was the simple response after he thrust his hand into his pocket and felt the collection of keys.

Sometimes, in our zeal to find things, we end up looking everywhere but the obvious places. That happens with keys, shoes, books, even Bible study. While there are many ways to study the Bible, we need to be careful not to avoid studying our Bible in the most obvious way. According to William Evans,

THE BEST WAY TO STUDY THE BIBLE

The best method of the study of any organism is that which gives due prominence to the structure of that

organism. The Bible is a living organism of truth; it has in it the life of the living God and is able (as no

other book is) to impart spiritual life to the soul of man. The Bible was made bookwise - one book at a

time, according as the need for the truth, historical, prophetical or ethical, as set forth therein, arose. It

would seem reasonable, therefore, to assume that the book-method of Bible study should yield the best

results from time and labor spent in an endeavor to "search the Scriptures." 9

As a young man beginning his pastoral ministry, Dr. W. A. Criswell was invited to pastor an older church and follow one of the most famous pastors of his day. Sensing something of the significance of the challenge he was facing, Criswell talked with other pastors and asked them for their advice as he began this new phase of his ministry. Someone advised him his best course would be to begin in Genesis and preach through the Bible over a period of many years. As Criswell followed this advise, he found people were hungry to study the Scriptures. By the time he resigned from the pulpit of First Baptist Church in Dallas, Texas, that church had become the largest Southern Baptist Church in America. His success in teaching the Bible book by book and chapter by chapter has motivated many other pastors to adopt his example as their primary preaching style. Many of these men are also experiencing steady long-term growth in their ministries. People are still hungry to study the Scriptures.

Why Study the Bible by Chapter and Book?

There are several good reasons to study and teach the Bible by book and chapter by chapter. For many Christians, this is the most obvious way to read and study the Scriptures. They plan their daily devotions around the unspoken principle, "A chapter a day keeps the devil away." While it is good to get into the habit of Bible study, you need other reasons to keep you motivated.

As noted above, one good reason for studying the Bible by books is that the Bible was written in books. Each of the sixty-six books of the Bible has a particular emphasis and/or theme. When the prophet first preached his sermons or an apostle first wrote a letter, they were trying to communicate a specific thought or theme. These themes are best understood in the context of the whole content of the book. When we study the Bible by book, we learn the major lessons of the Scripture in the manner that the human authors of Scripture intended to teach them.

Though added some time after the Scriptures were complete, chapters tend to break larger books down into more manageable sections for Bible study. The student of Isaiah might be overwhelmed trying to study through the entire book, but can be challenged to study chapter six in greater detail. When Isaiah saw the Lord and received a commission to preach and write. In the Old Testament, the average chapter is just under twenty-five verses long. That compares to just over thirty verses in length in the New Testament. While the student of the Scriptures might want to break some longer chapters into smaller units (i.e., Psalm 119), most find the average chapter about the right length for a challenging Bible study.

Taking a chapter approach to Bible study is not just practical, it is also a logical way to learning the principle teachings of the Scriptures. Several key chapters of the Bible actually summarize key thoughts or doctrines of the Bible. One effective approach to the doctrinal study of the Scriptures involves a thorough study of these key passages. The following chart identifies a few of those chapters and the doctrines and/or themes they address.

STUDYING KEY THEMES IN KEY CHAPTERS

The Creation of the World in Genesis 1

The Fall of Humanity in Genesis 3

The Ethical Code of the Law in Exodus 20

The Lord as Our Shepherd in Psalm 23

The Suffering Saviour in Isaiah 53

The New Birth in John 3

The Founding of the Church in Acts 2

The Nature of Love in 1 Corinthians 13

The Doctrine of the Resurrection in 1 Corinthians 15

The Nature of Faith in Hebrews 11

The Kingdom of Christ in Revelation 20

The study of the Bible by book and chapter provide a context in which the various details or verses of Scripture can be better understood. Many Christians have an understanding of various isolated passages in the Scripture, but have never learned how they fit together. When we study the Bible book by book, we begin to understand the broader context of each book. As an illustration most everyone knows John 3:16, but do they know John's purpose was to demonstrate the deifying Christ so people could believe and live, (John 20:31). When a book approach is coupled with the study of the Scriptures chapter by chapter, the finer details of Scripture are understood in their biblical context.

OWNING A BOOK

STEP ONE HOW TO STUDY A BOOK AND CHAPTER OF THE BIB

As we consider studying the Scriptures by book and chapter, the logical place to begin is by choosing and surveying a specific biblical book. This is sometimes called the synthetic approach to Bible study described by Merrill C. Tenney.

The interpretation of a book in its totality by such a process of repeated reading and final integration of

results is called the synthetic method. The word synthetic is derived from the Greek preposition syn, which

means together, and the verbal root the, which means to put, so that the resultant meaning is "a putting

together." Synthetic is the opposite of analytic, which means "a taking apart." The synthetic method

ignores detail, and treats only of the interpretation of a document as a whole.10

While any of the sixty-six books of the Bible can be studied synthetically, the size of a biblical book is a practical consideration, especially for those who are studying the Bible for the first time. The student is likely to encounter unnecessary difficulty who attempts to learn this method of Bible study by using a book of the Pentateuch, one of the major prophets, a gospel or one of the longer New Testament epistles in his or her first attempt at Bible study. A better approach is to choose one of the smaller books in Scripture for the first few attempts while learning this method, then later apply the method to larger books when you are more familiar with this approach. The following chart identifies some of the shorter books in the Bible which should be considered as you begin studying the Bible book by book.

THE SHORTER BOOKS OF THE BIBLE

Ruth Joel Jonah

Haggai Habakkuk Zephaniah

Malachi Philippians Colossians

2 Thessalonians 2 Timothy Titus

2 Peter

The shortest books of the Bible are also called the One Chapter books. The New Testament one-
