ONE CHAPTER BOOKS OF THE BIBLE

Obadiah Philemon 2 John

3 John Jude

As you begin studying one of these books, attempt to determine the probable historical context. Before you can understand and apply the Bible to your life, it is important to know how those who first heard it would have understood its message. To learn more about the historical context of the book, there are several questions you can ask. Begin with questions about the author of the book. Who wrote this book? What is known about this author? Then ask about the book itself. Why was this book written? How does the original purpose of this book relate to my life today? Next ask about those who first read this book. To whom was this book originally written? What similarities do I share with the original recipients of the book? How are we different? You may want to consider the uniqueness of your book with others written by the same author or about the same time. How does this book relate to other books by this author? How does it relate to other books written about this time? Finally, consider the context of the times in which this book was produced. When was this book written? What significant things were happening in the world at the time when this book was originally written?

FROM ONE WORD TO KNOW ALL THE WORD

Understand each word in a verse.

Relate the verse in its paragraph.

See how the paragraph fits into the chapter.

Connect chapter to understand a book.

Compare books to group the whole Bible.

Set aside time to read the book through without interruption. You may have to put your telephone on the answering machine to minimize the chance of interruption. Some people choose to leave their house and read their Bible in a quiet neighborhood park. Reading through the book this way will help you get a feel for the basic structure of the book.

Actually, you will want to do this several times. In your first reading, look for the central theme of the book and how the author develops it. Next, look for key words and circle them in your Bible. Look for a key verse or pivotal passage in the book. You might want to circle them. In your next reading, look for ways the central theme is emphasized in the book. In another reading, begin developing a summary outline of the book. Give each chapter a brief title that summarizes its main message. In subsequent readings, expand your book outline. You may want to write a three to five word summary of each paragraph, some even write these in their Bible at the heading of a chapter.

Reading through a book of the Bible four or five times as part of your Bible study may seem like an ambitious undertaking, but the benefits are far greater than the work involved. Before preaching from any chapter in the New Testament, G. Campbell Morgan read the entire book from which that chapter was taken forty times, in Greek. As a result, he earned the reputation of being one of the outstanding Bible teachers of his day. As you read your book several times, you may want to read from various translations. This will help you approach each reading fresh as each translation expresses the message in a slightly different manner. Also, reading your book through once each day for seven days will produce better results than reading it though seven consecutive times on one day.

By the time you have read through the book several times, you should have a fairly clear understanding of the book. Because you want to be both hearers and doers of the word, the next step involves comparing the theme of the book to our life. Does the book suggest specific actions to take? Does the book suggest a specific value or attitude to adopt? How does this book expand my understanding of God and the Christian life?

Once you have completed your study of a book, you may want to follow it up with a series of chapter studies to gain a better understanding of each chapter in the context of the broader message of the book. There are three additional steps involved in completing a chapter study.

The first step involves observing the details of the chapter being studied. Once again, asking the right questions is the key to gaining the right answers in your pursuit of a better understanding of the Scriptures. Use the following dozen questions to guide you to a better understanding of each chapter. (1) Who are the prominent characters in this chapter? (2) How are these characters related to each other? (3) What is the major event in this chapter? (4) How is this event related to other minor events mentioned? (5) When do the events of this chapter take place? (6) What was happening in the world when these things happened? (7) What events were taking place just before and/or after the events described in this chapter? (8) Where do these events take place? List each place mentioned and find them in a good Bible atlas. (9) Why does the writer express himself as he does in this chapter? (10) What motives lie behind the actions taken in this chapter? (11) How does the author describe the people, places and events in this chapter? (12) What significance is there in the way these things are described?

The next step involves determining the meaning of the chapter. To do this, analyze the basic unit of writing in most languages, you will analyze each paragraph in the chapter. To gain a good understanding of the chapter, write a three to five word summary of each paragraph unit within the chapter. Then make a list of words you do not understand. Look up each of these words in a Bible dictionary. To insure you have a good understanding of the chapter's contents, write a paraphrase of the chapter in your own words that clearly communicates the meaning of the chapter.

The ultimate goal of Bible study is a changed life. So, determine how the principles of this chapter can be best applied to your life. The following five questions may help guide you as you look for an appropriate application of this chapter to your life. (1) Is there an example to follow? (2) Is there a command to obey? (3) Is there a promise to claim? (4) Is there a prayer to pray? (5) Is there an error to avoid?

PRINCIPLES FOR STUDYING A CHAPTER

Determine if a chapter is historical, poetic, didactic, a sermon, biography, etc.

chapter?

point.

can they be applied to your life.

of Christ, because no Scripture is of "private interpretation," that will teach variant meanings.

How to Teach the Bible By Chapter and Book

When the focus of a Bible study session is a chapter or book of the Bible, remember your students must group the message of the book or chapter before they can apply it to their lives. When surveyed, about half of those involved in Bible study groups said they preferred doing a book study in their Bible study group. Most were not simply interested in expanding their biblical knowledge, rather, they wanted to study the Bible itself to apply it to their lives. Therefore, when we teach a chapter or book of the Bible, it is important to demonstrate how these ancient writings guide us today.

Begin your Bible study session by introducing your chapter or book study by drawing attention to the theme of the chapter or book. You may want to ask an opinion question which leads group members to express their own views about the theme. On another occasion, introduce a quote by a prominent person or from a popular song that deals with the theme. Then ask group members to respond to that quote. Some Bible teachers prefer to write the word that describes the theme on the chalkboard and ask group members what they think about when they see or hear that word used.

TEACHING THE BIBLE BY BOOKS

The Romance of Redemption . . . Ruth

The Providence of God in the Affairs of people . . . Esther

The Struggles of a Racist Prophet . . . Jonah

The Acts of the Holy Spirit . . . Acts

Christ is Better . . . Hebrews

Next, introduce the book being studied in the context of the theme, as illustrated in the chart above. Then lead your students through your book outline focusing on how the author develops that theme. Your goal in approaching the book this way is to help your students begin to recognize the message of the book for itself. When you are teaching a chapter, you will want to follow a similar procedure. As you lead the class discussion, encourage group members to suggest ways the author develops that theme in the chapter (see Studying Key Themes in Key Chapters chart earlier in this chapter).

As you teach this lesson, list the basic principles emphasized in the book or chapter being studied. Is there an example to follow? Is there a command to obey? Is there a promise to claim? Is there a prayer to pray? Is there an error to avoid?

Your goal in teaching the Bible is to lead your students to apply the Bible. Ask group members to identify specific steps they can take this week to apply one principle to their life. Everyone who has made a New Year's resolution or decided to lose weight knows intentions are not good enough on their own. People don't do what is expected; they do what is inspected. Therefore, have your Bible study group members share these steps with other group members who will hold them accountable for their actions this week.

Often, a book study is followed by a series of chapter studies from the same book in Bible based curricula. Also, many teachers who teach a chapter study do so as part of an extended series taking students through a biblical book. If your study is part of a similar series, be sure to assign a chapter or book to be read by group members in preparation for the next group Bible study session. This will make it that much easier for you as you continue teaching the Bible book by book and chapter by chapter.

Tools for Book and Chapter Studies

If you study and teach the Bible by book and chapter on a regular basis, you may want to invest in a few good books on biblical introduction and some commentaries. These books will serve as reference tools in the process of developing your own book and chapter studies. While not exhaustive, the following list identifies several leading non-technical books in this field.

H. A. Ironside, Various Commentaries (Neptune, New Jersey: Loizeaux Brothers). William Sanford LaSor, David Allan Hubbard and Frederic William Bush, Old Testament Survey: The Message, Form, and Background of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1994).

Leon Morris, ed. The Tyndale Commentaries (Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company).

J. A. Motyer and John R. W. Stott, eds., The Bible Speaks Today series (Downers Grove, Illinois: Intervarsity Press).

Merrill C. Tenney, New Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Erdmans Publishing Co., 1972). Warren W. Wiersbe, Be Series Commentaries (Wheaton, Illinois: Victor Books).
