PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION

When you read the Bible, you want to determine what the author had in mind. This is called interpreting the Bible. When you are interpreting the Bible, you are studying it to determine the author's meaning.

Don't use a "figurative" or "spiritual" approach to interpreting the Bible. That is reading into the passage a meaning that is not there. Often this is called an "allegorical" or "figurative" way of interpreting the Bible. The reader tries to find a hidden or "deep" meaning in the Word of God. Rather, follow the normal way that normal people use when reading any book or document. Follow the literal method of interpreting the Word of God. When the Bible talks about a tree, it is describing a tree growing in a field or woods. Don't try to make a tree into a family generation or an idea that is life-giving. Follow the normal grammatical literary method of reading and interpreting literature. Follow Cooper's Gold Rule of Interpretation.

When the plain sense of Scripture makes common sense.

seek no other sense, but take every word at its primary

literary meaning. David L. Cooper, 1850

When an author uses a simile, metaphor, or other figure of speech, you will follow the rule of interpreting figures of speech, i.e. seek the meaning of the author's mind when he/she used a figure of speech, because that is what they meant. What the author means is the interpretation. Do not read into the passage an outside meaning.

When you are not sure of an interpretation, look for the meaning in other verses that discuss the same topic. Note the following principle the church has followed for over 400 years.

The infallible rule of interpretation of Scripture is the Scripture itself, and

therefore, when there is a question about the true and full sense of any

Scripture, it must be searched and known by other places (in Scripture) that

speak more plainly. Westminster Confession of Faith

Interpret a verse in light of the context of the chapter. This means you will follow the author's thought that runs through a paragraph or chapter when determining the meaning of a particular verse.

Understanding Words

Etymology Original meaning of words

Usus Loquendi The use in a context

Koine Common meaning

When studying a Bible passage, first check the original meaning of words in a Bible dictionary. While the original use or meaning of the word may change, the root meaning will give you illustrations for teaching. You will find that usus loquendi in a concordance. That is what it means to other people in Scripture. To find the modern usage of a word, check a Webster's Dictionary for its meaning.
