WRITING THE LESSON PLAN

The following six steps of lesson preparation should be followed by mature and beginning teachers. Each teacher will give different emphasis to each step; nevertheless, each step should be made.

Sunday School teaching is not grinding out content. Nor is Sunday School teaching like a little boy playing with blocks, stacking them one upon the other in a hit or miss fashion. Often teaching is considered stacking blocks of content in the minds of the students. When the pile of blocks reaches its limit (the mind absorption of the student), the small boy says he is finished. The purpose of Sunday School teaching is not to communicate content only. "We teach for decisions."

Before you begin to teach, have in mind a clear decision that you want the pupil to make. This decision may be to accept Christ, to renounce a certain sin, to practice a certain behavior or to change a certain attitude.

Try to state your aims briefly in one or two sentences. Determine what you want your student to know (mind), to feel (emotions), and to do (will).

The aim gives direction to your study. Too often, Sunday School teaching has a poor aim or none at all. When that happens, teachers aim at nothing and hit it with precise accuracy.

• A clear aim guides Bible study.

• A clear aim gives unity, order and efficiency to teaching.

• A clear aim gives teachers confidence in the classroom.

• A clear aim helps teachers use time efficiently.

• A clear aim helps teachers select teaching aids and methods.

• A clear aim helps teachers evaluate a lesson.

Arrange the Lesson In Outline

Lesson preparation is not begun by writing an introduction. An introduction bridges from the student's life to the content, and the teacher must know the content before he builds the bridge. Therefore, the first step is to develop content into an organized whole. It should be sequential, building fact upon fact. Some of the following ways may be used to organize content: 1. A series of questions becomes the lesson outline. As either the teacher or the pupil answers each question, content is thereby filled in. a teacher should write both questions and answers in his lesson plan. If he waits to create questions until he is before his class, the right type of questions may not come. If you try to think of the answers as you stand before your students, you may be caught between home and third. Use more than one type of question. The following list may help you create a variety of questions for teaching: a. Factual questions. Usually the pupil can find the fact in the Bible

or in other source material.

b. Interpretive questions. The pupil is challenged to interpret a verse of Scripture. c. Discussion questions. An open-end question will bring out opinions and

attitudes of pupils.

d. Exploration questions. Some questions take the form of a project in which

pupils are pointed to a problem and given resources for finding the answer. e. Opinion questions. At times the teacher will want to involve the pupil, by

asking him to state an opinion.

WHY QUESTIONS
