To share something they don't know.

To help them see something they can't see.

To lift them to a level they haven't been.

To explain passages that they can't figure out.

To direct their thinking to issues they don't think are important. To expose them to teachers who have something they don't have. To motivate them through lethargy they can't break.

However, transition sentences should be written out in entirety. These are hinges that turn the lesson form one point to another. As you finish the introduction and move into your first point, you want to keep your pupils' interest. The introduction should capture their attention. Now keep the pupils by a smooth transition.

Write the Conclusion

Teaching without a conclusion is like fishing without a hook. The fisherman may have the best lure and equipment and be a skilled fisherman, yet if he doesn't have a hook he can't catch fish. If teaching is for decisions, then the conclusion should be designed to have pupils make a decision.

A conclusion is the aim of the Sunday School lesson applied to the life of the pupil resulting in the pupil's decision. The whole element of making a decision should be under the guidance of the teacher.

Some lessons are not concluded, they're just finished. Some teachers talk up to the final minute trying to cram in the last bit of Bible fact, then announce, "We'll take up here next Sunday." This teacher doesn't conclude, he just finishes . . . finishes the opportunity for God to work . . . finishes his opportunity to make a change in the pupils' lives . . . and finishes his greatest opportunity in life.

What about the pupil's invitation? Should the teacher in the Sunday School class give an invitation, that is, ask pupils to close their eyes, bow their heads, and raise their hands as an indication they want to receive Christ. For the most part, no. In small Bible classes, teachers should take the initiative to speak personally to each student about receiving Christ. If teachers don't have the courage to face pupils with the claims of Christ, they shouldn't hide behind the invitation. However, there may be times when God's Spirit works though such invitations, especially when the class is so large that the teacher cannot make a personal contact with each pupil.

A conclusion should summarize your main ideas and refresh the minds of the students. Try to get them to see the unity of the lesson.

Is it all right to have "loose ends" when you come to the end of a lesson? Loose ends are acceptable if they are live ends. "Live ends" drive the student from the classroom to seek answers and resolve issues for himself. These live ends are the very art of teaching. However, loose ends that leave the student confused, perplexed and frustrated are a manifestation of poor teaching.

When coming to your conclusion, avoid letting interest lag. Do not introduce new material. You are trying to drive for a decision, new materials may sidetrack students' thoughts. Also, do not conclude by apologizing for a poor lesson. If the lesson is poor, most students will know it; some may like it. Your apology may have introduced doubts into their thoughts about the Word of God.

The conclusion should be short, varied, real, personal, pointed, appropriate.

Write the Introduction

The introduction is the last part of the lesson to be prepared. The purpose of an introduction is to bridge the gap from "where students are" to "where they should be." You must prepare your lesson before you can bridge the gap from the student to that content.

A good introduction catches the attention of the pupil, creates a desire to learn, inspires him to action, and becomes a point of contact.

An introduction should promise the student something. However, like a down payment at the department store, when you promise there is more to follow, you lose your investment without the follow-through.
