SAMPLE LESSON PLAN

THE PERSON OF CHRIST

John 21:1-14

I. OBJECTIVE

A. Material - to analyze the spiritual state of the disciples when Christ performed His

last recorded miracle on earth.

B. To show the person of Christ can meet the need of spiritual blindness and His

presence challenges us to service.

II. THE APPROACH (INTRODUCTION)

A. How many miracles did Christ perform? Have the students guess. Explain the

difference between miracles and recorded miracles. Christ performed 37 recorded miracles; we don't know how many He really performed (cf. John 20:30,31; 21:25).

B. Use map and show the background.

The Disciples were in Jerusalem in the upper room at end of chapter 20:19,26. Why did they leave Jerusalem and walk to Galilee? Matthew 28:10, Mark 16:7. How many mile to Galilee from Jerusalem.

III. LESSON DEVELOPMENT

A. Where is the Sea of Tiberias? John 6:1

B. Name all the disciples in vs. 2.

(Peter, Thomas (twin), Nathaniel, James, John, Andrew and Philip)

John 1:40, 43, 44.

C. Why did Peter say, "I go a fishing?" (Note the 4 possible answers.)

a. They were called from their nets to follow Jesus and now they

are returning. Mark 1:7.

b. Backsliding evidenced by nothing in their nets.

a. They had been living off the food supplied by Jesus (by miracles,

John 6:1-14; by purchase, John 4:8).

b. It was only natural to help out with food. "We don't go to a

relative's house and eat without helping."

D. What is the result of fishing all night and catching nothing?

(hungry, tired, discouraged, sleepy, depressed) - have students list.

E. Why didn't the disciples know it was Jesus? (List on chalkboard)

a. Mary didn't know it was Jesus. John 20:14-16

b. Cleopas and his wife didn't know it was Jesus. Luke 24:13-21

c. Unbelief brings blindness. II Corinthians 4:3,4; Mark 16:11, 13, 14

a. They were 100 yards from shore (length of football field).

b. Eyes dilated because of night.

c. Maybe fog on the lake.

d. Early morning sun reflected on the waters.

At this point, bring out the contrast that if Peter went fishing because of backsliding then the result was blindness.

List on chalk board and point out the content.

NATURAL BACKSLIDING

ministry.

reasons.

reasons.

F. Cast nets on the right side of ship. It would have been easy to disobey a stranger;

however, obedience brings blessing.

G. What is faith? Faith is obedience to the Word of God in fellowship with the Son of

God. This is what the disciples did (vs. 6).

H. Peter's nakedness.

Peter was not nude, but was wearing an inner garment. The coat he put on was a tunic or long flowing outer garment to protect from sun, wind and chilly nights.

Why did Peter put on clothes to jump into water? Most people today take off clothes when abandoning a ship. (Modest, picture of clothes of righteousness, don't know, some thought he would walk on water.)

I. Practical application, verse 7, John was the first to know it was the Lord; Peter

was the first to act. Which are you?

J. This is one miracle in the count of 37. How many miracle make up the one?

(bread, fire, fish on the fire, fish in the net, net did not break, 7 not able to pull in the net, vs. 6, Peter pulls in the net by himself in vs. 11)

K. Why did Jesus supply miracle of fish in two ways?

(fish on shore, was this not enough? Fish in net, was this enough?) It is a picture of God working in us, as well as without us to do His will.

L. CONTRAST (have students offer the answer and list on the chalkboard)
