Francis of Assisi, Little Flowers ( 1328)

Chapter XXXIII

How St. Clare, by Order of the Pope, Blessed the Bread Which Was on the Table, and How on Each Loaf Appeared the Sign of the Holy Cross

St Clare, a most devout servant of the Cross of Christ, and one of the sweetest flowers of St. Francis, was so holy, that not only the Bishops and Cardinals but the Pope himself wished to see and hear her, and went often to visit her in person. One day, amongst others, the holy Father went to her convent to hear her speak of things celestial; and having long reasoned together, St. Clare ordered the table to be laid and bread to be placed upon it, in order that the holy Father might bless it. Their spiritual conclave being at an end, St. Clare, kneeling down with great reverence, begged him to bless the bread which had been placed on the table. To whom the holy Father answered: "Most faithful sister, I will that thou bless this bread by the sign of the cross to which thou hast devoted thyself." St. Clare said: "Most holy Father, excuse me. I should indeed by worthy of reproof if I, a miserable woman, should presume to give such a blessing in the presence of the Vicar of Christ." Then the Pope answered: "In order that such an act be not looked upon as presumptuous, but that it may bear on it the marks of obedience, I command thee, in the name of holy obedience, to make on this bread the sign of the cross, and to bless it in the name of God." At this St. Clare, like a true daughter of obedience, blessed the loaves most devoutly, making over them the sign of the holy cross; and, wonderful to relate, on all those loaves appeared a cross, most clearly marked; and some of them were eaten, but the rest were put aside, in order to testify of the miracle. And the holy Father, having seen the miracle, thanked God; and taking some of the bread, went away, leaving his blessing with Sister Clare. At that time Sister Ortolana, mother of St. Clare, and Sister Agnes, her sister, were living together in the convent with St. Clare, both most virtuous women, full of the Holy Spirit, likewise many other nuns; to whom St. Francis sent a great number of sick persons, who were all healed by their prayers and by the sign of the most holy cross.
