BYU–Pathway Worldwide was introduced a few years ago to the countries of Africa and is blessing many lives on the continent. It has already served close to 2,000 students: members and non-members alike. Returned missionaries are pre-approved for BYU–Pathway and are given an automatic 25% discount when they enroll. All students are also eligible for the Heber J. Grant Scholarship, which can reduce their tuition by up to 50%. In addition, non-English-speaking students have an opportunity to learn English through EnglishConnect and then enroll in PathwayConnect. Many students report getting employed, promoted, or simply expanding their existing businesses while pursuing a bachelor’s degree.

Annet Nankumba of Upperhill Ward in Nairobi, Kenya, first learned about BYU–Pathway from her Mission President in Cote d’Ivoire. Due to her low grades in high school, Annet was very nervous about pursuing a university education. A few months after returning from her mission, she decided to enroll in PathwayConnect and began her journey towards a bachelor’s degree. This will make her the first university graduate in her family. “PathwayConnect has been a great blessing for me. One of my first courses taught me about having a growth mindset. Unlike before, I now look at failure as an opportunity to grow,” she said.

Annet further explained, “Someone with a fixed mindset fears failure, gives up so quickly when things get tough, and sees themselves as not smart. To stay focused on my education path, I have to be positive and trust in my Heavenly Father who will help me navigate the challenges.” Annet says she has also learned better financial management, which is helping her in her small business. “I have learned to prioritize payment of tithing, and I now feel my Saviour’s guidance more in my life. I am inspired by the weekly devotionals and institute of religion classes; all this is helping to increase my faith in the Saviour. I know that I can accomplish hard things!”

Phineas Nyambita and his wife, Caroline, are both BYU–Pathway students. Phineas is a returned missionary and serves as branch president of his branch in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Phineas, studying towards a Bachelor of Applied Technology degree, said, “I enjoy the programme because I am working full time and attending to my classes. Being a husband and father, a church leader, and adding another responsibility as a student may be overwhelming. Still, I have seen that it can be done with great success.” Turning to young adults in Chang’ombe Branch and elsewhere, Phineas offers this advice: “I know that the Lord wants us to be successful in this life.

However, being successful may not come if we do not act in faith. We may have a lot to deal with as fathers, mothers, leaders, and young adults. We can be successful with faith and the desire to learn how to prioritize. BYU–Pathway will assist all those who want to further their education in order to build the foundation of becoming successful through opportunities that will come in the future.”

Caroline is a holder of a PathwayConnect certificate and has had to pause her studies to allow for the birth of their second baby a few months ago. “I will pick up again this coming September; I have already enrolled,” she said. Looking back on her journey through PathwayConnect, Caroline says, “The journey was not easy because we have many things that we need to accomplish as mothers. However, with faith and lessons from BYU–PathwayConnect, I forged ahead and finished PathwayConnect. Weekly devotionals were the daily drive to keep me moving on. Meeting my fellow students during weekly gatherings and getting to hear their experiences built me and encouraged me. I pleaded with my Heavenly Father for help and strength so that I could accomplish my studies.”

Pursuing a Pathway degree is sometimes a long, patient process. Daddy Kampoy David shares his experience: “I have a young family and a full-time job. I serve as the first counsellor in the Bandalungwa Ward, DRC, and I teach in the EnglishConnect program. My time for study is very limited. I started my degree in 2020 and hope to finish in 2024. I get up at 5:00 am for study, care for my family, work all day, and study a couple of hours before returning home at night. Before exams, I take a few days of vacation for study. I know this degree will help me grow as a person and provide a more secure life for my family. I know this is worth it!”

President Russell M. Nelson has extended this invitation and a promise: “BYU–Pathway Worldwide brings an innovative approach to education. . . . I encourage each person, regardless of age, to continue to learn. Pursue whatever path will be most valuable to you and to your family. You will be blessed as you do this. You will grow academically, professionally, and spiritually as you seek to enhance your education.”

BYU–Pathway is open to everyone. If you are interested in furthering your education, please visit www.byupathway.org.
