No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

FAITH PRECEDES THE MIRACLE

President Spencer W. Kimball

Throughout the Church hundreds of thousands of faithful Saints have truly consecrated their lives and their energies to the work of the Lord, secure in the assurance that thereby they please Him.

It is a disappointment, however, to find many others who are not willing to trust the Lord—or to trust in His promise when He says, "Prove me and see." I often wonder why men cannot trust their Lord. He has promised His children every blessing contingent upon their faithfulness, but fickle man places his trust in "the arm of flesh" and sets about to make his own way unaided by Him who could do so much.

The Lord has challenged us: "Prove me . . . if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Malachi 3:10.)

The prophet Moroni stopped abruptly in his abridging to offer his own inspired comments concerning the matter of faith: "I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.)

Father Adam understood this basic principle: "An angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me." (Moses 5:6.) He showed his unwavering faith—and since the witness and the miracle follow rather than precede the faith, the angel then sought to enlighten him, saying: "This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father." (Moses 5:7.)

In faith we plant the seed, and soon we see the miracle of the blossoming. Men have often misunderstood and have reversed the process. They would have the harvest before the planting, the reward before the service, the miracle before the faith. Even the most demanding labor unions would hardly ask the wages before the labor. But many of us would have the vigor without the observance of the health laws, prosperity through the opened windows of heaven without the payment of our tithes. We would have the close communion with our Father without fasting and praying. We would have rain in due season and peace in the land without observing the Sabbath and keeping the other commandments of the Lord. We would pluck the rose before planting the roots; we would harvest the grain before sowing and cultivating.

If only we could realize, as Moroni writes, that "if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them. . . . And neither at any time hath any wrought miracles until after their faith; wherefore they first believed in the Son of God." (Ether 12:12, 18.)

The Lord has made it clear that faith is not developed by miracles. To the scribes and Pharisees who demanded signs without the preliminary faith and works, He said: "An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign." (Matthew 12:39.) In modern-day revelation He has said: "But, behold, faith cometh not by signs, but signs follow those that believe." (D&C 63:9.)

In the early days of the restoration of the Church, Sidney Rigdon did not retain his membership in the kingdom even though he had, with Joseph Smith, witnessed marvelous signs. Had he not participated in the great vision, and had he not been the recipient of many revelations? Yet despite all these manifestations from our Heavenly Father, he did not remain in the kingdom.

Oliver Cowdery saw many signs. He handled the sacred plates; saw John the Baptist; received the higher priesthood from Peter, James, and John; and was the recipient of many great miracles; and yet they could not hold him to the faith.

Amassed evidence in signs and works and miracles failed to touch the stony hearts of the Galilean cities: "Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not: Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! . . . And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day." (Matthew 11:20-21, 23.)

Paul, speaking to the Hebrews, said: "By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house." (Hebrews 11:7.) As yet there was no evidence of rain and flood, so the people mocked Noah and called him a fool. His preaching fell on deaf ears. His warnings were considered irrational. There was no precedent; never had it been known that a deluge could cover the earth. How foolish to build an ark on dry ground with the sun shining and life moving forward as usual! But time ran out. The ark was finished. The floods came. The disobedient and rebellious were drowned. The miracle of the ark followed the faith manifested in its building.

Paul also wrote concerning the faith of Abraham and Sarah. Of Abraham he said: "By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went." (Hebrews 11:8.)

Paul said concerning Sarah: "Through faith . . . [she] herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable." (Hebrews 11:11-12.)

So absurd was it to be told that children could be born of centenarians that even Sarah doubted at first. But the faith of a noble pair prevailed, and the miracle son was born to father multitudes of nations.

Exceeding faith was shown by Abraham when the superhuman test was applied to him. Isaac, his young "child of promise," must now be offered upon the sacrificial altar. It was God's command, but it seemed so contradictory! How could Isaac be the father of an uncountable posterity if in his youth his mortal life was to be terminated? Why should he, Abraham, be called upon to do this revolting deed? It was irreconcilable, impossible! And yet he believed God. His undaunted faith carried him with breaking heart toward Mount Moriah with this young son, who little suspected the agonies through which his father must have been passing. Saddled asses took the party and supplies. The father and the son, carrying the fire and the wood, mounted to the place of sacrifice.

"Behold the fire and the wood," said Isaac, "but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?" What a heavy heart and sad voice it must have been that replied: "My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering."

The place was reached, the altar built, the fire kindled, and the lad, now surely knowing, but trusting and believing, was upon the altar. Then the father's raised hand was stopped in midair by a commanding voice: "Lay not thine hand upon the lad. . . . Now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me."

As the near-perfect prophet found the ram in the thicket and offered it upon the altar, he heard the voice of God again speaking: "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice." (See Genesis 22.)

This great and noble Abraham—"who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many nations . . . and being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb:

"He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; and being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform." (Romans 4:18-21.)

Father Abraham and Mother Sarah knew that the promise would be fulfilled. Isaac positively would live to be the father of a numerous posterity. They knew that he would, even though he might need to die. They knew that he could still be raised from the dead to fulfill the promise, and faith here preceded the miracle.

Paul told the Hebrews that by faith the children of Israel "passed through the Red sea as by dry land." (Hebrews 11:29.) The Israelites knew, as did Pharaoh and his hosts, that they were "entangled in the land," shut in by the wilderness. As Pharaoh's trained army approached with all the horses and chariots of Egypt, the escaping multitudes knew full well that they were hemmed in by the marshes, the deserts, and the sea. There was no earthly chance for them to escape the wrath of their pursuers. And in their terror they indicted Moses: "Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? . . . It had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness."

No hope on earth for their liberation! What could save them now? The gloating armed forces of Egypt knew that the children of Israel were trapped. Israel knew it only too well. But Moses, their inspired leader with supreme faith, knew that God would not have called them on this exodus only to have them destroyed. He knew that God would provide the escape. He may not at this moment have known just how, but he trusted. He commanded his people: "Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever. The Lord shall fight for you."

The mighty warriors pressed on. Hope must have long since died in the breasts of the timid Israelites who knew not faith. Deserts and wilderness and the sea—the uncrossable sea! No boats, no rafts, no bridges, nor time to construct them! Hopelessness, fear, despair must have gripped their hearts.

And then the miracle came. It was born of the faith of their indomitable leader. A cloud hid them from the view of their enemies. A strong east wind blew all the night; the waters were parted; the bed of the sea was dry; and Israel crossed to another world and saw the returning sea envelop and destroy their pursuers. Israel was safe. Faith had been rewarded, and Moses was vindicated. The impossible had happened. An almost superhuman faith had given birth to an unaccountable and mysterious miracle that was to be the theme of the sermons and warnings of Israel and their prophets for centuries. (See Exodus 14.)

Israel was later ready to cross into the Promised Land, the productivity and beauty of which could probably be seen from the higher hills. But how to get there? There were no bridges or ferries across the flooding Jordan. A great prophet, Joshua, received the mind of the Lord and commanded, and another miracle was born of faith.

"And [as] the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, . . . the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap . . . and those that came down . . . failed, and were cut off. . . . And all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over Jordan." (Joshua 3:15-17.)

The elements find control through faith. The wind, the clouds, the heavens obey the voice of faith. It was by and through the faith of Elijah that the drouth that had devastated Israel for three interminable years was finally ended when repentance had come to Israel. The brooks had dried up; rivers had ceased to run; forage had become scarce; and famine was upon the land. A king and his people were begging for relief—a people who had lost themselves in the worship of Baal. At Mount Carmel came the contest of power. At Elijah's command, fire came down from heaven and ignited the sacrifice and shocked the Baal worshipers once more into repentant submission. Miracle followed faith again, and though the heavens were still clear and there was no indication of rain on the parched land, Elijah warned King Ahab: "Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not." (1 Kings 18:44.)

With his face between his knees as he sat on Carmel, Elijah sent his servant seven times to look toward the sea. Six times there were cloudless skies and calm sea, but on the seventh he reported: "Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand." Soon the heavens were black with clouds, the wind was carrying them to Palestine, and "there was a great rain." A dry, parched land was drenched in moisture, and the miracle of faith had again made good the promises of the Lord. (See 1 Kings 17, 18.)

It was by supreme faith that three Hebrews were delivered from the fiery furnace of their king, Nebuchadnezzar. The king asked his councilors, "Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire?" They answered, "True, O king." He then said, "Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God." Then all the people who had gathered saw the men, "upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them." (See Daniel 3:19-27.)

Now, if you would discount these miracles of the Old Testament, how can you accept the New Testament? You would also have difficulty in accepting Paul, the apostles, and the Lord Jesus Christ, for they verified and documented those miraculous events.

How can these stories of faith be brought into our own lives? Faith is needed as much today as ever before. Little can we see. We know not what the morrow will bring. Accidents, sickness, even death seem to hover over us continually. Little do we know when they might strike.

It takes faith—unseeing faith—for young people to proceed immediately with their family responsibilities in the face of financial uncertainties. It takes faith for the young woman to bear her family instead of accepting employment, especially when the young husband's schooling is to be finished. It takes faith to observe the Sabbath when time and a half can be had working, when profit can be made, when merchandise can be sold. It takes great faith to pay tithes when funds are scarce and demands are great. It takes faith to fast and have family prayers and observe the Word of Wisdom. It takes faith to do home teaching, stake missionary work, and other service, when sacrifice is required. It takes faith to fill full-time missions. But know this: all these are of the planting, while faithful, devout families, spiritual security, peace, and eternal life are the harvest.

Remember that Abraham, Moses, Elijah, and others could not see clearly the end from the beginning. They also walked by faith and without sight.

Remember again that no gates were open; Laban was not drunk; and no earthly hope was justified at the moment Nephi exercised his faith and set out finally to get the plates.

Remember that there were no clouds in the sky, no evidence of rain, and no precedent for the deluge when Noah built the ark according to commandment.

Remember that there was no ram in the thicket when Isaac and his father left for Moriah for the sacrifice.

Remember that though Joshua may have witnessed the miracle of the Red Sea, he could not by mortal means perceive that the flooding Jordan would back up for the exact time needed for the crossing, and then flow again on its way to the Dead Sea. Remember that there were no clouds in the sky nor any hygrometer in his hand when Elijah promised an immediate break in the long extended drouth.

Remember that there were no heavenly beings in Palmyra, on the Susquehanna, or on Cumorah when the soul-hungry Joseph slipped quietly into the grove, knelt in prayer on the river bank, and climbed the slopes of the sacred hill.

And remember that there were no towns and cities, no farms and gardens, no homes and storehouses, no blossoming desert in Utah when the persecuted pioneers crossed the plains.

But know this: Just as undaunted faith has stopped the mouths of lions, made ineffective fiery flames, opened dry corridors through rivers and seas, protected against deluge and drouth, and brought heavenly manifestations at the instance of prophets, so in each of our lives faith can heal the sick, bring comfort to those who mourn, strengthen resolve against temptation, relieve from the bondage of harmful habits, lend the strength to repent and change our lives, and lead to a sure knowledge of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Indomitable faith can help us live the commandments with a willing heart and thereby bring blessings unnumbered, with peace, perfection, and exaltation in the kingdom of God.
