No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

THE POWER OF FAITH

President Marion G. Romney

"Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.)

"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God." (Romans 5:1-2.)

In his preface to the Book of Commandments, the Lord said that one of his purposes in giving Joseph Smith this revelation was "that faith also might increase in the earth." (D&C 1:21.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith named "faith in the Lord Jesus Christ" as the first principle of the gospel.

Blessed is he who, based on a knowledge of the gospel, has unshakable faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Such a one has for his goal the attainment of eternal life. He has an anchor to his soul, and a motive for action.

He knows that God lives. He knows that he himself is a begotten child of God, and that as such he is endowed with the potential eventually to rise to the full stature of his Heavenly Father. And he is intimately acquainted with the plan by which he may do so. Thus fortified, he is not "driven with the wind and tossed" (James 1:6), but stands serene and confident amid the ups and downs of life. Like the Valley of Lemuel, he remains "firm and steadfast, and immovable" (1 Nephi 2:10), his goal fixed by his knowledge of the purpose of life.

He knows that he lives in a day of great conflict between good and evil; that anti-Christs stalk the earth in all lands; that false philosophies and doctrines emanating from the Prince of Darkness are being presented in such an appealing manner as almost to deceive the very elect. All this he knows and more.

He knows that earth was created to be a battleground for the souls of men; that this life is a testing time; that in mortality men must struggle between the two mighty forces of truth and error.

He is strengthened for the conflict by the knowledge that God, his Heavenly Father, has not abandoned him in the struggle, but has put within his reach the knowledge and wisdom upon which he can correctly distinguish good from evil. He knows that such knowledge has been revealed from heaven and that it may be found in the scriptures and in the teachings of the living prophets.

He knows this because he has studied and searched scriptures and has listened to and pondered what the living prophets say. He has also fasted and prayed about the teachings of the scriptures and living prophets. He knows from his own experience that faith comes from searching, hearing, pondering, and praying about the word of God. He knows that he himself has the gift of revelation by which he may not only correctly interpret the scriptures and the teachings of the living prophets, but also properly conduct his own personal affairs.

He is not led astray by false teachings, theories, and philosophies, for he tests them by his knowledge of revealed truth. If they do not comport therewith, he rejects them or at least holds them in abeyance until all the facts are in. His knowledge and faith enable him to distinguish between truth and error. The manner and importance of so doing we learn from Mormon, who said to the saints in his day:

"Take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil. . . .

"For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

"But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work."

Then he adds this caution: "And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged." (Moroni 7:14-18.)

Consider, for example, Joseph in Egypt. At the very pinnacle of success, when he was prosperous, popular, young, and romantic, he came upon a great temptation—a temptation that, had he yielded to it, would have ruined his life. His master's wife became enamored with him and sought to seduce him. From the record it is clear that Joseph's strength to resist this great temptation and live true to his convictions was derived from his faith, based upon a knowledge of what the Lord had said about adultery. For, said he, "How . . . can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?" This weighing of Joseph's temptation in terms of sinning against God was possible only because he was informed as to God's commandments. And thus, he being fortified with knowledge and great faith, "It came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her." (Genesis 39:9-10.)

There is no greater blessing. There comes a time in the life of every soul, be he ever so self-confident and well-adjusted, when without such an inner peace he sinks into the valley of despair.

For the comfort, encouragement, and guidance of the members of his infant Church, the Lord said in August 1830: "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Lord, your God, and your Redeemer, whose word is quick and powerful. . . .

"Lift up your hearts and rejoice, and gird up your loins, and take upon you my whole armor, that ye may be able to withstand the evil day, having done all, that ye may be able to stand.

"Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, having on the breastplate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, which I have sent mine angels to commit unto you;

"Taking the shield of faith wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked;

"And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of my Spirit, which I will pour out upon you, and my word which I reveal unto you, and be agreed as touching all things whatsoever ye ask of me, and be faithful until I come, and ye shall be caught up, that where I am ye shall be also. Amen." (D&C 27:1, 15-18.)

Great is the power of faith, and great are the rewards for faithfulness!
