No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

THE FAITH OF OUR FOUNDING FATHERS

President Ezra Taft Benson

Oh beautiful for heroes proved In liberating strife, Who more than self their country loved, And mercy more than life! [^1]

The foundation of the United States of America is spiritual. We must never forget this vital truth. This country was founded on a belief in the sovereignty of God, and He, not man, granted man his rights. This was possible because the Founding Fathers of this nation were God-fearing men disposed to deliberately acknowledge the hand of God in the events that brought about the nation's independence.

The Lord raised up the founders of the United States, sanctioned their work, and designated them "wise men." His approbation of their work is recorded in section 101 of the Doctrine and Covenants: "And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 101:80.)

In 1877, shortly after the dedication of the St. George Temple, the first temple in Utah, the Founding Fathers appeared to Elder Wilford Woodruff, one of the twelve apostles, who was president of the temple. This is his testimony:

"Before I left St. George, the spirits of the [Founding Fathers] gathered around me, wanting to know why we did not redeem them. Said they, 'You have had the use of the Endowment House for a number of years, and yet nothing has ever been done for us. We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God.' These were the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and they waited on me for two days and two nights. . . . I straightway went into the baptismal font and called upon Brother McCallister to baptize me for the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and fifty other eminent men, making one hundred in all, including John Wesley, Columbus, and others." (Journal of Discourses 19:229.)

At a conference in April 1898, after he became president of the Church, President Woodruff declared:

"Those men who laid the foundation of this American government and signed the Declaration of Independence were the best spirits the God of heaven could find on the face of the earth. They were choice spirits, not wicked men. General Washington and all the men that labored for the purpose were inspired of the Lord. . . .

"Everyone of those men that signed the Declaration of Independence, with General Washington, called upon me, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Temple at St. George, two consecutive nights, and demanded at my hands that I should go forth and attend to the ordinances of the House of God for them." (Conference Report, April 1898, pp. 89-90.)

Shortly after Spencer W. Kimball became president of the Church, we met together in one of out weekly meetings. We spoke of the sacred records that are in the vaults of the various temples of the Church. As I was soon to fill a conference assignment to St. George, President Kimball asked if I would go into the vault at the temple and check the early records. In so doing, I realized the fulfillment of a dream I had had ever since learning of the visit of the Founding Fathers to this sacred place. I saw with my own eyes the records of the work that was done for the Founding Fathers of this great nation, beginning with George Washington. I was deeply moved on that occasion to realize that these great men returned to this promised land by permission of the Lord and had their ordinance work done for them. If they had not been faithful men, if they had not been God-fearing men, would they have come to the elders of Israel to seek their temple blessings? I think not. The Lord raised them up, sanctioned their work, and proclaimed them "wise men." Moreover, a president of the Church declared them to be the "best spirits the God of heaven could find on the face of the earth," and testified that they were "choice spirits" and "inspired of the Lord."

I emphasize this because there have been some efforts recently to belittle their accomplishments and depreciate their integrity—efforts, I might add, that are clearly pointed toward undermining, changing, or destroying the system established by them.

Here was a group of men unparalleled in the history of mankind in their character, foresight, and integrity and with regard to their spiritual awareness that political rights are eternal, inherent, and God-given. "There has not been another such group of men in all the [200] years of our history, no group that even challenged the supremacy of this group." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Conference Report, April 1957, p. 47.)

The historian Henry Steele Commager queried: "What explains this remarkable outpouring of political leadership, this fertility in the production of statesmen—a fertility unmatched since that day? Was it an historical accident? Was it a peculiar response to the time or the place, or to a combination of the two? Or was it a product of conditions and attitudes that were cultivated and directed to calculated ends, and that can be if not re-created at least paralleled in our time?" ("Leadership in Eighteenth-Century America and Today," Freedom and Order, New York: G. Graziller, 1966, pp. 149-50.)

Since these men were foreordained to come to earth to lay the foundation of liberty, this explains why such an aggregation of talent, political wisdom, and faith was concentrated at one time in one place, making this period so extraordinary and exceptional in history.

Who were these "wise men" whom the Lord raised up? They were the more prominent leaders of the American Revolution, which included the period of the Continental Congress, the Declaration of Independence, and the framing and adoption of the Constitution through the beginning years of the republic.

As indicated by the testimony of Wilford Woodruff and the declaration of the Lord Himself, the Founding Fathers were those who laid the foundation of the American Republic, the fifty-six men who signed the Declaration of Independence and the thirty-nine who signed the Constitution. These were young men, but men of exceptional character, "sober, seasoned, distinguished men of affairs, drawn from various walks of life." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Stand Fast by Our Constitution, Deseret Book, 1962, p. 135.)

Was their religious faith relevant to what they accomplished? I believe it was most significant because they believed that what they accomplished was not possible without the superintending hand of God, and they believed that morality based on true religion was indispensable to liberty, without which the new republic would fail.

Consider the testimonies of their belief in God, which evidence a conviction and deliberate acknowledgment that God's hand was in the events that brought about our independence.

George Washington: "The success, which has hitherto attended our united efforts, we owe to the gracious interposition of Heaven, and to that interposition let us gratefully ascribe the praise of victory, and the blessings of peace." (To the Executive of New Hampshire, November 3, 1789, Writings 30:453.)

Alexander Hamilton: "The Sacred Rights of mankind are not to be rummaged from among old parchments or musty records. They are written . . . by the Hand of Divinity itself." (An Essay, "The Farmer Refuted," 1775.) "For my own part, I sincerely esteem it a system, which without the finger of God, never could have been suggested and agreed upon by such a diversity of interests."

Thomas Jefferson: "The God who gave us life gave us liberty at the same time." (Rights of British America, 1774.)

John Adams: "As I understand the Christian religion, it was, and is, a revelation." (In God We Trust, p. 75.)

Benjamin Franklin: "The longer I live the more convincing Proofs I see of this Truth. That God Governs in the Affairs of Men!—And if a Sparrow cannot fall to the Ground without his Notice, is it probable that an Empire can rise without his Aid?—We have been assured, . . . in the Sacred Writings, that 'except the Lord build the House, they labour in vain that build it.' I firmly believe this;—and I also believe that without his concurring Aid we shall succeed in this political building no better than Builders of Babel." (Prayer during Constitutional Convention, June 28, 1787.)

James Madison: "It is impossible for the man of pious reflection not to perceive in it a finger of that Almighty hand which has been so frequently and signally extended to our relief in the critical stages of the revolution." (Federalist Papers, no. 37.)

Samuel Adams: "Revelation assures us that 'Righteousness exalteth a Nation'—Communities are dealt with in this World by the wise and just Ruler of the Universe. He rewards or punishes them according to their general Character." (Letter to John Scollary, 1776.)

Charles Pinckney: "When the great work was done and published, I was . . . struck with amazement. Nothing less than that superintending hand of Providence, that so miraculously carried us through the war, . . . could have brought it about so complete, upon the whole." (P. L. Ford, ed., Essays on the Constitution, 1892, p. 412.)

It was not just incidental, nor was it mere political platitude, that the name of God was mentioned in the Declaration of Independence four times and that our inspired national motto became "In God We Trust."

We are not to conclude from the foregoing expressions of religious belief that all of the founders professed a formal faith. Writers and biographers of some of the founders have classified them as deists, which implied that they denied revelation and relied solely on reason. This may have been true in a few exceptional instances, but essentially they were believers in God, immortality, and an eventual judgment day. They maintained a respect for the Bible and the Judaic-Christian heritage of the nation. None claimed to be an atheist, although some were labeled as such because they rejected certain established tenets of the religious denominations of the day.

Again their testimony to Wilford Woodruff was: "We were faithful to God."

What significance is it to us living today that the founders were God-fearing men of faith?

This nation was founded on certain principles, chief among which was the expressed statement that all men are "endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights." This pronouncement recognizes God as the Creator of man and that man's rights are an inherent gift from their Creator.

The founders further recognized that if the new nation were to survive, there must be reliance on the protection of God. The Declaration of Independence concluded with this affirmation: "With a firm reliance on the protection of Divine providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor."

The religious faith of the founders was totally consistent with the Lord's injunction concerning those who would inhabit the land of America:

And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off, for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off. . . .

Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written. (Ether 2:9-10, 12. Italics added.)

In other words, this nation will be preserved so long as we retain the same quality of faith in God that our founders manifested. Personal righteousness is essential to our liberty. The burden of self-government depends on our supporting wise and good representatives, exercising self-restraint, and keeping the commandments of God.

All is not well in our beloved land. Our problems for the most part are directly traceable to the transgression of those sacred laws given to Moses on Mount Sinai over three thousand years ago. These eternal laws were honored by our Founding Fathers. But today worship and service to God have noticeably declined. In the midst of all our prosperity, we may say with Lincoln, "We have forgotten God." Blasphemy, foul stories, and questionable humor characterize films, television programs, and the daily conversations of many Americans. The Sabbath has become a desecrated day of amusement. Idleness, greed, covetousness, cheating, lying, stealing, shoplifting, and immorality are commonplace in our society.

Is this not an evidence that there has been an apostasy from the faith and practice of our founders?

Latter-day Saints stand without excuse. The Lord, through modern revelation as well as statements by the prophets, has given us inspired direction. The Constitution of this land is the only constitution in the world bearing the stamp of approval of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Lord has said this to us: "I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the law also maketh you free. Nevertheless, when the wicked rule the people mourn. Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than this cometh of evil." (D&C 98:8-10.)

This nation has a spiritual foundation and a prophetic history. It is, in very deed, the Lord's base of operations in these latter days. From this base the gospel must be carried to all the world, and in order to do this, the nation must be kept strong and sound.

Without faith in God and righteousness, we are no better than any of the other nations that have sunk into oblivion.

Our Founding Fathers, with solemn and reverent expression, voiced their allegiance to the sovereignty of God, knowing that they were accountable to Him in the day of judgment. Are we less accountable today? I think not.

I urge all to keep the commandments and to pray for our nation and its leaders. It is my conviction that God does now look with favor and has looked with favor upon this government, which He established by wise men. It is also my firm conviction that His protective hand is still over the United States of America. I know too that if we will keep the commandments of God—live as He has directed and as He does now direct through His prophets—we will continue to have His protecting hand over us. But we must be true to the great Christian principles that God has revealed. Then, and only then, will we be safe as a nation and as individuals.

God grant that we as members of the Church can stand before God and declare as the founders of this nation did, "We never apostatized. We remained true and were faithful to God."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Katherine Lee Bates, "America, the Beautiful," st. 3.
