No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

THE FAITH OF PROPHETS

Elder Mark E. Petersen

The prophets of God—all of them—walk by faith, just as the rest of us should. Some have seen God, but not all, for it was decreed long ago that the Lord's ministry among the Gentiles would be by the Holy Ghost.

The Savior explained this to the ancient Nephites. He referred to His sermon in Palestine when He told the Jews, "Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." (John 10:16.)

The Jews supposed that He was speaking of the Gentiles, for He added, "They understood me not that I said they [the other sheep] shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost." (3 Nephi 15:23.)

A great principle is announced here: The preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles would be a dispensation of the ministry of the Holy Ghost, and it would not include frequent appearances of the Savior personally.

The Lord did appear to Hebrew prophets at various times, and also to the Nephites. He was seen by Moroni, Mormon, and others—all of them Israelites—and He appeared to congregations of Nephites. Following His resurrection when He first appeared to them, twenty-five hundred people saw the glorious manifestation described in the Book of Mormon. But they were not Gentiles. They were a branch of the house of Israel. They were given both sight and faith, and they labored accordingly.

When the gospel was to be restored in the latter days, it became necessary that the Father and the Son manifest themselves to the prophets to initiate the work. There was an important reason for this. The false notions about God that were being taught among the various congregations of the world must be dispelled. People did not know what God was like. Many creeds taught that He was an indefinable something that filled the whole universe, having no substance, shape, or limitation of size, and was not a person. Others said that the Father and Son in some mysterious way were of one substance or body, yet separate, in a contradiction of terms that was admittedly unexplainable. At least one creed taught that God was sheer intelligence, distributed everywhere in the universe, and that when we die, our intelligence merges with the over-all intelligence, and that that constitutes immortality for us.

To restore the gospel and provide a basis for a solid faith, it was necessary that a true knowledge of God be restored. This was accomplished in the first vision of the Prophet Joseph Smith, wherein he saw both the Father and the Son as separate, glorified persons in whose image human beings were made.

This glorious event became the basis for the restoration of the gospel. It provided the means whereby people could believe in God as a person, as our eternal Father in heaven, and in the Savior, also as a divine but individual being, separate from the Father but in the form of man. Jesus lived as a man on earth, and He was resurrected also as a man without losing His form or identity.

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery saw the Savior as a divine individual in the Kirtland Temple. (See D&C 110.) Angels also came to restore their powers and blessings.

Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon had the glorious vision described in section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The Savior also appeared to some at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. A few other appearances of the Savior to our modern prophets are also recorded. For the most part, however, the taking of the gospel to the Gentile nations is a ministry of the Holy Ghost and does not require the personal appearance and visitations of the Lord Jesus Christ.

There is no record that the Savior appeared to the Gentile nations visited by Paul, and for the same reason. The Gentiles were to receive the gospel through the Holy Ghost. Is He not one of the Godhead? Does He not bear witness of Christ and give to modern people, Israelites or Gentiles, a testimony of the truth?

The Lord Himself said that the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, bears testimony of Him. (See John 15:26.) Paul, writing to the Corinthians, said: "Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed: and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." (1 Corinthians 12:3.) And wasn't Paul the apostle to the Gentiles?

In our day, some have seen the Savior, but the major part of today's ministry is through the Holy Ghost. How do revelations come for work among the Gentiles?

When Paul and Barnabas were chosen to go forth among the Gentiles, how did their call come? Through the Holy Ghost! Note these words:

"Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.

"And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus." (Acts 13:1-3. )

The Holy Ghost, of course, ministered to the Israelite prophets. Alma says that he also received manifestations by the Holy Ghost. (Alma 5:46.) The Holy Ghost bore witness to the Nephites of both the Father and the Son. (2 Nephi 31:18; 3 Nephi 11:36.) He therefore was not in any manner limited to the Gentile ministry, but the Gentile ministry in large measure was limited to the Holy Ghost.

In our day what did the Lord say to the Prophet Joseph Smith? Note these words: "I speak unto you with my voice, even the voice of my Spirit, that I may show unto you my will concerning your brethren in the land of Zion, many of whom are truly humble and are seeking diligently to learn wisdom and to find truth." (D&C 97:1.)

The elders of that day were to work as they were guided by the Spirit: "But notwithstanding those things which are written, it always has been given to the elders of my church from the beginning, and ever shall be, to conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy Spirit." (D&C 46:2.)

The Holy Ghost was a revelator to our early leaders. He gave them utterance (D&C 14:8), and manifested to them all that was expedient for them to know (D&C 18:18). The Twelve were told to speak by the power of the Holy Ghost (D&C 18:32). The prophets of our day were to speak as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost, which testifies of Christ (D&C 20:26-27). The meetings of our early brethren were to be conducted under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost (D&C 20:45), and the officers of the Church were to be ordained under His guidance (D&C 20:60).

One of the interesting scriptures regarding the brethren laboring under the power of the Holy Ghost is this: "And this is the ensample unto them, that they shall speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:3-4.)

The Lord made it clear that Joseph was inspired by the Holy Ghost in laying the foundation of this Church. (D&C 21:2.)

Since the Church today carries the gospel abroad to the Gentiles, the work conforms to the dispensation of the Holy Ghost. It is not necessary for the Savior to make numerous and repeated appearances when the Holy Ghost is directing this ministry as a member of the Godhead.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught:

When the Twelve or any other witnesses stand before the congregations of the earth, and they preach in the power and demonstration of the Spirit of God, and the people are astonished and confounded at the doctrine, and say, "That man has preached a powerful discourse, a great sermon," then let that man or those men take care that they do not ascribe the glory unto themselves, but be careful that they are humble, and ascribe the praise and glory to God and the Lamb; for it is by the power of the Holy Priesthood and the Holy Ghost that they have power thus to speak. What art thou, O man, but dust? And from whom receivest thou thy power and blessings, but from God?

Then, O ye Twelve! notice this Key, and be wise for Christ's sake, and your own soul's sake. Ye are not sent out to be taught, but to teach. Let every word be seasoned with grace. Be vigilant; be sober. It is a day of warning, and not of many words. Act honestly before God and man. Beware of Gentile sophistry; such as bowing and scraping unto men in whom you have no confidence. Be honest, open, and frank in all your intercourse with mankind.

O ye Twelve! and all Saints! profit by this important Key—that in all your trials, troubles, temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonments and death, see to it, that you do not betray heaven; that you do not betray Jesus Christ; that you do not betray the brethren; that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in the Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any other that ever was or ever will be given and revealed unto man in this world or that which is to come. Yea, in all your kicking and flounderings, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found upon your skirts, and you go down to hell. All other sins are not to be compared to sinning against the Holy Ghost, and proving a traitor to the brethren.

I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives. The principle is as correct as the one that Jesus put forth in saying that he who seeketh a sign is an adulterous person; and that principle is eternal, undeviating, and firm as the pillars of heaven; for whenever you see a man seeking after a sign, you may set it down that he is an adulterous man. (History of the Church 3:384-85.)

The Prophet made it clear that the guidance of the Holy Ghost was part of that ministry, since the Holy Ghost is a revelator. It is by that power that the Church is guided to the Gentiles in this dispensation.

Faith in the lives of the prophets? It is the basis and foundation of their testimonies. By this faith they do their work, carrying on their ministry to all the world. The apostle Paul taught that in the Church are apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers, "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (Ephesians 4:12-14.)

And how was all of this to be done? By the inspiration and direction of the Holy Ghost!

The prophets teach faith—through the power of the Holy Ghost. They teach repentance by the same power. They teach perfection of the Saints by the same power. They teach unity among the Saints by the same power. They help us to obtain "the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ."

This is all done by the power of the Holy Ghost. That is the way our prophets teach; that is the way they live; that is the way they direct the work of the Lord in these last days. This gives us encouragement to obtain faith like theirs, that the gospel will indeed be as real to us as it is to them.

Yes, the prophets walk by faith!
