No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

WHAT IS FAITH?

Elder Boyd K. Packer

During World War II the city of Osaka, Japan, was almost obliterated. Her buildings were rubble, and her streets were littered with blocks, debris, and bomb craters. The subway had been protected, and soon after the occupation, it became the only means of transportation for the city.

One beautiful day in late fall, several servicemen and I came up the steps from the subway. As far as we could see lay the desolation of war. What had been a broad thoroughfare lined with sycamore trees was now a scene of hopeless destruction. Although most of the trees had been blasted completely away, some few of them still stood with shattered limbs and trunks. One or two of them had gathered the courage to send out a few new shoots and had produced a meager crop of foliage.

A gentle breeze was scattering the yellow leaves among the debris. A tiny Japanese girl in a tattered kimono was busily climbing over the rubble, gathering the sycamore leaves into a bouquet. The little sprite of a child seemed unimpressed with the devastation and hopeless futility that surrounded her and was scrambling over the rubble to add new leaves to her collection. She had found the one beautiful element in her world—perhaps it would be more proper to say that she was the one beautiful element in the scene.

I have not forgotten that little girl. Somehow, to think of her increases my faith. Embodied in the child was the answer to futility; in her there was hope.

Children have a frankness and honesty that is disarming. They possess a simple, implicit faith that is shared by few adults. The Lord instructed his disciples by calling "a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 18:2-3.)

In children there is little pride and little vanity. They eagerly and trustingly respond.

It is little wonder that the Lord chose a mere boy to act as his spokesman in restoring the kingdom of God to the earth. Some have been incredulous over the fact—and it is a fact— that God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ did reveal themselves to Joseph Smith when he was but in his fifteenth year. More remarkable perhaps than the vision itself was the naive, implicit faith with which the boy had sought answer to his prayers in a secluded grove.

Faith and humility go hand in hand. The person who can acknowledge his dependence upon God and accept a child-parent relationship with Him has prepared a growing place for faith.

The Book of Mormon gives an account of a man who had tremendous faith. The brother of Jared went up on the mountain with sixteen small stones. He had in mind having the Lord touch them so that there might be light in their vessels as his people traveled. His petition was granted, and as the Lord touched the stones, the brother of Jared saw His finger. He fell down before Him, saying that he knew not that He had flesh and blood. The Lord said unto him: "Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast, for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou more than this?" The answer was monumentally courageous: "Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me."

In the Lord's answer, the choice of a simple word, the word shall, is a marvelous commentary on faith. Now there was a test of faith involved, as the Lord asked: "Believest thou the words which I shall speak?" Interesting, isn't it, that he was not asked, "Believest thou the words that I have spoken?" It didn't relate to the past. It related to the future. The brother of Jared was asked to commit himself on something that had not yet happened. He was to confirm his belief in that which the Lord had not yet spoken. There are few individuals, indeed, who would command such faith from any of us. To few people would we commit ourselves to believe what they were going to say. It takes faith to be willing to commit oneself that way.

The Lord said, by way of testing the brother of Jared, "Believest thou the words which I shall speak?" The brother of Jared confirmed his great faith by answering, "Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a God of truth, and canst not lie." When the Lord saw that Jared would believe anything He said, He showed Himself to him. The brother of Jared had actually seen; now he had knowledge. The record confirms:

"And because of the knowledge of this man he could not be kept from beholding within the veil; and he saw the finger of Jesus, which, when he saw, he fell with fear; for he knew that it was the finger of the Lord; and he had faith no longer, for he knew, nothing doubting." (Ether 3:1-19.)

Faith, to be faith, must center around something that is not known. Faith, to be faith, must go beyond that for which there is confirming evidence. Faith, to be faith, must go into the unknown. Faith, to be faith, must walk to the edge of the light, and then a few steps into the darkness. If everything has to be known, if everything has to be explained, if everything has to be certified, then there is no need for faith. Indeed, there is no room for it.

The prophet Alma said: "Yea, there are many who do say: If thou wilt show unto us a sign from heaven, then we shall know of a surety; then we shall believe. Now I ask, is that faith? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for if a man knoweth a thing he hath no cause to believe, for he knoweth it. . . . And now as I said concerning faith—faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:17-18, 21.)

There are two kinds of faith. One of them functions ordinarily in the life of every soul. It is the kind of faith born by experience; it gives us certainty that a new day will dawn, that spring will come, that growth will take place. It is the kind of faith that relates us with confidence to that which is scheduled to happen. This kind of faith was exemplified by the little Japanese girl.

There is another kind of faith, rare indeed. This is the kind of faith that causes things to happen. It is the kind of faith that is worthy and prepared and unyielding, and it calls forth things that otherwise would not be. It is the kind of faith that moves people. It is the kind of faith that sometimes moves things. Few men possess it. It comes by gradual growth. It is a marvelous, even a transcendent, power, a power as real and as invisible as electricity. Directed and channeled, it has great effect.

But faith must be faith. One man tried "experimenting" with faith. He had spoken of his certainty that an event would transpire, and his desires were not brought to pass; the event he so much yearned for did not happen. Afterward, his bitter comment was, "Well, you see, it didn't happen. I didn't think it would."

In a world filled with skepticism and doubt, the expression "seeing is believing" promotes the attitude, "You show me, and I will believe." We want all of the proof and all of the evidence first. It seems hard to take things on faith.

When will we learn that in spiritual things it works the other way about—that believing is seeing? Spiritual belief precedes spiritual knowledge. When we believe in things that are not seen but are nevertheless true, then we have faith.

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared: "Never get discouraged. . . . If I was sunk in the lowest pit of Nova Scotia and all the Rocky Mountains piled on top of me, I . . . hang on, exercise faith and keep up good courage and I should come out on the top." (George A. Smith, Memoirs of George A. Smith, pp. 81-82.)

Faith can increase. It will move forward as a light before us. Sometimes the fogs and mists of doubt are so thick and enshroud us so fully that only the most penetrating and persistent faith will send a beam beyond it.

As we exercise faith we can do as did Nephi, who said: "And I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do." (1 Nephi 4:6.)
