No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

FAITH IN ONESELF

Elder Marvin J. Ashton

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the individual, the human soul, is of utmost importance. We are the sons and daughters of God. He loves us. He wants us to have joy and happiness and to be exalted and dwell with Him. He has said, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39) and "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God" (D&C 18:10).

Each of us and our lives are important to God. We need to be constantly aware of the fact that we are children of God. He knows us. He hears us. He loves us. His church, His truths, and His eternal dwelling places are for those who love Him, keep His commandments, and continue in His word. We need to constantly remember that faith in God is reflected in faith in oneself, and faith in oneself is manifest by one's actions.

Proper self-image will help us keep our habits, lives, and souls directed in happy paths. How proud we should be in the knowledge that we have Godlike attributes. It was Abraham Lincoln who said, "It is difficult to make a man miserable while he feels he is worthy of himself and claims kindred to the great God who made him."

One of life's eternal pursuits is learning to know oneself. Dr. Thomas Harris shares this worthy thought with us: "Most people never fulfill their human promise and potential because they remain perpetually helpless children overwhelmed by a sense of inferiority. The feeling of being okay does not imply that the person has risen above all his faults and emotional problems. It merely implies that he refuses to be paralyzed by them. He is determined to accept himself as he is but also to assume more and more control of his life."

Getting better acquainted with oneself and realizing God has given to every person gifts and talents is a worthy challenge, "for there are many gifts, and to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God. To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby." (D&C 46:11-12.)

How important are you in your own eyes? Do you treat yourself shabbily? Do you forget you are a temple of God? Or do you treat yourself as being a person of great worth? Do you look upon yourself as though you really are a son or daughter of God? Do you have personal respect and honor for yourself? Do you have faith in yourself?

In all of these questions we need to realize that with God's help, we can accomplish all things; our potential is unlimited. What a blessing it is to us individually to know that if we walk in His paths, we can merit security. God's joy is great when we repent and come unto Him. All that God has is available to His worthy children regardless of how long they have been away or lost.

We are all different. God in His wisdom has so created us. Only we can determine what we will do with what happens to us. What we do with what happens to us is more important than what happens to us. Certainly with God's help we can do what is right. The truth "for as he thinketh in his heart, so is he" (Proverbs 23:7) is as applicable today as any time in history.

Shakespeare had a glimpse of the importance of becoming well acquainted with oneself when he wrote the following lines in the play Hamlet:

This above all: to thine own self be true,

And it must follow, as the night the day,

Thou canst not then be false to any man.

Being true to ourselves can mean knowing where we are, where we are going and why, and assisting our associates in traveling the right paths with us.

Proper self-management is a great virtue that can lead to personal pride. Personal pride is a great motivator. It is a virtue to understand who we are and to conduct ourselves accordingly. To be created in God's image is a tremendous blessing with accompanying choice responsibilities. He said, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are." (1 Corinthians 3:16-17.)

Appropriate personal pride prohibits shabby performance. Proper self-image is a basic ingredient of pride in oneself. It is necessary if individual discipline is to be purposeful and effective.

Generally the cover or jacket of a book is designed to sell what is inside. We will not have to die to be judged by the cover of the book of life. To those who say, "It's what you really are inside that counts, not the length of the hair or beard," I would say, "If this is true, and I agree it is, why run the risk of looking like something you're not?"

One winter when the Salt Lake area was experiencing one of its worst snowstorms, a handsome young serviceman and his beautiful bride-to-be encountered extreme difficulty in getting to the Salt Lake Temple for their marriage appointment. She was in one location in the valley, and he was to come from another nearby town. Heavy snows and winds had closed the highways during the night and early morning hours. After many hours of anxious waiting, some of us were able to help them get to the temple to be married before the day was over. How grateful they, their families, and their friends were for assistance and concern in their keeping this most important appointment.

The young bridegroom expressed his deep gratitude with these words: "Thank you very much for all you did to make our wedding possible. I don't understand why you went to all this trouble to help me. Really, I'm nobody." I am sure he meant his comment to be a most sincere compliment, but I responded firmly, but I hope kindly, "Bill, I have never helped a 'nobody' in my life. In the kingdom of our Heavenly Father, nobody is a 'nobody.'"

This tendency to wrongfully identify ourselves was again brought to my attention during an interview with a troubled wife. Her marriage was in great difficulty. She had tried earnestly to correct the communication blocks with her husband but with little success. She was grateful for the time her bishop spent in counseling. Her stake president was also most patient and understanding in his willingness to try to help. Her many contacts with properly channeled priesthood direction left her not only grateful but also somewhat amazed. Her concluding observation was, "I just don't understand all of you people giving so much time and showing so much concern. After all, I'm really nobody."

I am certain our Heavenly Father is displeased when we refer to ourselves as "nobody." How fair are we when we classify ourselves as a "nobody"? How fair are we to our families? How fair are we to God? We do ourselves a great injustice when we allow ourselves, through tragedy, misfortune, challenge, discouragement, or whatever the earthly situation, to so identify ourselves.

No matter how or where we find ourselves, we cannot with any justification label ourselves "nobody." As children of God, we are somebody. He will build us, mold us, and magnify us if we will but hold our heads up, our arms out, and walk with Him. What a great blessing to be created in His image and know of our true potential in and through Him! What a great blessing to know that in His strength we can do all things!

God help us to realize that one of our greatest responsibilities and privileges is to lift a self-labeled "nobody" to a "somebody" who is wanted, needed, and desirable. Our first obligation in this area of stewardship is to begin with self. "I am nobody" is a destructive philosophy. It is a tool of the deceiver.

It is heartbreaking when youth in difficulty look up and respond to offered guidance with, "What does it matter? I'm nobody." It is just as disturbing when a student on campus responds with, "I am no one special on campus. I'm just one of the thousands. I'm really nobody."

We are living in days when it is easy to be discontented, tired, fatigued, bored, and vexed in and with life. Discouragement and weariness set in when we allow ourselves the dangerous luxury of self-pity. Such thoughts as these come to us when we allow ourselves to become discouraged and weary: "No one appreciates me." "Even my own children won't listen to me." "I don't have to get involved with someone else." "I'm really not accomplishing anything."

Proper attitude in this crisis-dominated world is a priceless possession. Never before has it been more important for all of us to move forward with conviction. We may be behind, but we are not losing if we are moving in the right direction. God will not score our performance until the end of the journey. He who made us expects us to be victorious. He stands by anxious to answer our call for help.

Sad but true, many today are behind in their contacts with God and are encouraging destructive attitudes toward self and fellowmen. We need to lead with good cheer, optimism, and courage if we are to move onward and upward.

We came into this life for experience, and that's all we can take out of it. Thank God we have the right to decide personally and individually what we shall do. The future belongs to those who know what to do with it. We must look forward to the unknown with optimism and confidence; look to tomorrow with happy expectancy, realizing that with God's help we can do all things. We need to constantly build faith in ourselves and those about us. We need to personally make dark days brighter. Isn't it a joy, a lift, a light, to see someone with heavy challenges and burdens moving forward to victory in the only contest that really matters!

Faith makes it possible for us to know that even in temporary failure or setback, there is always a next time, ever a tomorrow. One of the greatest tragedies of our times is that children of God are living and performing below their capabilities. What a thrill it is to see people achieving, conquering, overcoming through proper daily action, self-discipline, and commitment. Progression and achievement belong to those who have learned to use the opportunity of now. Our strides of today will determine our location tomorrow.

Our obligation is to avoid self-pity, self-judgment, and self-indulgence. If we properly understand our relationship to God and His to us, we will not have moments, days, or lives spent in wondering, "What have I done to deserve this?" "What does God have against me?" or "Why wasn't I born with the talents my friends have?"

Following a recent discussion on the subject of adversity, a young man who was greatly concerned about the burdens being carried by his wonderful mother asked, "If God is omnipotent and knows all, why does He put my mother through the agony of continual sufferings when He already knows what the outcome will be?" My response to him was, "Your mother's trials are not tests so the Lord can measure her. They are tests and trials so that your mother can measure herself. It is most important that she know her strengths in adversity and grow from the experiences."

It is not our role to be self-condemning. I like to think that the admonition of the Savior, "Judge not, that ye be not judged," has direct reference to us and our relationship with ourselves. We should not judge ourselves.

Let me share with you an example of the results of daily determination and performance.

In 1960 the Olympics were held in Melbourne, Australia. In the spotlight on the winner's platform one day there stood a beautiful, tall, blonde American girl. She was being presented a gold medal, symbolic of first place in worldwide competition. Tears ran down her cheeks as she accepted the recognition. Many thought she was touched by the victory ceremony; the thing they did not know was the story of her determination, self-discipline, and daily action.

At the age of five she had polio. When the disease left her body, she couldn't use her arms or legs. Her parents took her every day to a swimming pool, where they hoped the water would help hold her arms up as she tried to use them again. When she could lift her arms out of the water with her own power, she cried with joy. Then her goal was to swim the width of the pool, then the length, then several lengths. Kelly Mann kept on trying, swimming, enduring day after day after day until she won the gold medal for the butterfly stroke—one of the most difficult of all strokes in swimming—at the Olympics in Melbourne.

What shall we do then? Let us resolve to so live that the Lord can say to us, as He did to the Prophet Joseph Smith in some of his darkest, most trying hours, "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes." (D&C 121:7-8.)

We should teach ourselves patience—patience to believe in ourselves, patience to motivate ourselves, patience to believe that God and we can do it. When necessary, we should lean on the truth that we are children of God. God and we, with patience on our part, can do it. We do not have to worry about the patience of God, because He is the personification of patience, no matter where we have been, what we have done, or what we have allowed ourselves to think of ourselves.

From Harry Emerson Fosdick we read: "The most extraordinary thing about the oyster is this: Irritations get into his shell. He does not like them. But when he cannot get rid of them, he uses the irritation to do the loveliest thing an oyster ever has a chance to do. If there are irritations in our lives today, there is only one prescription: make a pearl. It may have to be a pearl of patience, but anyhow, make a pearl. And it takes faith and love to do it."

Two of Satan's greatest tools are impatience and discouragement. Drugs, moral misconduct, and violent protest are merely evidences of internal impatience on our part.

A notion commonly shared by many is that the best of life is just ahead, over the next hill, a few years away—retirement, tomorrow, next month, when I turn sixteen, or next summer. We become actively engaged in the pastime of conditioning ourselves to believe that happiness and achievement are always somewhere in the future. There is an attitude of tolerating today, even looking past today in anticipation of a better tomorrow. To people so inclined, the better future may never come. The pleasant future belongs to those who properly use today. We need to find the abundant life as we go along. How can we be happy tomorrow if our nows are filled with self-inflicted unhappiness and unwise delays?

Generally speaking, those inclined to count their blessings have more to count because they help make more possible as they learn gratitude. A constant waiting for a brighter future may cause us to lose the beautiful today. Some spend so much time getting ready to live for an unknown future that they discover there is suddenly no time left to live. Often in our anxiousness for the joys of the future we run away from the very things we are wanting and needing today. An appropriate examination of the passing moment will prove that it leads to eternity. We need to constantly remind ourselves that eternity is in process now.

When the wise counsel that "men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness" (D&C 58:27) was given, the time structure referred only to now, today, and without delay. How unwise are those who want to delay repentance until tomorrow. With each passing day, the process becomes more difficult to pursue. Most of our hurts and misunderstandings could be cleared away if we treated them today instead of waiting for them to go away tomorrow.

To live more fully each hour and to glean the most from each day is wisdom. How unwise we are to waste our todays, when they determine the significance of our tomorrows. We should wisely live a day at a time, because that is all we have.

Fears in our lives can be conquered if we will but have faith and move forward with purpose. The constant nursing of personal hurts is a crutch for those who would move with hesitation, if at all. Yielding to the pains of tragedy and grief deters self-development and takes away the opportunity for triumph over trying obstacles. Being fettered with habits and mistakes of misconduct relegates a person to being a victim of his errors. Letting fears inhibit progress is but another evidence of one's unwillingness to try because of the fear of failure. Roadblocks to eternal progress are cast aside when resolves are made that no man needs to walk alone. It is a happy day when we come to know that with God's help, nothing is impossible for us.

May we look to ourselves with new responsibility, new self-appreciation, higher self-image, and greater self-respect. We are children of God. We do possess God-given attributes.

Let us so live that it may be said of us, "He is well balanced. He has faith in God and in himself. He knows where he is going and how to get there. He is a good manager of himself." By doing this, it will be possible for us to better serve in the kingdom and have a greater appreciation for the thrilling declaration, "As man now is, God once was; as God now is, man may become." (Lorenzo Snow.)
