No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

FAITHFUL SERVANTS

Elder J. Thomas Fyans

During the existence of this world, when there has been need, the Lord has spoken to a faithful servant. The dictionary tells us that faithful means "full of faith, true in affection or allegiance." What kind of person is a faithful servant of the Lord? Where do we find instances of faithful servants?

In the scriptures we find many examples. Noah responded to the direction he received from heaven. He built an ark and placed aboard it all that he was commanded to. "Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he." Then the Lord said to Noah, "Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteousness before me in this generation." Noah, being full of faith, saved himself and his family. (Genesis 6:22; 7:1.)

In the Book of Mormon, we read: "Behold I, Nephi, will show unto you that the tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom he hath chosen, because of their faith, to make them mighty even unto the power of deliverance." (1 Nephi 1:20.)

Then Nephi describes the deliverance of his father and family: "For behold, it came to pass that the Lord spake unto my father, yea, even in a dream, and said unto him: Blessed art thou Lehi, because of the things which thou hast done; and because thou hast been faithful and declared unto this people the things which I commanded thee, behold, they seek to take away thy life.

"And it came to pass that the Lord commanded my father, even in a dream, that he should take his family and depart into the wilderness." (1 Nephi 1:20; 2:1-2.)

Many other instances are recorded in the holy writ, such as Abraham and Moses receiving inspirational direction so that they and their loved ones might avoid destruction.

Inspiration from heaven does not always require a physical move. In fact, it more frequently requires a spiritual move, from an undesirable condition to one more compatible with the Spirit of the Lord. All of these moves, spiritual and physical, require faith.

The scriptures give us instances of faith in centuries past. Let us look at an instance within a few years of today. When the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve of the Church directed that the Translation Department become functional in the Orient, the General Authorities and mission presidents were asked whom they would recommend to assume this very important key role. This man needed to be a person who was full of faith. The name of Kan Watanabe was recommended by several. In Tokyo, an interview was arranged with Brother Watanabe, and as we awaited his arrival, Elder Adney Komatsu, an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve now, but president of the Japan Mission in Tokyo then, recounted this story as a basis for his recommendation of Brother Watanabe.

Brother Watanabe was serving as a counselor to President Komatsu in the Japan Mission. One day in a conversation with Brother Watanabe, President Komatsu said, "Because you live several hundred miles from here, I sometimes feel that I am in a boxing ring and have one hand tied behind me." This statement was meant to compliment Brother Watanabe and recognize his contribution to the presidency of the mission.

Not long after this comment had been made, Brother Watanabe appeared at the mission headquarters in Tokyo and said to President Komatsu, "Here I am." President Komatsu replied, "Yes, I see you." Brother Watanabe then said, "No, what I am saying is that I am now here in Tokyo. I have left my employment and have moved my family, and I am now here so that you will be in a boxing ring with both hands ready. One hand will not be tied behind you." What a display of faith! Brother Watanabe soon found a very fine position that would allow him to take care of his family temporally.

As Brother Watanabe was ushered into a room for the interview and we described to him the responsibility that would evolve upon the shoulders of the person charged with the responsibility of translating, printing, and distributing materials in the Orient, we asked, "Would you like to assume this responsibility?" He responded immediately, "If that is what the Lord would like me to do, I am ready." He left his employment and began this new assignment immediately. He was willing to accept the direction of the Lord.

Faith gives us the assurance that we can expect to attain a certain result if we act in a particular way. If we wish to leave a room, we will get up and move toward the particular exit that will allow us to arrive at the desired destination. In turning out a light, we will automatically use the switch that we believe controls that certain light. We learn from new experiences, but we rarely move in a direction unless faith gives us the feeling that we can thereby accomplish a desired goal. Faith is a condition of the heart and mind, built on experience, that gives us the motivation to move ahead in all areas of our lives.

Lasting faith must be built on true principles, and the process of building faith is the testing of knowledge for its truth. Faith increases as our knowledge increases, but the degree of faith depends upon the intensity and certainty of our belief. Great faith can even accompany limited knowledge; it has great motivating power.

Our wise Father in heaven desires us to build strength within ourselves, and He does this by giving us free agency and allowing us to choose for ourselves.

President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "Wouldn't it be easy for the Lord to have an angel come in the midst of heaven and cry to all people everywhere upon the face of the earth and tell them that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God? That is not His way of doing. We came here to this world to be tried and proved to see what kind of stuff we are made of, and to walk by faith."

The principle of faith is probably the basic principle of all human life, and it is the first principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The basic saving principle is faith in Jesus as the Christ. We need a great faith in Jesus as the Son of God, in His atoning sacrifice for all mankind, and in the fact that obeying His commandments will place us on the road to eternal life. The reward for faith will come when we demonstrate it by our works.

How can faith motivate us in our daily lives? It can give us a positive approach to living. Because of the promises from the Lord, we should be willing to keep our bodies clean and in good physical condition. In view of our covenant and promise, through baptism and partaking of the sacrament, to follow the gospel plan by keeping the commandments, we should have no problem in being honest and upright in all of our dealings with our fellowmen and in giving faithful and devoted service in our church assignments. Faith will give us the desire to improve ourselves by gaining more knowledge and by developing talents and skills that will help us to have greater ability in every facet of our lives. We will grow spiritually as we are motivated to stay in communication with our Heavenly Father through prayer, to read the scriptures, to listen to the counsel of our latter-day prophets, and to live in such a way as to have the Holy Ghost as our companion.

We are continually faced with decisions. Daily we have to decide where we are going and by what route we will reach the desired goal. One day a father was backing his car in an abandoned lot. His little daughter, who was riding with him, said, "Daddy, you are getting into a hole." The father did not pay any attention and kept backing until her insistent cry caused him to apply the brakes and drive forward. His heart sank when he saw a large pit covered with rotting boards and the tire marks just about a foot from having backed into a real problem.

He said, "Suppose I had not believed her. All of my superior wisdom, my determination, my stubbornness for believing that I was always right all argued against my faith in her sure knowledge. The insistence in her tone of voice rather than my faith in her word finally made me alter my course. Is this the way we react to the warnings we receive from our Heavenly Father through His servants as they say "Stop, you are backing into a problem that may lead you from the straight and narrow way; change your direction"? Do we have the faith to listen to the servants of God and to follow their counsel that we should obey all of His commandments? If we have such faith, we can be sure that God will keep His promises to us. We will find the right course and will be rewarded with happy, successful lives here, and we can look forward to eternal lives in the hereafter.
