No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

FAITH IN THE LIVES OF THE SAINTS

Elder M. Russell Ballard

What a priceless collection of faith-promoting experiences can be found in the scriptures! I marvel at the powerful accounts they contain: The aged patriarch Abraham ascending Mount Moriah with his only son Isaac. A young shepherd boy challenging the giant of the Philistine armies. Alma and Amulek imprisoned at Ammonihah.

You and I are constantly nourished by these great examples of faith and miracles from the past.

But what of today? As the prophet Mormon asked: "Has the day of miracles ceased? Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought." (Moroni 7:35-37.)

Yes, faith is the key. And as I travel over the Church, I find such miracle-spawning faith to be in abundant supply. I agree with President Heber J. Grant, who said: "I bear my witness to you that if a record had been made of all those who have been afflicted, those who have been given up to die, and who have been healed by the power of God, since the establishment of the Church of Christ in our day, it would make a book much larger than the New Testament. More miracles have been performed in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints than we have any account of in the days of the Savior and His Apostles. Today, sickness is cured by spiritual power. . . . The dead have been raised. My own brother was announced to be dead, but by the prayer of faith he lives and presides over one of the stakes of Zion. I know, as I know I live, that the healing power of Almighty God . . . is in the Church of Christ of which you and I are members." (Conference Report, October 6, 1910, p. 119.)

May I take you on a globe-spanning tour to show you the faith that exists today in the lives of Latter-day Saints?

Our first stop is New Zealand. It is March 1976, and the Saints of this South Pacific island are anxiously preparing for their first area conference and the arrival of President Spencer W. Kimball. President Kimball had just concluded a rigorous schedule of conference sessions in Samoa. Between sessions he had selflessly exposed himself to all manner of sickness as he gave blessings to numerous people who sought his aid. Then, shortly afterward, he himself was stricken with a serious illness, similar to the type he had rebuked in several administrations. Both he and Sister Kimball had temperatures of 104 degrees. They were coughing, violently nauseated, and most miserable.

Russell M. Nelson, the prophet's attending physician, recalled that President Kimball was "gray and ashen" as he and D. Arthur Haycock, President Kimball's secretary, assisted him onto the airplane for the flight to New Zealand. One official scolded Dr. Nelson for allowing President Kimball to get on the plane, saying "Anyone can see that he's too sick to get on an airplane and fly to New Zealand. You should leave him here in Pago Pago, where he can go to the hospital and get the aid that he needs." Nevertheless President and Sister Kimball were settled on the plane with blankets while their fevers raged between 102 and 104 degrees.

In New Zealand President and Sister Kimball were rushed to the home of the temple president, and they immediately went to bed. President Kimball asked President N. Eldon Tanner to handle the planned reception with the Maori queen, since he himself was too ill to go. Moreover, he said, "Sister Kimball and I will not make it to the cultural activities planned for this evening because of our illness. The doctor thinks we should not attend. Therefore, will you please excuse us and begin the meeting on time. Express our regrets to the congregation. We will try to conserve our strength in order to make it to the general sessions of the area conference tomorrow morning." President Tanner agreed and left.

Dr. Nelson remained with President and Sister Kimball while his wife, Dantzel, went with the other Brethren and their wives to the stadium at the Church College of New Zealand for the cultural program. All was quiet at the temple president's home while the prophet and his wife slept. Brother Nelson recalls what happened then:

I was reading in President Kimball's room when he awakened with a start.

He said, "Brother Nelson, what time was that program to begin this evening?"

I said, "At seven o'clock, President Kimball."

He said, "What time is it now?"

I replied, "It's almost seven." Noting that he was soaked in perspiration, I thought his fever may have broken, which indeed it had. His temperature was now 98.6 degrees.

He said, "Tell Sister Kimball we're going!"

Several thoughts flashed through my mind in that instant, culminating in a decision that it would be inadvisable for me to say anything about it being medically inadvisable for him to go. So I quickly went in and said to Sister Kimball, "We're going." They each hurriedly prepared and went to the car that had been made available.

So President and Sister Kimball, Brother Haycock, and I drove the short distance from the temple president's home to the Church College stadium, where the activities were being held. As the car entered the stadium, there was a very loud shout that erupted spontaneously. It was so sudden and so deafening that I wondered if it might have been a clap of thunder. The car was driven around the track to the place where President and Sister Kimball could be ushered to their seats; Brother Haycock and I took our seats beside our companions as well. I asked Dantzel what was the cause of that enormous shout. I got the story from her point of view.

She said that President Tanner had called the meeting to order at 7:00 P.M. and had explained that President and Sister Kimball were unable to attend because of illness. They were to proceed without them in order that their strength might be preserved to join with the Saints the following day. Then one of the young New Zealanders was called upon to pray. With a faith typical to these Saints in the islands, this young New Zealander gave what my wife described as a rather lengthy prayer. During the course of his prayer, he supplicated the Lord thusly: "We are three thousand New Zealand youth. We are assembled here, having prepared for six months to sing and to dance for thy prophet. Wilt thou heal him and deliver him here." Then, as the "Amen" was pronounced, the car entered carrying President and Sister Kimball. They were immediately identified by the assembled throng of thousands, who all spontaneously issued that shout for joy on having their prayer answered so directly." (Russell M. Nelson, From Heart to Heart: An Autobiography, 1979, pp. 177-80.)

Missionary work is one area where faith and their attendant miracles are particularly evident in our day.

Several years ago, I was assigned to supervise missionary work and other Church work in the southeastern part of the United States. In that capacity I had the great opportunity to meet with missionaries in zone conferences. While sitting on the stand in a zone conference at one time in the Columbia South Carolina Mission, I noticed a missionary and his companion come in, walk across the back of the hall, and come down the aisle. Then I watched as the senior companion, with great empathy and love, gently arranged for the seating of his junior companion. As I watched, I turned to President Ronald Knighton and inquired, "Is that elder blind?" Upon learning that he was, I confessed to President Knighton, "I didn't know that we sent totally blind young men or women on full-time missions."

I had a great spiritual experience as I met that young man, Elder Nolan Crabb, after the meeting. I embraced him and told him how proud I was of him and how sure I was that the Lord was blessing him. He served a glorious mission surrounded by physical darkness, but filled to overflowing with the spirit of the gospel and the light of the Lord. He touched many, many lives. No missionary who served in that mission brought more people into the Church than did this young man. He served as zone leader and finished his mission as the assistant to the president of the mission, despite his blindness.

Upon arriving home from his mission, he was called into his bishop's office in Ogden, Utah, and given a very special blessing. Three months later, he was at Brigham Young University, white cane in hand, learning his way from one building to another. With the help of a mobility instructor he was able to learn 95 to 98 percent of the campus.

One day, while Nolan was in a hurry to get to a class, a friend came along and said, "I'll take you with me." As they were running along, his friend took a shortcut through an area Nolan had never been through before. Then his friend stopped in the middle and said, "I've got to take off to my class now, but you can make it; it's really easy." Nolan was left alone. He said it was like being flown over to Tokyo, dropped out of the plane, and told, "Walk to the temple site." But Nolan began to move, and as he did so, he said, "Now, Father, the nearest person is about three hundred feet away, and this is BYU, where you don't ruin your reputation by hollering, 'Hey, come and help.' People would think I was some kind of a freak, and I couldn't afford that. So you're the only one who can hear me at this point. Can you please get me out of this jam? I'm not exactly sure where I am." As he started to move again, he began to hear a voice, clear and distinct, that said "Turn left here," or "Go right," or "Stay straight." He also felt a hand on his shoulder, and so real was that force and feeling that he turned around to see who was there. He obviously did not see anyone, but more significantly, he did not hear any footsteps either, nor did anyone speak. Within two minutes, he heard the sound of a familiar landmark. Sensing his location, he was able to turn and enter the building where his class was.

There were tears in his eyes as the Spirit recalled from his memory the words of his bishop in the blessing he gave him three months earlier after his mission: "I bless you that in your time of trial the angels of God will come and encamp round about you. And though they will be unseen, they will serve as your guiding lights, as your beacons, and as your friends to guide you in areas throughout this earth wherein you need their help."

Yes, angels, healings, gifts of the Spirit, and other miracles operate daily in the lives of faithful Latter-day Saints who have committed themselves to the service of the Lord and their fellowmen. Even the tempering of the elements is possible when faith is strong enough and the Lord requires it. I was thrilled in general conference a few years ago to hear Douglas W. DeHaan, president of the Portland Oregon East Stake, tell of such an experience:

The Portland Oregon East Stake has been developing a dairy farm over the past half dozen years or more. It is located on an island in the Columbia River and is one of the largest single-stake projects in the Church. This fact, coupled with the need to develop the project almost from scratch, has placed a heavy burden upon our people, both in time and in money.

With a new project, we had run in the red each year, but 1977 was to be our turnabout year. The final result depended upon harvesting about seventy-five acres of corn, which was to be made into silage for feed. Unseasonably, it had rained almost every day during the month of September, and by the first day of October, our scheduled harvest date, I knew the crop was in trouble. We have a very high water table on the island, and when the ground gets saturated with too much water we get so much mud our harvest equipment cannot get into the fields without sinking. Once the land is saturated it takes about a month of dry weather to make the fields passable to vehicles. During the winter months and right up until June, the corn ground is entirely under water.

I visit the farm about once a week, so I keep a pair of rubber boots in my car. I drove to the farm that October day and decided to pull on my boots and walk down into the corn fields. I immediately found even the road turned to mud and puddles. In places the mud came near the top of my eighteen-inch-high boots, and I don't really know why I continued walking. It was a dark gray, overcast day, and drops of rain were splashing in the open puddles everywhere. The farm crew told me they had taken a corn chopper down into the fields a few days earlier but had it down to the axles in mud somewhere in the long corn rows.

As I walked I noticed that the corn itself was a fine crop, with row after row ten to fourteen feet high. Now, I rarely get depressed, but I was feeling really low that day. I knew how hard everyone had worked and what it meant to lose that fine crop. I eventually came to the spot where the chopper had gone in, and looking way down the rows I saw it sunk deep into the mud. For some reason I decided to walk to the chopper, and as I entered the rows and splashed on through the mud and water, I was startled to hear a voice. I am sure that the voice came to me only in my mind, but I could hear the voice and admonition of President Kimball. He said softly, "Is anything too hard for the Lord?" (Genesis 18:14.) Now, like you, I have heard him say that many times, but I did not fully focus upon it before this time. I smiled to myself and said, "Yes, President, I believe this mess may be too hard even for the Lord."

As I neared the chopper, I was impressed to climb up on it and upon doing so found my head was about two feet above seventy-five acres of that tall, splendid corn. As I looked about in discouragement, the voice seemed to come to me again, but this time in a more serious tone, "President, is there anything too hard for the Lord?" At once I felt ashamed of my attitude of depression, and soon I was no longer looking down but up into the sky. Before I realized it, I was talking, yes, pleading aloud with the Lord in faith. When I had finished, I had committed that crop and the harvesting of it into the hands of the Lord and had done so by the power of the priesthood of God. I recall that as I climbed down from the chopper, tears were still streaming from my eyes. I grew concerned as I slowly walked away considering what it was that I had just done. Yet I knew that I had done it in total faith, that there was a proper need, and that it was a righteous request of the Lord.

Because of the spiritual nature of my experience, I think I had decided not to tell anyone of it. But the very next Sunday I was sitting on the stand during one of our ward sacrament meetings. I was not scheduled to speak, but the bishop got up with about ten minutes remaining and said, "I feel President DeHaan has had a spiritual experience that he needs to share with us." I got up reluctantly, knowing what it was I had to relate. I did so and asked the congregation to join me with their faith. Now, we have Saints with great testimonies in our stake, and my experience spread rapidly throughout the wards. I learned several weeks later that members were even telling their nonmember friends to go ahead and plan picnics and outdoor activities, because even in Oregon it was not going to rain throughout October. On the day following my experience in the corn fields, the sun came out for the first time in nearly thirty days. Then the next day we had sun, and the day following that. Before long the temperature was back into the high seventies. Every day for the next three weeks the weather forecast called for rain, but each day no rain fell.

I recall that about two weeks later I flew to Seattle, about two hundred miles to the north, on business. It rained very hard there all day, and as I made the return trip to Portland it rained all the way until we reached the Columbia River, which surrounds our farm. Miraculously, the clouds parted and the rain ceased. That day I cut a little weather map from the newspaper showing the rain ending at the river and put it on our refrigerator as a reminder to keep my faith. Three weeks after my original experience in the fields, I drove to the farm once again. I put on my boots and went back into the corn. This time the ground was soft but firming. That was on a Friday, and our fine farm crew was already making plans to begin the harvest on the following Monday.

That same day an acquaintance of mine from a local television station called. He said, "I understand the Mormons are developing a fine dairy farm on Sauvies Island." I answered in the affirmative, and he inquired, "Is there a story there?" I told him there was, but I knew he could never capture the real story. That very Monday, as we began our harvest, we had a camera crew on the farm for several hours, and we did get some fine publicity for the Church.

With the loyal assistance of many of the members, we worked day and night for the next five days. By the following Saturday, all of the freshly chopped corn was safely in our silage pits, and we finished covering it over with plastic. At last we had the feed needed to get us through the winter. Within an hour after having covered the crop, the heavens just seemed to open and commenced one of the heaviest and longest downpours I can remember. The fields from which the corn had just been removed were flooded and remained under water from that day until the following June. As I stood in the rain with feelings of gratitude that I'll never be able to adequately describe, it seemed to me that the Lord had just saved it up until our spiritual understanding had been fulfilled. (Ensign, November 1980, pp. 87-88.)

Our Church leaders have faith-promoting experiences almost daily. I was privileged to participate in such an incident on a Fast Sunday recently when I had the pleasure of being in my own ward. A young sister arose to bear her testimony. I had known her father for many years and knew that he was presently on a Church assignment away from Salt Lake City. As she bore her testimony, she talked about the tremendous difficulties her older sister was undergoing in a pregnancy. She was bearing her testimony essentially for the faith of the ward to help her older sister. As I sat listening to her remarks, the impression hit me that I must go and give the sister a blessing.

Later in the day, my wife and I went to the home of the older sister. A member of her family answered our knock. He hesitated to let us in because of the physical appearance of the bedridden, expectant mother. She had contracted shingles, her face was a mass of scabs, and she looked as though she had been in a terrible fight. It was understandable that she didn't want to see anyone.

Being a devout member of the Church, this young mother had always desired to do what the Lord wanted her to do. She had always felt that her mission was to bring children into the world. But in prior pregnancies she had had severe complications, so it was understandable that she had fears, anxieties, and worries over this pregnancy.

I was prompted by the Spirit to tell the family that I had been directed there by the Lord to give her a blessing. With that message, she came into the room, and there, with the help of her husband and her father-in-law, I gave her a blessing. As I sealed the anointing, words flowed and promises were made that were frightening. I even wanted to hold back, but it didn't seem right to do that. The impression came to let her know that I was standing there, not only as her neighbor and as a General Authority, but as a proxy for her absent father. When those words slipped from my lips and fell upon the head of this daughter, she wept. We were all weeping.

The following Wednesday, she had an appointment with her doctor. Much to her relief and with a heart full of gratitude, she learned that all of her bodily functions had returned to normal, the afflictions to her face and body had receded, and her general well-being had returned. I had occasion to see her a short time after that, and what a blessing it was to see this sweet sister, who had been so very sick, bedridden, and unable to move, up and about and doing so very well. A few weeks later she brought her little infant son, who was born normal and well and healthy in every way, for us to see.

Because of experiences like this that come into my life, it is easy for me to bear testimony that I know that the Church is true, that I know that Jesus is the Christ, that this is His work, and that our Heavenly Father is very close to us.

I know that the faith of righteous individuals is a very real force in the universe. It is the key that unlocks the heavens and allows the Almighty to pour down knowledge, blessings, and even miracles upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints. I testify that the faith of the ancients is with us today and is manifested in the lives of humble people throughout the world.
