No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

THE FAITH OF WOMEN

Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin

Women have played a major role in my life. My father labored long hours in his business and in the Church, and for that reason my childhood and teenage years were influenced in a major degree by my mother and my sisters. We have seven daughters and one son. You can see that in our family the girls have the majority, but never have they exercised their majority unrighteously. Our family has had a beautiful spirit of love and consideration one for another. Our son has been kind and considerate of his sisters and his mother. The reason for this wonderful spirit has been the influence of the gospel of Jesus Christ. This spirit fosters the peace that passeth understanding, of which the Savior spoke so beautifully.

My life has been encircled by two special women—my mother, who gave me life itself and who nurtured me in those days when I needed that care, and the girl of my dreams whom I married and who is the loving companion of my life here on this earth and will continue so into the eternities. She has sustained me with an unfailing devotion.

Another important person who taught me a love of this divine Church in my early years was Sister Marion G. Romney, the wife of President Marion G. Romney. She was my Primary teacher who taught me to love and sustain the authorities of the Church and to appreciate the early pioneers who sacrificed so much. President Romney was my coach in those early years and later my bishop, a great leader of youth and of all the Church today.

What are the great principles that women must continually emphasize in their families as mothers and future mothers? First, they should emphasize that God lives, that He is our Creator, that He is interested in each one of us, in our eternal progress and growth. They must teach their sons and daughters to have faith that Jesus is the Christ, the only Begotten Son of our Heavenly Father, even our Redeemer. Third, they must help their children to possess the faith that Joseph Smith did see God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ, and that he was indeed a true prophet of God. Our sons and daughters must know that it was through Joseph Smith that the gospel, the Church of Jesus Christ, was restored, and that the holy priesthood was given to the Prophet and his associates in order for them to have the power to act for God here upon the earth. And last, they must have the faith to know and realize that they as mothers in our day play a major role in shaping the destiny of their families and the kingdom of God. We must turn this faith into action as did our pioneer ancestry.

One of my grandmothers made great sacrifices for the kingdom of God. My grandfather was called on a mission to Switzerland by President Brigham Young, and without any hesitation he accepted the call. There were three children in the family. They had no money; their only resource was the family cow, and so they sold it in order to provide the traveling expenses for my grandfather. During his mission my grandmother sewed salt sacks for one dollar a thousand in order to sustain her family. She had the faith to endure such tribulation and hardship, to sustain her husband and provide for her three children during the absence of her beloved husband, and also to fulfill her divine calling as a mother.

Another grandmother, Emma Hillstead, was born in Hull, England. Her father and his entire family joined the Church because of a spiritual experience. My grandmother was an extremely spiritual person. She had many dreams that were fulfilled. She loved the Lord and worked diligently to build up the kingdom. When my father left for his mission, she shed tears of joy that her son could be a representative of the Lord in the mission field. She was a Relief Society president during the influenza epidemic following World War I and nursed the sick by day and night. In so doing she weakened her own physical condition, and soon thereafter she passed away.

My maternal grandmother was Martina Halseth, who was born in Oslo, Norway. As a young girl, Martina loved the Church and its leaders. She was baptized at age fifteen. One weekend when she came downstairs, she heard the elders trying to persuade her parents to give their consent for her to emigrate to America. They would not give it, and so, regardless of their feelings, she joined the group of emigrants who were coming to America and prepared to undertake the journey. Her parents were severely hurt and informed her that she could never come home again if she left. This was no deterrent for this young woman of great faith. Later she learned that all of her family had joined the Church.

Martina endured many hardships crossing the Atlantic Ocean. There were 557 souls aboard this sailing ship; 3 adults and 25 children were buried at sea. The water on the ship was so bad that vinegar had to be added to make it drinkable. It took the ship five weeks and six days to cross the ocean. Martina learned as she landed in New York that she had three thousand miles of travel to endure before she could enter the Salt Lake Valley. This news almost overcame her, but she was determined not to give up. When her pioneer group arrived in Quincy, Illinois, they had no shelter for two days during a severe rainstorm. They experienced hardships beyond description during their long trek to the valley. She taxed to the utmost every resource she possessed. One day as she and her girl friend walked a short distance from the camp, Indians attempted to capture them. My grandmother tried to rescue her friend, but an Indian mounted on a horse threw a rope around the other girl and carried her away into captivity. She was never found or heard of again. My grandmother finally reached the valley and in due time married a wonderful man, Brenneman Barr Bitner. They had twelve children, my mother being the twelfth. It was my grandmother's cargo of faith that carried her through her wonderful life, and she bequeathed that same faith to her children.

I do not remember my grandmothers, but one of the most pleasant thoughts for me is to dream of the time that I will meet them in the hereafter and will be able to express my gratitude to them, to those great and mighty women who carried as their cargo in life a great quality of faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and bequeathed to us, their children, the teachings of Jesus Christ.

Elder Richard L. Evans said: "A man or a woman must begin to be what he would be, if that's what he wants to be. He must travel the road that leads to the destination he has in mind, if that's where he wants to go. Neither here nor in the hereafter shall we find ourselves becoming overnight something we are not, with qualities we have not earned, nor enjoying a way of life we are not fitted for."

Our sons should never forget the words found in Proverbs: "My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother." (Proverbs 1:8.) Remember the words of Paul written to Timothy when he said, "When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also." (2 Timothy 1:5.)

To the handmaidens of the Lord, Malachi declared in prophetic words, "And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him." (Malachi 3:17.) A modern-day prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, has said: "We again ask thy blessing on the women in all the land, that they may accomplish the measure of their creation as daughters of God, thy offspring. Let the blessings of Sarah, Huldah, Hannah, Anna and Mary, the mother of the Son of God bless these women to fulfill their duties as did Mary, the beloved mother of thy Son, and let the power and satisfactions of the prophetesses and all holy women rest upon these mothers as they move forward to fulfill their destinies."

I have faith in the mothers of the kingdom of God that they will uphold the standards, that they will hold high the arms of their sons and their husbands, to the end that the kingdom of God will influence all mankind here upon the earth. May the faith and righteous living of all of us become perfect as we do the will of our Heavenly Father.
