No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

WE KNOW THROUGH FAITH

Elder F. Enzio Busche

The Spirit of God touches our hearts with the assurance that we human beings are children of a loving Father in heaven and that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior of mankind. Through the power of that Spirit, we know that we are born free; and because of this free agency, we know that we are responsible for all our actions, words, and thoughts, and that some day we will be held accountable for them by our Father in heaven. As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we know that He wants us to come to him every day to pour out our hearts before Him, to constantly ask Him for our needs, and to confess that we will do all we can in faith, that our life and the life of our neighbor, of our family, and of society will be improved daily. As members of His church, we have been charged to proclaim to all people not to procrastinate the day of repentance. In the Book of Mormon we read, "For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors. . . . For that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time ye go out of this life, . . . will have power to possess your body in that eternal world." (Alma 34:32-34.)

How happy we are to be able to increase our knowledge daily through study, prayer, and service in obedience to His laws and commandments so that our love, faith, and hope can continue to grow. Our faith can become as strong as Nephi's, the descendant of Helaman, of whom is said in the Book of Mormon, "So great was his faith on the Lord Jesus Christ that angels did minister to him daily. And in the name of Jesus did he cast out devils and unclean spirits; and even his brother did he raise from the dead, after he had been stoned and suffered death by the people." (3 Nephi 7:18-19.)

We read in Matthew, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you." (Matthew 17:20.) A grain of mustard, no matter how small, has the strength to trust that, if it is cared for and put in the ground, it will be able to grow to the size of a big tree and bear good fruit.

As we look around, we discover a great variety of human beings, every one precious, a jewel in his own way. Man is waiting to be discovered, promoted, and touched until his inner potential can be realized. No one is inferior; no one is unimportant; no one is rejected under the careful attention of the servants of the Lord through the priesthood in His true church. Under the influence of the spoken word and the eternal light and the manifestation of the Holy Ghost, man grows to an unknown height. Nothing is impossible to him who believes.

The Savior said, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matthew 11:28.) How does He give us rest? He touches our soul and opens our eyes so that we may perceive the purpose of life through His love for each and every one of us, if through faith we humbly seek him in prayer. He also gives us rest through His church, which is completely organized and is led by a living prophet. Therefore, we are not left alone in our knowledge and understanding. The Church is an organization that in its far-reaching purposes, is destined to fill the basic needs of men for love, dignity, growth, and joy, even for salvation and exaltation through the law of service and love for one another.

What joy it is to be allowed to take upon oneself the yoke of Jesus Christ in His church and thereby escape the trouble and anxiety of this world. The greatest commandment, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself" (Leviticus 19:18), is attainable through communion with the Spirit of God and mutual participation in service to one another. Because of His mercy, we are daily facing new tasks and are permitted to be called to special service in His church. I am convinced that whoever will draw near unto the Lord Jesus Christ in all his decisions in faith and prayer will have his life filled with more light and joy.

Not long ago I had an experience that brought me particularly close to our Savior. I had a conversation with someone from another denomination. He talked about his work, his faith, and his conviction. I felt a relationship and love when I could testify to him that the true church has been restored in these latter days through the Prophet Joseph Smith. This man seemed like a brother to me in his straightforwardness, and I thought I might learn something from him. But then something happened. The more my love and my ability to listen to him as a brother increased, the more his disposition changed. The expression on his face became braced and clenched. His words expressed harshness and indifference. He could not stand to listen any longer. When we separated, I thought I noticed fear in his eyes and hatred as a result of it.

The Savior met this same kind of hatred while He lived on this earth. Although He was pure and His love was perfect, only those who recognized Him had sufficient faith to give up everything in their search for perfection. The Lord in His boundless love shows us what He had to go through when He walked the earth and testified of the truth.

Truth cannot be divided; we cannot get away from it. It was impenitent men who could not tolerate Christ and His teachings because of their hatred and fear. They had to cover up their ears when he spoke. Finally they persecuted and killed him. Nevertheless, His death was the final victory, the victory of immortality over mortality, the victory of light over darkness. We are witnesses of the crucified Christ and of His resurrection. We call upon all men with good intentions to get to know Him in His church, restored in these latter days by the Prophet Joseph Smith. We call upon mankind to change its ways and to accept the importance of a clean life, to draw closer unto the Lord through study, work, diligence, faith, and prayer, and to become aware that all yearning of men is the yearning for the light of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the only source of real joy.
