No specific author, Faith ( 1983)

MAN'S ETERNAL HORIZON

Elder Joseph Anderson

It has been truly said that the greatest asset of a man or a nation is faith, that the men who built America and made it prosper during its darkest days were men with unshakable faith, men of courage, men of vision, men who always looked forward and never backward.

The same can be said in truth of those who established the Church under the inspiration and revelation of the Lord and of those who have built upon the foundation they laid. They too were and are men of unfailing testimony and unwavering faith.

There has never been greater need for faith than is the need today, particularly faith in divine leadership. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as a general rule, have faith in divine leadership, but the world needs faith in God, that He rules the world.

Many of us have had the experience of being on a ship traveling on the ocean. As we look in the various directions, we can see nothing but water. As far as the mortal eye can see, the sky comes down and meets the water. The sun comes up on the horizon, and in the evening the sun sets on the horizon. The same is true when we are on the ground: the limit of our vision is the horizon. Is it not true also that the limit of our spiritual perception is the horizon we see?

What about our spiritual horizon? Is it limited to our present struggle for the things of this world? Is it limited to an acquisition of things of the flesh? Is it limited to our competition with a money-mad world, to the obtaining of the worldly things of life, or does it reach out to an eternity with God and our loved ones in the life to come?

Our horizon should extend to an unlimited future beyond death—out beyond those things of a temporal nature. Our horizon of the future should not be confused with the close-up horizon of present conditions.

Our philosophy of life contemplates an eternity of life—life without beginning before we came here, life without end hereafter. Our happiness here and hereafter depends upon our actions here. We should therefore seek the finer things of life. The road leading to eternal life must be paved with obedience to the commandments of the Lord.

We once dwelt in the presence of our Father, in the spirit, and we rejoiced at the opportunity to come to earth, take upon ourselves mortality, and pass through the experiences we here encounter, that we might prove ourselves worthy of greater experiences and greater blessings.

While we are here, we are not to enjoy the presence of our Father, but we can communicate with Him, and we can hear His voice if that becomes necessary. The Holy Ghost is given to us as our guide and companion and monitor, if we live worthy of that blessing.

It seems difficult for some to have faith in an eternal being and faith that He can communicate with man; that He hears and answers our prayers; that He is the Father of our spirits, for we are dual beings, spiritual and physical; that He loves us; and that He has given us commandments which, if we accept and live them, will result in mortal as well as eternal blessings to us.

There was a time when men would have laughed to scorn anyone who said that in time to come we would be able to sit in our own homes and watch and see and hear things that were transpiring in our own country, in Europe or Asia, South America or Africa. In our time we have seen men walk on the moon, heard the messages they have sent over the great expanse of space between us and the moon, and witnessed pictures they were transmitting. These things have been accomplished by faith, by work, and by intelligence.

Can we talk with God?

Can our prayers, in thought as well as word, ascend to the Father of us all, and does He have the power to answer them?

We lived by sight in the spirit state before we came here; we are walking by faith in this mortal existence. The Spirit of God bears witness to the spirit of man that we are God's children; that He loves us; that there is a purpose to earth life, a great and mighty purpose, a glorious purpose; that by keeping the commandments that He has given us, we may gain knowledge and understanding; that we may gain experience by overcoming the opposition with which we must contend; that we shall resurrect from the grave in the due time of the Lord and eventually return into His presence if we live worthily. This is the long-distance horizon we should keep in view.

Alma, a Book of Mormon prophet, related an experience in his time about a people who were cast out of the synagogues because of the coarseness of their apparel, a people who were poor as to the things of this world and were also poor in heart. They came unto Alma, explained their situation, and asked what they should do. Alma answered by explaining to them the principle of faith and teaching them the word of God. Concerning faith he stated that "faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.)

Alma then went on to compare his words, which are truly the word of God and the gospel of salvation, to a seed that a man plants in the soil. He suggested that if one will give place that a seed may be planted in his heart, and not cast it out or resist the Spirit of the Lord, if it is a true seed it will swell within the breast. When one feels this swelling motion, he cannot do otherwise than admit that the seed is a good seed, for it enlarges the soul and begins to enlighten one's understanding, and it becomes delicious to the individual. Further, when the seed, or the word, or the gospel, swells and sprouts and begins to grow in one's soul, he knows it is a good seed, and therefore his knowledge is perfect. It is no longer faith but knowledge.

People sometimes say that one cannot know that the gospel is true. As indicated by Alma, if, when we hear the word of God, we do not cast it out by unbelief or resist the Spirit of the Lord, the swellings within our breast, its enlargement of our soul, and its enlightening of our understanding are of such a nature that they cause us to know that it is the truth.

However, this is only a beginning. We must nourish the seed; in other words, we must nourish the testimony we have that it is true, by living the teachings of the gospel.

If we will do this, this ancient prophet said, the seed will grow into a tree and bring forth fruit. But if the tree is neglected, it will not take root; and when the heat of the sun cometh and scorcheth it, it will wither and die. This is not because the seed or the word of God was not true nor because the fruit thereof would not be desirable, but because the ground was barren and the plant or the tree was not nourished, in which event we cannot have the fruit thereof that we otherwise would obtain.

If, however, we have faith and patience to nourish the word, or the tree, as time goes on we may pluck the fruit thereof, which is most precious and delicious to the taste. We shall have the privilege of feasting upon this fruit, and our faith will be fully rewarded and will develop into a sure knowledge of the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Latter-day Saints believe and teach that without the experience of mortal life, its problems and accomplishments, and without a resurrected body, the spirit of man cannot have a fulness of joy. Our philosophy of life contemplates an eternity of existence—life without beginning in the preexistent world and life hereafter throughout the eternities.

Our happiness in this life and in the life to come depends upon our actions here. If we are to attain the goal of eternal salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of our Heavenly Father, we must hold fast to the iron rod, which is the word of God, and render obedience to the commandments of the Lord.

It is reported that on one occasion when Sir Isaac Newton was thinking seriously concerning the nature of light, he cut a hole in a window blind and a ray of light entered his room. He held a triangular piece of glass in the range of the light, and there, reflected in great beauty, were all the colors of the rainbow. For the first time, man learned that all of the glorious colors of the universe are locked up in a ray of white light.

It is important that we live all the principles of the gospel and obey all the commandments the Lord has given us if we are to grow more nearly like our Father and his Beloved Son. We cannot say, "Oh, I believe in missionary work—it is important; I am thoroughly converted to the welfare plan or the wonderful social program of the Church for its young people; but I don't believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet or that our present prophets are guided by revelation from the Lord."

Some may say, "I believe the Book of Mormon, but I can't believe that it was received from an angel as Joseph said it was."

With wavering faith of that kind, how can such a person expect to have the true light of Christ, the true understanding and light of the gospel? How can he expect to receive the blessings that the Lord has promised to the faithful? If he leaves out any one of these principles, he does not receive pure white light. If he fails to have faith in all the principles of the gospel and does not have faith to live in accordance therewith, he cannot expect to get the pure light of the gospel in his heart.

If we truly have faith in God sufficient to impel us to keep His commandments, we will draw nearer to Him and He will come nearer to us. Our faith will become knowledge, and the limit of our horizon will extend into the eternal world.

May we grow in faith through the love and blessing of our Lord and Savior. May we keep the commandments that he has given us, that we may ultimately find salvation and exaltation in his celestial kingdom.
