Hyrum L. Andrus, Glory of God and Man's Relation to Deity ( 1964)

THE GREATNESS AND MAJESTY OF GOD

Because man is created in the image of God, he is like Him in certain respects. But in our minds, either intentionally or unintentionally, we often reduce God to the status of a man. We say that God is an anthropomorphic [being] which in a sense is true, but I would like to begin today by approaching the subject of man and his relation to Deity from a different angle, by saying that man is theomorphic; that is, there are certain aspects of man that are like God, but these are somewhat limited as yet. Though we have the great ideal of attaining unto the fulness of the measure of the stature of Christ, still that which man possesses today—in comparison with God—is very limited.

Besides being a personage of tabernacle, God is a personage of glory. But when we refer to Him as a personage of glory, we are somewhat hazy in our understanding. So let me turn to the scriptures and give two or three references to clarify this point. Let us first refer to the vision of Joseph Smith, when as a youth of fourteen he went into the Sacred Grove to pray. Said he of that great manifestation:

... I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. ...

... When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. ... (Joseph Smith 2:16, 17.)

Even though the Prophet actually saw the Father and the Son, he was still unable to describe Deity. He was unable to do so because of their greatness, glory, and majesty, which outshone the sun at noonday. Thus, it is evident that God is more than a man. God is a glorified personage, and the full brilliance of His glory cannot be understood, comprehended, or experienced by mortal man.

Let me turn to the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 110, and give you another testimony by the Prophet Joseph Smith to introduce our discussion today. Here we find the Prophet's report of the appearance of Christ in the Kirtland Temple, preceding the appearance of Moses, Elias, and Elijah. While the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery were praying in the temple, Joseph wrote: "We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit before us." The Prophet then made a finite effort to describe an infinite being, as he sought to report that which they saw in open vision. Said he of the glorified Christ:

... under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah ... (D&C 110:2-3; italics added.)

Here again the glory of Christ is said to be above the brightness of the sun. It was out of this background that Joseph Smith made other efforts to explain the divine nature of Deity. Said he:

God Almighty Himself dwells in eternal fire; flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire. [And then he quoted the Apostle Paul:] "Our God is a consuming fire." When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in this tabernacle. Some dwell in higher glory [that is, brilliance or fire] than others. ... Immortality dwells in everlasting burnings. All men who are immortal dwell in everlasting burnings. ... (Documentary History of the Church, VI, 366; hereafter cited DHC.)

On another occasion Joseph Smith reported another vision in which he was shown the celestial kingdom and its glory:

The heavens were opened upon us and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God and the glory thereof [In other words, he saw not only the celestial kingdom, but the light or glory associated with it.], whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. (DHC, II, 380-381; italics added.)

Let me give you one other commentary, this one by Parley P. Pratt. In discussing his view of God, which view he received from the Prophet, he said:

God sits enthroned in the midst of his creations and is filled and encircled with light unapproachable by those of lower spheres. (Parley P. Pratt, Key to Theology, 9th Edition, p. 115.)

Note that from the foregoing statements it is evident that God is associated with "light unapproachable by those of lower spheres"; that this brilliance associated with God is His "glory"; that the Prophet uses such terms to describe the divine nature of Deity as "everlasting burnings," "circling flames of fire," "consuming fire." The word "light" is also used. In fact, an associate of Joseph Smith, in describing the Prophet's concept of God, said that he taught that

... all light and heat are the "Glory of God," which is His power, that fills the "immensity of space," and is the life of all things, and permeates with latent life, and heat, every particle of which all worlds are composed. (Letter written by Benjamin F. Johnson to George S. Gibbs, B.Y.U. Library, p. 8; italics added.)

We will come back to the fact that "all light and heat are the glory of God" in another lecture.

We sometimes get the idea that bad people go to a place of fire and burnings. But in some respects the Prophet Joseph turned this concept directly around. To clarify the issue, he said on another occasion:

Some shall rise to the everlasting burnings of God; for God dwells in everlasting burnings, and some shall rise to the damnation of their own filthiness, which is as exquisite a torment as the lake of fire and brimstone. (DHC, VI, 317.)

We can see from this statement that when the term "everlasting burnings," etc., refers to God, it denotes the glory and power that exists in His presence. But when such terms refer to the future state of the wicked, they have reference to the inner torment and anguish that the wicked feel in their condemned state.

The righteous are given eternal life by being endowed with celestial glory. By definition, "eternal life" is the kind of life a being has who possesses the divine endowments of celestial glory. Section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, for example, equates "eternal life" with "the glory of the celestial kingdom" (verse 4). And in the book of Moses the Lord speaks of the righteous who obey the Gospel as enjoying "eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." (Moses 6:59.) So we see that eternal life is glorified life—life endowed with celestial glory. Said Joseph Smith:

Here then is eternal life—to know the only wise and true God; and you have got to learn to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power. (DHC, VI, 306.)

Here is the ideal and the goal of every true Latter-day Saint—to be able to dwell ultimately in everlasting burnings and to sit enthroned in everlasting power, possessing eternal life as the Prophet here declares.

The Doctrine and Covenants gives us the clearest and most concise definition of God's glory. Let me refer you to Section 93 and analyze briefly what the Lord says here about this subject. This section deals almost totally with the concept of glory and man's relationship to Deity, and for this reason it is probably the most important and meaningful section in the Doctrine and Covenants. If I, at least, were asked to designate the most profound revelation God has given to man, I would place this section as second to none of all the recorded revelations we have today. This section, along with Sections 76, 88, and 132, contains some of the most profound statements that God has revealed to man concerning His divine nature and His relationship to man.

In Section 93 we find the testimony of John concerning Jesus Christ and His development to where He received a fulness of His Father's glory. Said John:

And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at first, but received grace for grace;

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness; ... (D&C 93:12-13.)

The word "grace," by definition, means unearned divine assistance. It is an unearned (not necessarily an unmerited) gift. As here used, it is an endowment given by the Father. Christ was endowed with the Father's glory, grace upon grace, until he received a fulness. In verse 16 of the same revelation, John says, "And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father." And having received this fulness, He then possessed the full powers of God, for John bore record that at that time Christ received all power both in heaven and on the earth. (See D&C 93:17.)

Having given us this testimony concerning Christ, the revelation explains why it is important for us to gain an understanding of these things. Said the Lord:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:19-20; italics added.)

The essential idea here is that man, like Christ, may ultimately attain a fulness of this divine element that we call glory; and this is the purpose of true worship. Men are subordinate to Christ in receiving these divine endowments. We receive them through Him and He received them directly from His Eternal Father. The plan is essentially the same, in that we must go from one endowment, through obedience, to a greater endowment, until ultimately we receive a fulness of glory. When our bodies are quickened with this eternal fulness, we will then become celestial beings, capable of dwelling in everlasting burnings, of sitting enthroned in divine power and enjoying the blessings of celestial life.

In this revelation, the Lord reveals the pathway of obedience that man must follow to acquire the endowments of celestial life, stating: "He that keepeth his [God's] commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things." (D&C 93:28.) With what, then, are we to be glorified? With celestial truth and light. What, then, is this thing we call glory? It is celestial light and truth and the divine powers associated therewith. It is out of this background that the Lord declares: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.)

Too often this statement merely means to many of us that God takes glory in being an intelligent being. And while I am sure He does, the real meaning of this scripture is that this divine element that is centered in God, which we call His glory, is a concentration of divine light and truth—or intelligence—within Him to a point of brilliance above the brightness of the sun. Imagine if you can a Being in whose image you were created, who has centered within Himself such a concentration of pure intelligence and its correlated attributes and powers that the very brilliance of that person would outshine the sun in the firmament. If you could comprehend such a glorified person's intellect, so that you could see as He sees, understand as He understands, feel as He feels—if you could do this, then you might begin to say that you knew God. When you can meet Him on this level of divine intelligence, when you can comprehend as He comprehends, then you will know God. That goal cannot be achieved in this mortal state. Moses was allowed to receive the glory of God in some measure, but not in full, for it is not possible for man in mortality to behold the fulness of this light and glory. When Moses went away from that experience, he made this statement: "Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed." (Moses 1:10.)

Sometimes we do not stop to think about the great disparity that exists between man and God. We take pleasure in proving to the world that God is an anthropomorphic being, that He is a being in likeness and form much like man; and after we have satisfied ourselves with the fact that we have won the argument, we cease to think more about God and do not consider the divine injunction that it is life eternal to know Him.

Here is an important key to an understanding of the nature and majesty of God. God is a personage of glory; and the glory associated with Him is, essentially, a concentration of the forces of life, of intelligence, of truth, and of light in the universe to a point of brightness above the light of the sun. We have several instances, both in the past and in our modern dispensation, when the glory of God has been visibly manifest to mankind, at least in part.

For example, Moses once saw in the desert a bush that was burning, but did not seem to be consumed. He heard a voice from that burning shrub command him to remove his shoes, for he was standing upon holy ground—ground made holy by the concentration of God's glory in that spot. Again, during the Exodus, when the Egyptians were pursuing the Israelites, a pillar of fire stood between them and the Israelites and kept them from destroying the Israelites before they could cross the Red Sea.

At the dedication of Solomon's temple, a holy fire was visibly manifest upon that structure. The record states that

... the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the Lord;

So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of God. (II Chronicles 5:13-14.)

Again, a short time later, the Bible states:

Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the Lord filled the house.

And the priests could not enter into the house of the Lord, because the glory of the Lord had filled the Lord's house.

And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the Lord ...

(II Chronicles 7:1-3.)

Elijah no doubt had great faith in this divine element. God had consumed the sacrifice at the dedication of Solomon's Temple and in so doing had manifest His divine presence. The Israelites knew of this event and of previous manifestations of God's glory. Here, then, was the background of Elijah's contention with the priests of Baal, to see if their god could send down fire from heaven as Jehovah had done. And such confidence did Elijah have in the power and glory of God that he saturated his sacrifice with water before he asked the Lord to manifest His glory and consume it. And it was done according to his faith.

God's glory has also been manifest in the transfiguration of certain holy prophets. The Pearl of Great Price reports, for example, that on one occasion Moses was caught up to an exceeding high mountain. This took place after the burning bush episode and before the time of the Exodus. While there, this scripture says:

... he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence. (Moses 1:2.)

From this statement it is evident that for a mortal man to come into the presence of Deity there must be some operation of divine power upon his body; and that action of power comes from God's glory, so that he is quickened thereby and enabled for a time to endure the presence of God, that he might talk with Him face to face. Moses later bore this testimony:

But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him. (Moses 1:11.)

Transfiguration thus consists essentially in the envelopment of the individual in this intelligent power which we call glory. And having been enveloped in glory, man may then see God. For this reason a revelation declares: "No man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God." (D&C 67:11.) Note that the Spirit of God is equated with God's glory.

As Moses came down from the mountain where he had been given the second set of tablets upon which God wrote the basic law of the Gospel as it pertained to the Aaronic Priesthood, the Ten Commandments, and the Law of Carnal Commandments, having been with God for an extended period of time, his face shone brightly. He absorbed the glory of God to such a degree that the Israelites could not stand to behold the glory that radiated from him. Here is what the Bible says about this incident:

And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony ... the skin of his face shone. ...

And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

And Moses called upon them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them. ...

And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a veil on his face.

But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.

And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone: and Moses put the veil upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him. (Exodus 34:29-35.)

The children of Israel were too carnal to stay in the presence of such a concentration of glory, or pure intelligence. The Doctrine and Covenants tells us that intelligence forsaketh the evil one. (See D&C 93:36-37.) It is also true that those who are carnal forsake the intelligence or glory of God—flee from it, as did the Israelites.

During the meridian of time, we have the case of Jesus' transfiguration, about which Matthew says:

And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him. (Matthew 17:1-3.)

Here again was a manifestation of these divine powers, the powers of God's glory. (Peter later wrote that there came a voice "from the excellent glory" that overshadowed our Lord on that occasion, saying: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." [II Peter 1:17.])

In our own dispensation there were several instances when the Prophet Joseph Smith was enveloped by transfiguring power. For example, let me read two or three little-known incidents that come to us through the testimonies of those who were associated with him. On one occasion the Prophet was talking with a group of Indians. Mary Ann Winters, being there, gave this report:

I stood close by the Prophet while he was preaching to the Indians in the Grove by the Temple. The Holy Spirit lighted up his countenance till it glowed like a halo around him, and his words penetrated the hearts of all who heard him, and the Indians looked as solemn as Eternity. (Young Woman's Journal, XVI, 558.)

Another person gave this testimony upon hearing the Prophet utter a remarkable prophecy:

All the time he was delivering the word of the Lord, his face shown as if there was a light within him and his face was translucent. (Ibid., II, 124-125.)

Here is the testimony of Wilford Woodruff, who was with the Prophet Joseph Smith in that famous last meeting he held with the Twelve before his martyrdom. Wilford Woodruff bore his testimony over and over again of this particular instance. Said he:

This last speech that Joseph Smith ever made to the quorum of the Apostles was in a building in Nauvoo, and it was such a speech as I never heard from mortal man before or since. He was clothed upon with the Spirit and power of God. His face was clear as amber. The room was filled with consuming fire. He stood three hours upon his feet. Said he: "You Apostles of the Lamb of God have been chosen to carry out the purposes of the Lord on earth. Now I have received, as the Prophet, Seer and Revelator standing at the head of this dispensation, every key, every ordinance, every principle and every priesthood that belongs to the last dispensation and fulness of times. And I have sealed all these things upon your heads." (Conference Report, April, 1898, p. 89.)

These are merely some among many other evidences of the manifestation of God's glory in our day and age. These evidences not only give us a key of insight into the nature of God, but they bear their own testimony of the truthfulness of His work in our day.

On the day of Pentecost, there was another great incident when God's glory was manifest, this time in manifestation of the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Luke gives us this testimony in Acts, chapter 2:

And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place.

And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.

And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. (Acts 2:1-3.)

These cloven tongues that were like unto fire were a manifestation of God's glory; and that glory, as we have indicated, is a concentration of powers of pure intelligence. Thereby the Apostles were quickened in their intellects and given the marvelous gifts of the Spirit that were then manifest. Consequently, they spoke with tongues and prophesied and had power to do many other marvelous things.

Let me refer you to a Book of Mormon incident in which similar powers were manifested. Helaman, chapter 5, tells of two great Nephite missionaries, Nephi and Lehi—taking their names from the original Nephi and Lehi—who were out preaching to the Lamanites. Because of the traditions of hatred the Lamanites held against the Nephites, these brethren were cast into prison. The Lamanites then came to the prison with the intent to kill them. But when they arrived, they found that Nephi and Lehi were encircled about with a flame of fire. The record says:

And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi were circled about as if by fire, even insomuch that they [the Lamanites] durst not lay their hands upon them for fear lest they should be burned. Nevertheless, Nephi and Lehi were not burned; and they were as standing in the midst of fire and were not burned.

And when they [Nephi and Lehi] saw that they were encircled about with a pillar of fire, and that it burned them not, their hearts did take courage.

(Helaman 5:23-24.)

A voice from heaven then spoke to the Lamanites, after a cloud of thick darkness had gathered over them. Finally, in faith the Lamanites began to seek to know more about this divine power. The record then states:

And it came to pass that when they [the Lamanites] cast their eyes about, and saw that the cloud of darkness was dispersed from overshadowing them, behold, they saw that they were encircled about, yea every soul, by a pillar of fire.

And Nephi and Lehi were in the midst of them; yea, they were encircled about; yea, they were as if in the midst of a flaming fire, yet it did harm them not, neither did it take hold upon the walls of the prison; and they were filled with that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory.

And behold, the Holy Spirit of God did come down from heaven, and did enter into their hearts, and they were filled as if with fire, and they could speak forth marvelous words. (Helaman 5:43-45; italics added.)

Why could they speak forth marvelous words? I think the answer is obvious—simply because they had a concentration of the powers of God within them to where their intellects were greatly quickened and they were given these marvelous gifts.

Moses, when filled with the glory of God, was given supernatural powers to where he had power in a measure to see as God sees. Says the record:

... Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the spirit of God. (Moses 1:27.)

Moses not only had his intellect quickened, but, instead of viewing things by this three-dimensional light by which we normally behold the creations of God, he began to see, to discern, and to comprehend things as God does—through the medium of the divine light of God's glory. The record continues:

And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof [of the earth], and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God;...

(Moses 1:28.)

Moses saw every particle of the earth in one great moment of time. He also saw every person on the earth, individually, at once. Certainly, the means that God has at his disposal to see, to comprehend, and to understand, far supersede that which we, as mortals, have.

Doctrine and Covenants, Section 130, gives us just a brief insight into the nature and power of celestial beings. It speaks of the planet on which God dwells as being a great Urim and Thummim; that is, it is a sphere composed of celestialized matter into which God has organized His glory. This revelation also states that those individuals who have died and who have been resurrected and wait to receive their inheritance on this earth—we call them at times angels—dwell in a similar state. The testimony of the Doctrine and Covenants concerning them is as follows:

The angels do not reside on a planet like this earth;

But they reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire,... (D&C 130:6-7.)

The sphere upon which they dwell is like unto glass or crystal, in that it is purified by the divine intelligence that is organized within it. As the Prophet would say, "All corruption is devoured by the fire." (DHC, VI, 366.) A glorified sphere is also likened unto crystal, because, by the powers of glory or intelligence centered in it as a celestial sphere, one can view the inner elements as you can a crystal, rather than being limited in view to that which is on the surface. Furthermore, because angels dwell in the presence of God on a globe like a sea of glass and of fire, "all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord." (D&C 130:7, italics added.)

Note that all things without limitation are not manifest to them, but instead all things for their glory. There is a limiting factor here. That which is important to them and to their acquisition of glory is manifest to them.

Eternity to glorified beings is largely one eternal moment. Past, present, and future are in large measure before those who develop to where they can be endowed with the fulness of God's glory. Here is a statement that adds meaning to the comment Jesus made when he said that not so much as a sparrow falls without the Father's notice.

On the day of Pentecost—to get back to our basic theme—cloven tongues of fire rested upon the elders and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. We had in our own dispensation a modern Pentecost that was in many respects a greater endowment that the original Pentecost. I have reference to the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. The Prophet's statement concerning the marvelous incident that took place on that occasion is worth noting. Before this time, the Prophet spent several months preparing the people for it. Then, on that day, he admonished those present to deny not the spirit of prophecy, but to exercise faith in the powers of God. He then promised that the first man who stood on his feet would have the spirit of prophecy. At this moment, the Prophet's cousin, George A. Smith, arose and Joseph reported:

George A. Smith arose and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld that the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed at 11:00 P.M. (DHC, II, 428.)

You can support the accuracy of this statement from many other sources. There are several references from individuals who were there and who bore a like witness of this marvelous, phenomenal occurrence. My own great-grandfather was one who was at this and later meetings where similar powers were manifest. Said he: "I saw fire descend and rest on the heads of the Elders, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied." (Milo Andrus Genealogy, p. 4.)

Certainly man in mortality knows little about the nature and the majesty of God. And because he knows little about this aspect of Deity, many statements that the Lord makes about Himself are entirely meaningless, until we probe a little more deeply into the truths of eternal life.

In our day and age men have come to realize that the greatest forces of the universe are unseen. I have reference to electricity, to atomic power, and to other forces that are largely known only by their effects. In a similar way, the power of God is known only by its manifestations. We are today in what we call an atomic age. But when the people on this earth, particularly the Latter-day Saints, exercise the necessary faith, we are going to have what might be called an age of glory, that is, an age when the earth will be associated with glory to the extent that it will be a common phenomenon to those who live here. The Doctrine and Covenants bears ample witness of this future period. For example, it talks about the coming of Christ to Zion, during which time His glory will be visibly manifested. In Section 97, the Lord makes this standing promise to Zion:

And inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the Lord [The house that He has reference to is the temple at the New Jerusalem.], and do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled, my glory shall rest upon it;

Yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come unto it, and all the pure in heart that shall come unto it shall see God. (D&C 97:15-16.)

Here is the standing promise to the Saints. When we cease to believe that the Gospel is merely a spiritual romance or just a beautiful philosophy, when we begin to believe in the practical application of God's power to man's life and begin to develop that divine power in our lives, then, as Isaiah bears testimony,

...the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night.... (Isaiah 4:5.)

...to live in a place where the Spirit of the Lord was so concentrated that upon every dwelling place this divine power of intelligence was visible as a cloud and a pillar of fire to the inhabitants of the earth? I am sure that many of us have at some time in our lives experienced a marvelous spiritual experience where the Spirit of the Lord has lifted us out of the realm of the temporal and carnal and mundane world into the realm of God's presence, into the realm of His peace. This tranquil, enlightening experience may come at times during a marvelous testimony meeting. It is the uplifting power that comes from a conscientious and dedicated visit to one of the temples of God. You can also find that "spiritual fragrance"—if I may use President J. Reuben Clark's terminology—in the Sacred Grove and other places that the Lord has made sacred by His presence.

But if the Spirit of the Lord on such occasions as we may have experienced has been so manifest that the world has lost its charms and its vanities, and we have felt the inexpressible peace of God, just think how joyful it would be to dwell where God's glory was so concentrated that it was visibly manifest upon each dwelling place in Zion. Every sanctified home in Zion and all of Zion's assemblies are to be glorified by a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night.

The Lord in modern revelation has borne testimony to us that in that future day there will be a marvelous display of His power and glory. To the Nephites, He made this promise:

And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your Father Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you. (3 Nephi 20:22.)

Again, having spoken of the New Jerusalem, He said, "And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst." (3 Nephi 21:25.)

We have in the Doctrine and Covenants two statements that add meaning and significance to the millennial reign and what it actually means to enjoy paradisiacal glory. I might say, parenthetically, that His coming in glory is subsequent to His coming to Zion. It is subsequent to the fulfillment of the promise that He will come suddenly to His temple. It is also subsequent to His appearance among the Jews, at which time He will come as their Deliverer. Of His final coming—this coming in glory in the clouds of heaven—He gives us His testimony, in Section 29:

And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve [excluding Judas and including Matthias, I take it] which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else. (D&C 29:12.)

On another occasion, the Lord again states:

And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together. [In other words, that veil which withholds the manifestation of His glory in our temporal or fallen condition will be removed at the time of His coming in glory, and every eye shall see Him together.]

And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; [The brilliance of His glory is such that all corruption on earth will be consumed.]

And also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and my glory may dwell upon all the earth.

(D&C 101:23-25.)

I would like you to note that God's glory, as it is here to be manifest, is not just a consuming fire—a consuming fire, as we know fire, would destroy all and leave behind it a pile of ashes. But the glory of the Lord—the abundance of pure intelligence that will then be manifest—will have a purifying effect upon the earth and the creatures that dwell on it who are able to abide Christ's coming. The effects of the Fall will then largely be destroyed by the power of God's glory, so that God's "knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth." Or, as Joel says in his famous prophecy, speaking for the Lord of the latter-day judgments that are to precede Christ's second coming:

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. (Joel 2:28.)

The time of the pouring out of the Spirit, or the manifestation of God's glory as here described, has not yet come, nor will it come until after the Lord comes in His glory. Of that day the Lord says, in Section 101 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face. (D&C 101:26.)

In other words, this pure element of intelligence that we call God's glory will be manifest in such a concentrated manner that the spirit of peace and of tranquility will fill the earth during the age of glory that is the millennial reign. Again from this revelation:

And in that day whatsoever any man shall ask, it shall be given unto him [because of his union with the powers of Deity].

And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man.

And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death.

In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree;

And when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious. (D&C 101:27-31.)

As I understand this scripture, it means that the elements of corruption that have come into the world because of the Fall of Adam—these corrupt elements that bring decay, disintegration and death—will be purged and destroyed by the manifestation of Christ's glory, when He comes. Hence, there will be no death, in the sense of the body's disintegration. Men will not grow old so as to become bent and broken in body, but they will blossom in perpetual youth. There will, however, be a transition in which the person who is old in years will be changed from the millennial state to the state of resurrected life, where the fuller powers of celestial glory are organized into man.

During the millennium, the earth will enjoy a state of paradisiacal glory, when the glory that has previously been manifest in Zion will be spread throughout the earth, as Christ appears and removes the veil that allows this fallen, corrupt state to exist. A revelation therefore says of those who abide Christ's coming: "The Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them." (D&C 45:59.) Another revelation speaks of the earth at that time, stating: "... Truth is established in her bowels; And the heavens have smiled upon her; And she is clothed with the glory of her God;..." (D&C 84:101.) Truly, this will be a marvelous era, when men will be much more aware of this divine element than men are at present.

There is much more that could be said on this general topic. But let me conclude by saying that to understand the greatness and the majesty of God we must keep some of these fundamental points in mind and seek to view Him as He is, not as we are here in mortality, where we live under the effects of a spiritual fall—a fall from paradisiacal glory. May the Lord ever bless us in our search for truth, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
