Hyrum L. Andrus, Glory of God and Man's Relation to Deity ( 1964)

II

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST

We have discussed the divine nature of God as a key to a deeper and more meaningful understanding of Deity. God's glory, according to a revelation on the subject, consists of a concentration of light and truth, or divine intelligence, in His person and presence, to a point of brilliance above the brightness of the sun.

In this lecture, I would like to continue this basic theme, but bring in the subject of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and show how it ties in with the divine nature of God. Christ expressed one of the great truths of all ages when He said, "I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." (D&C 93:2.) The Apostle Paul also bore a similar testimony when he declared that in God "we live and move and have our being." (Acts 17:26-28.) Thus we see that there is a portion of divinity in all things. Brigham Young explained that God is everywhere present—that He is in all things—when he said, in 1860:

If people understood true philosophy—eternal philosophy, they would understand that there is an eternity of matter...and it is all acted upon and filled with a portion of divinity. Matter is to exist; it cannot be annihilated. Eternity is without bounds, and is filled with matter; and there is no such place as empty space. And matter is capacitated to receive intelligence. (Journal of Discourses, VII, 2-3, hereafter cited JD; italics added.)

Note that "matter is capacitated to receive intelligence", that is, it has the inherent capacity to be acted upon by intelligence and to have intelligence diffused and developed within it. President Young went on to say:

If we could so understand true philosophy as to understand our own creation, and what it is for—what design and intent the Supreme Ruler had in organizing matter and bringing it forth in the capacity that I behold you here today, we could comprehend that matter cannot be destroyed—that it is subject to organization and disorganization; and could understand that matter can be organized and brought forth into intelligence, and to possess more intelligence, and to continue to increase in that intelligence; and could learn those principles that organized matter into animals, vegetables, and into intelligent beings; and could discern the Divinity acting, operating, and diffusing principles into matter to produce intelligent beings, and to exalt them ... to happiness. (Ibid.)

God, in a sense, then, is in all things and through all things. The Doctrine and Covenants also bears testimony of this fact when it makes this statement in Section 88:

He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever.

(D&C 88:41; italics added.)

Having expressed this great concept, the revelation then makes reference to the many kingdoms God has created. These kingdoms we see when we view the works of nature, the starry heavens, and so forth. Having mentioned the vastness of His created works, the Lord then says:

Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand?

Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came unto his own was not comprehended.

The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him.

Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound.

(D&C 88:46-50; italics added.)

Here again God expressed the fact that He is in and through all things. From this statement we may conclude that there is an element of divinity within each individual. Thus, Christ can say, "I am the true light that is in you."

Charles W. Penrose gave the best explanation of this particular point that I have seen in Latter-day Saint literature. In discussing the topic of how God is in all things and how He is everywhere present, President Penrose made this comment:

As I have previously explained, God is not everywhere present personally, but he is omnipresent in the power of that Spirit—the Holy Spirit—which animates all created things. ... This spirit which pervades all things, by which our heavenly Father operates, by which He is omnipotent, never had a beginning and never will have an end. It is the light of truth; it is the spirit of intelligence. We are told in the revelations of God to us that, "Intelligence or the light of truth never was created, neither indeed can be." And we are told further, that this Spirit, when it is manifest, is God [I would like you to note that—that when it is manifest, it is God.] moving in His glory. When we look up to the heavens and behold the starry worlds, which are kingdoms, we behold God, moving in His majesty and in His power. Now, this Spirit always existed; it always operated, but it is not understood and cannot be comprehended except through organisms.

(JD, XXVI, 23; italics added.)

Here is a basic fundamental in our understanding of this very important point, that is, that this Spirit which is a part of God's glory cannot be manifest and it cannot be comprehended except through organisms—through organized things. It must be a manifestation of an organized Being and it must be expressed in and through other organisms. Said President Penrose:

If you see a living blade of grass you see a manifestation of that Spirit which is called God. If you see an animal of any kind on the face of the earth having life, there is a manifestation of that Spirit. If you see a man, you behold its most perfect earthly manifestation. And if you see a glorified man, a man who has passed through all the various grades of being, who has overcome all things, who has been raised from the dead, who has been quickened by this spirit in its fulness, there you see manifest, in its perfection, this eternal, beginningless, endless spirit of intelligence.

Such a being is our Father and our God, and we are following in His footsteps. He has attained to perfection. He has arisen to kingdoms of power. He comprehends all things because in Him dwelleth the fulness of the Godhead, bodily. He is a perfect manifestation, expression and revelation of this eternal essence, this spirit of eternal, everlasting intelligence or light of truth. (JD, XXVI, 23-24; italics added.)

If we see a blade of grass, as President Penrose points out, we see part of God—part of that divine intelligence that is centered in Him, as it is manifest from His person and presence and developed in other organized things, and as it quickens the life within His creations. If we see the animal creations on this earth, we see a part of divinity. There is an element of divinity within all things. The only means by which all things live and move and have a being is by the divinity within them. The book of Job makes this explanation: "There is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8.) From this statement it is evident that there are at least three factors necessary for organized life on earth. They are (1) the organized spirit, (2) the physical body, and (3) this indwelling element of divine life—the light that emanates from the presence of God, having its origin or its center in His glory—that quickens the life within all things. Let me put it this way: There is centered in the light, the truth, and the power that constitute God's glory an agent or divine substance called the Holy Spirit, that emanates from God's presence to fill the immensity of space. The Holy Spirit, variously called the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Truth, the Light of Christ, is endowed by its relationship with God with intelligent attributes and powers, by which it quickens the life within all things, thus being the force of intelligence responsible for the phenomena of existence.

To bring the picture a little more clearly into focus, may I say that in the councils of heaven Jesus was ordained to be that Being in whom the light and the life of this world should center. Hence, He bore testimony continually that He was the Way, the Truth, the Light, and the Life of the world. All forces of life, of light, and of truth for this world center in Christ. This power that quickens the life within our beings centers in Him and is therefore appropriately designated as the Light of Christ. Likewise, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which has its source of power in these divine elements of light and truth that come from Christ, is called after the name of our Lord. The same is true of the Holy Priesthood. It has its source of power in the divine elements of light and life and Spirit that are sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ. (See D&C 50:27.) And its true name is "The Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God."

Before Jesus could attain the fulness of the Father's glory, it was necessary for Him to descend below all things, that He might comprehend all things, that He might then intelligently manifest His glory and power in and through all things. Here is what the scripture has to say about it:

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth. ... (D&C 88:6.)

I believe that one reason Christ descended below all things was to demonstrate obedience. The writer of the epistle to the Hebrews said, "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." (Hebrews 5:8.) Next, He descended below all things that He might feel and appreciate the power of temptation and know how to succor and to give aid to others in this world of sin and temptation. (See Alma 7:11-12.) Again from the writer of Hebrews we have this comment:

For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.

(Hebrews 4:15.)

Christ descended below all things that He might comprehend all things in this temporal world, that He might know by experience the depths as well as the heights, that He might learn that which was exalting and that which was degrading—not necessarily by participation therein, but by observation.

Christ did observe the temporal world. As evidence of this fact, He spoke of the world about Him. As a typical Hebrew prophet, He said, for example,

... Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:

And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. (Matthew 6:28-29.)

We might conclude, then, that he who lives best is aware of the world about him and comprehends the true relationship of all things to God. In order for Jesus to be aware of the world about Him and comprehend its true relationship to His Father and the relationship it would have to Him when He ascended up on high and received all power, He had to descend below all things in the experiences He underwent. When He did this, He fulfilled all the requirements that were necessary for Him to become in the full and perfect sense, the source of light and truth for this earth. This was necessary to bring about a full consummation of God's plan for this earth. However, we should keep in mind that even before Christ came to earth He had glory with the Father sufficient to be the light of the world for men in their fallen state. But He did not have power to redeem and to glorify this earth until He had descended below all things. Only then could He be in all and through all things, in a full and perfect sense.

The Doctrine and Covenants speaks of this great power that we call the Light of Christ. We know very little about it. If you find a person who says that he knows all about it, you had better watch that individual. Nevertheless, the Lord has given us some information concerning this divine power that centers in Christ and is the quickening power of life, of truth, and of light for all things on this earth. Said the Lord:

... This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made; ...

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (D&C 88:7-13.)

Let me summarize certain ideas in this statement by saying, first, that the Light of Christ is the light of the sun and is thus the great source of energy and of life for this earth. Second, the Light of Christ is that light which quickens man's understanding. Third, it is that light which gives life to all created and organized things. Finally, it is God's power that governs all things. In short, it is the light and power of God's glory.

One of the best explanations in Latter-day Saint literature on this particular point comes from Parley P. Pratt, in his masterful little work, The Key to Theology, wherein he says:

This leads to an investigation of that substance called the Holy Spirit or the Light of Christ. This Spirit "giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. ..."

It is the agent or executive by which God organizes and puts in motion all worlds, and which, by the mandate of the Almighty, or of any of His commissioned servants, performs all the mighty wonders, signs, and miracles ever manifested in the name of the Lord. ..."

This is the true light which in some measure illuminates all men. It is, in its less refined existence, the physical light which reflects from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances, and by reflection on the eye, makes visible the truths of the outward world.

It is, also, in its higher degrees, the intellectual light of our inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend, and remember the subjects within our reach.

Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life, reason in man, vision in the prophets, and is continually flowing from the Godhead throughout all His creations. (Key to Theology, pp. 45-47.)

To make his statement a little plainer, may I suggest that you imagine a great spectrum or continuum, and let it represent the Light of Christ. Divide it so that you have on one end the less refined and less intelligent portion of this divine light and power that centers in Jesus Christ. On the other end of the spectrum have the more highly refined and intelligent powers in the great continuum of light that is so manifest from the glorified Christ.

Note that Brother Pratt states that sunlight is the Light of Christ in its "less refined existence." This fact is also made plain in the Doctrine and Covenants 88:7-13, a part of which says that the Light of Christ "is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made."

Continuing, this same source says:

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light [that is, sunlight], is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understanding;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God. ...

(D&C 88:11-13; italics added.)

Note that "the light which shineth, which giveth you light [i.e., sunlight], ... is the same light that quickeneth your understanding," and that this is the same light that "giveth life to all things." Now what is the light that quickens our understanding? It is the Light of Christ, is it not? Sunlight, then, is part of the Light of Christ. Sunlight is that power that gives life to the plant kingdom, and this the revelation says is part of the Light of Christ. In commenting on this revelation, John Taylor said:

... God is light and in him there is no darkness. He is the light of the sun and the power thereof by which it was made; he is also the light of the moon and the power by which it was made; he is the light of the stars and the power by which they were made. He says it [i.e., sunlight, etc.] is the same light that enlightens the understanding of men. What, have we a mental light and a visual light, all proceeding from the same source? Yes, so says the scripture, and so says science when rightly comprehended. (JD, XVIII, 330.)

Charles W. Penrose made a similar statement when he said of the Light of Christ:

It is in the earth on which we stand; it is in the stars that shine in the firmament; it is in the moon that reflects the light of the sun; it is in the sun; and is the light of the sun, and the power by which it was made; and these grosser particles of light that illuminate the heavens and enable us to behold the works of nature, are from the same spirit which enlightens our minds and unfolds the things of God. As that light comes forth from the sun, so the light of God comes to us. That natural light [i.e., sunlight] is the grosser substance or particles of the same Spirit. (JD, XXVI, 21-22; italics added.)

Notice that Elder Penrose says that sunlight is "the grosser substance or particles" of the Light of Christ, while Parley P. Pratt uses the term "less refined." The meaning is certainly the same.

From our discussion thus far we might conclude that there are many and varying degrees of light that make up the divine elements of glory that center in God. A portion of this light—keep in mind that there is a veil that keeps us here in mortality from contact with all God's glory—in its grosser, less refined and less endowed form, constitutes the light of the sun, etc. But there are also more refined and more highly endowed forms of the light of God's glory that play a key role in quickening and sustaining life here on earth. Let me suggest that we come back to our example of the spectrum and look at things this way:
