Hyrum L. Andrus, Glory of God and Man's Relation to Deity ( 1964)

THE LIGHT OF CHRIST

The light of the

The light of reason, gospel

analysis, and

judgment

The light of in- 1. The regener-

stinct ating powers as-

Sunlight sociated with the

application of true

The quickening power faith.

in the lives of all 2. The power of the

men (the natural man) Holy Ghost, includ-

Quickens and gov- in mortality. ing the baptism of

erns life among fire.

animals, birds, 3. The power of

Quickens plant fish, etc. the Priesthood.

kingdom, etc.

Now let us analyze this diagram or chart for a minute. Sunlight and other similar forms of light, as the quickening power of life and energy for this earth, are a less refined part of that light that centers in Christ that is called the Light of Christ. Moving up the spectrum, there is a more refined and more highly endowed portion of the Light of Christ that quickens the life within animals, fish, birds, etc., and is the law by which they are governed and enlightened in their spheres of life. This portion of the Light of Christ I would like to call the "light of instinct."

To illustrate, it is possible to hatch the egg of a migratory bird artificially, then rear the newly-hatched bird in total isolation from others of its kind, until it is time for it to fly on its migratory journey. And when it is turned loose, it will, without hesitation, fly away in the direction it is supposed to go. There is an element of power or instinct given to animals, birds and fish that has perplexed scientists for years. According to the statement by Parley P. Pratt given above, a portion of the Light of Christ gives instinct to these forms of life and gives them the law by which their lives are governed and controlled.

Continuing further up the continuum, we come to the light of reason—the divine power that quickens and animates life within man on earth. Let us call this the quickening power of the natural or unregenerated man. This is that Light or Spirit which God gives to all mankind in their natural, temporal state. Consequently, we must differentiate between this degree of the Light of Christ and that greater power that is given to those who, through the Gospel, are brought into a closer relationship with the divine elements of light and truth that center in Christ. The Light of Christ, as given to the natural man, is the power by which men reason, discern, judge, compare and comprehend the things of the world, while the Light of the Gospel is in addition a regenerating and sanctifying power.

Above and beyond the powers that quicken life in the natural man are the more pure, refined, and highly endowed elements of light and power that center in Jesus Christ. Here, as far as they are manifested in mortality, we find these divine powers in their highest, most pure and refined degrees. We may call this portion of the Light of Christ the "Light of the Gospel." Here is the source of the power that arises out of the manifestation of true faith. Here also is the power of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost as a Personage draws upon these powers that center in Christ to fulfill His mission. Maybe we ought to say just a word or two in relation to this particular fact. Some people maintain erroneously that the Godhead is something like a First Presidency and that the Holy Ghost, as an individual, is a counselor along with Jesus Christ in that Presidency. The Savior Himself points out, however, that the Holy Ghost is subordinate to Himself and to the Father. For example, in the book of John, Jesus speaks of the Holy Ghost and says this concerning Him:

Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.

He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. (John 16:13-14; italics added.)

In other words, the Holy Ghost, as the third Personage in the God-head, is subordinate to Christ, for He receives the power and truth He posesses from Christ and reveals them to men. Again, Jesus is the light and the life of the world. He is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. In other words, all things center in Christ. This fact Jesus pointed out as He continued the above statement, by explaining:

All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he [i.e., the Holy Ghost] shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you. (John 16:15.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 93, verse 20, we find that man is to be glorified in Christ. These powers of the Spirit that we call the power of the Holy Ghost must therefore center in Christ and be given by the Holy Ghost to man. The Holy Ghost, then, is an agent acting under the direction of Christ, manifesting the powers of Christ to man. The Lord therefore declared in a revelation to Edward Partridge:

... I will lay my hand upon you by the hand of my servant Sidney Rigdon, and you shall receive my Spirit, the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which shall teach you the peaceable things of the kingdom.

(D&C 36:2; italics added.)

It seems evident from what the Lord has said that the Light of Christ in its more pure and highly endowed degrees is also the power of the Priesthood. Doctrine and Covenants, Section 20, states that those who act in the power of the Priesthood are acting in the power of the Holy Ghost. It declares:

Every elder, priest, teacher, or deacon is to be ordained according to the gifts and callings of God unto him; and he is to be ordained by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is in the one who ordains him.

(D&C 20:60.)

But Section 50 more clearly shows the relationship of the Light of Christ to the Priesthood when it says of one who is properly ordained:

Wherefore, he is possessor of all things; for all things are subject unto him, both in heaven and on the earth, the life and the light, the Spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ, his Son. (D&C 50:7; italics added.)

What do the terms "life," "light," "Spirit," and "power" mean when applied to the Priesthood? Do they not have reference to the intelligence and power that centers in Jesus Christ? Thus it can be seen that the power of the Priesthood consists of the light, life, spirit, and power that is sent forth from the Father through Jesus Christ.

To summarize thus far, we might conclude that when we feel the warming and resplendent rays of the sun, we are enjoying in some measure the light and glory that centers in the glorified Christ, as it is given to us through the means God has ordained to extend it to us. Again, as the Prophet taught, "All light and heat are the 'glory of God,' which is His power, that fills the 'immensity of space,' and is the life of all things, and permeates with latent life, and heat, every particle of which all worlds are composed." (Johnson to Gibbs, op.cit.) I also believe that the mysterious operations of instinct among animals, birds, and fish are the result of the Light of Christ upon them. If we study the powers of mind and of comprehension in man, we must ultimately come to an analysis of the Light of Christ in still a higher degree of manifestation, for it is the power by which we think and move and have an intelligent being. Here also is the power of the Gospel, as it is expressed through true faith in Christ and as it is manifest in the gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost. When men partake of these powers, they are partaking of the powers of God; and thereby they may be developed in all the attributes of Deity—love, peace, truth, long-suffering, and so forth. By these divine powers, they may be purified and matured spiritually to where they can come back into God's presence, to dwell in everlasting burnings. These divine powers constitute the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost; and by partaking of them, men may be endowed with the supernatural gifts of the Holy Spirit—prophecy, tongues, healing, discernment, and so forth. Finally, those who are ordained to the Priesthood and who are purified from all sin can draw upon these powers to where all things are subject to them, "both in heaven and on the earth." (D&C 50:27.)

In looking at things in light of the above views, it is evident that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is more than just a philosophy of life. If some people were asked to define the Gospel, they would include everything the Lord has revealed about the three degrees of glory down to the last and most degraded level in hell. They would say that the Gospel included everything. But the Lord says in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 20, that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the Gospel. Yet the Book of Mormon says absolutely nothing about the three degrees of glory, does it? It says nothing about the premortal existence of mankind. It has about one statement of real meaning concerning that interim between death and resurrection. It says nothing about eternal marriage. Yet the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the Gospel.

Wherein does the Book of Mormon contain the fulness of the Gospel? It does so because it contains many explicit statements of how one can bring himself into relationship with the light and power of Christ in its more pure and refined degrees, through His atonement. For example, 3 Nephi, chapter 27 gives the Savior's definition of what constitutes the Gospel. In verse 13, He says: "Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you. ..." Christ then explains that His atonement is the basis of the Gospel. Thereby He reconciled divine law and made it possible to extend His divine power and mercy to men. Having explained this side of the divine plan, He then spoke of man's need to reconcile his life to God by faith in Him and by obedience to the Gospel. Said the Lord:

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

Verily, Verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel.

(3 Nephi 27:20-21.)

Now what is Christ's Gospel? It consists of the requirement to have genuine and living faith in Christ and of repentance, by which man may bring his life into harmony with the Savior. It consists of the ordinance of baptism in which men make covenant with Christ to do His will and receive a remission of sins through His atonement. Finally, it consists of the extension of the powers of the Holy Ghost to man, to enlighten him, to regenerate his soul and to purify and sanctify his heart to where he may enter into God's presence. This, essentially, is the Gospel.

The Doctrine and Covenants makes another very pointed statement of what constitutes the Gospel of Jesus Christ when it says:

Yea, repent and be baptized, every one of you, for a remission of your sins; yea, be baptized even by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost.

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and remember that they shall have faith in me or they can in nowise be saved;

And upon this rock I will build my Church. ...

(D&C 33:11-13.)

What is this baptism of fire? It is a portion of Christ's glory manifest to us through the channel of the Holy Ghost and through the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood. John the Baptist said: "I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier than I cometh, ... he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. (Luke 3:16.)

I used to wonder if that word "fire" was not an interpolation inserted by some sectarian priest who preached hell-fire and brimstone and thought he would associate it with Christ. When I came to a fuller understanding, however, I realized that the Holy Ghost, deriving His power from Christ's glory, has access to celestial fire, to cleanse the dross, the debris, and the carnality from the human system. The Holy Ghost, by His power, can enlighten, purify and expand the human organism to where man can overcome this fallen state and come into Christ's presence, to partake of His power in a state of everlasting burnings.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ consists, basically, as Paul said, of "the power of God unto salvation." (Romans 1:16.) That power in its more pure and refined degree does not come to the natural man, who is conditioned or acclimated to his fallen mortal state. The natural man is an enemy of God and has been from the Fall and will be until he puts off the natural man and becomes a saint by following the dictates of the Spirit. (See Mosiah 3:19.) But having put off the natural man, he then enters into a newness of life and is regenerated and sanctified by the power of Christ. He thereby comes into a closer relationship with the powers of life, of truth, of intelligence, that lead ultimately unto the perfect day. This is the Gospel of Jesus Christ—the plan by which man can obtain a remission of sins and partake of the truth, light, and power of Christ.

This spiritual renewal, in which man begins to partake of the glory and power of Christ, does not come without dedication and service to the cause of righteousness on the part of the individual. It is not something that comes along by fasting and by prayer, although these are important. Jesus set the example. And in Section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants we read that He received grace for grace. It is one thing to go from grace to grace in acquiring the endowments of God's glory, but it is another thing to receive grace for grace. To go from grace to grace is to receive one endowment of light and truth after another until one eventually acquires a fulness. But to receive grace for grace implies that one receives grace only as he gives grace or compassionate service to others. Thus, service is the key to spiritual development. Concerning the application of this principle to man, the above revelation declared: "Therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace." (D&C 93:20.)

This same principle of service is again stressed when the Lord said of those who receive the Priesthood and by true dedication and service magnify their calling therein:

For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying of their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies. (D&C 84:33.)

This renewal is real. It comes by the power of the Holy Ghost, and it comes as the individual himself gives grace or service to others. If you want to purify your heart, if you want to establish a relationship with Christ whereby His power will be with you, then serve the interests of your fellow men in the way God has ordained. Live outside of yourself by loving and serving others. Then you can have claim to the power of the Holy Ghost. One great promise that the Book of Mormon gives is that those who assist in building up the latter-day Zion will have the gift and the power of the Holy Ghost. (1 Nephi 13:37.) Here, then, is the way to obtain the Holy Spirit, by dedicating your life to the building up of Zion in the way ordained of God.

Having received the necessary ordinances of the Gospel, service is therefore the key to true spiritual growth, for as the individual dedicates his life to God and serves the cause of righteousness, he becomes an agent through which the power of Christ is ministered to others. And to be instrumental in giving the Holy Spirit to others, he must possess it himself. Nevertheless, spiritual development comes by grace. Christ went from grace to grace in acquiring a fulness of the Father's glory. We must do the same. Can the works of man produce the divine power by which we may be glorified? Who knows the first thing about how to produce glory and associate it eternally with the human system? Some of us have the naive opinion that Jesus merely pays the debt of sin for man and resurrects us, and from there we must work out our salvation by our works. Those who hold this view should read and understand Section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants. We are to be glorified by grace—by the gift of God to those who dedicate their lives to righteous service in the Gospel. Our righteous works merely reconcile us to Christ; and He then endows us with the divine powers that He has previously received from His Father. In its final sense, it is an act of grace, and we get more than we could possibly earn.

Parley P. Pratt gave us one of the classic statements of the power and influence of the Holy Ghost on an individual in his Key to Theology. First the individual is in the form, stature and image of God and possesses, basically, every organ and attribute that God has in His fulness. But man has these physical endowments in an embryonic or rudimental sense of the word—that is, undeveloped. The Holy Ghost, Elder Pratt then points out, applies His power to the development of the individual. Said he:

The gift of the Holy Ghost adapts itself to all these organs or attributes [of the human system].

It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation and social feeling. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being. (Key to Theology, p. 100).

Here, then, is the plan of the Gospel—to apply the power of Christ's Holy Spirit to the human system, to expand and develop man unto the fulness of the measure of the stature of Christ. These divine powers are as necessary to our growth and development as sunlight is necessary to the plant kingdom. May we seek and achieve this great goal of receiving these divine powers in their sanctifying degrees and thereby grow up to acquire the full celestial powers of Christ, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
