Hyrum L. Andrus, Glory of God and Man's Relation to Deity ( 1964)

IV

MAN'S RISE TO THE CELESTIAL KINGDOM OF GLORY

There are several sections in the Doctrine and Covenants that deal with the resurrection and the three degrees of glory. Section 76 is one of them. We call it "The Vision." We also have Section 88, sometimes designated as "The Olive Leaf," which makes several great statements pertaining to the three degrees of glory. Section 130 deals with this earth in its future celestial state. Section 131 clarifies that there are three degrees within the celestial kingdom; and, finally, Section 132 reveals the law of eternal marriage and the patriarchal order of celestial life.

I would like to read first from Section 88, concerning the law of the resurrection and what the Lord states is necessary to come forth and receive the celestial kingdom:

Now, verily I say unto you, that through the redemption which is made for you is brought to pass the resurrection from the dead.

And the spirit and the body are the soul of man.

And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul.

And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things [Here we come back to the theme of a previous discussion: that power that is extended through Christ and quickens all things is also the power by which the body is quickened in the resurrection.], in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it.

Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory;

For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father;

That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified.

And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom. (D&C 88:14-21.)

The Lord has given us in the Gospel the law required to bring the power of Jesus Christ into our lives, that we might ultimately attain the glory of the celestial kingdom. For those who hear the Gospel here on earth, God has made it plain that we must attain that power to prepare us for celestial glory. Thus, a revelation declared that it is "through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh, [that] they may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory." (D&C 76:118.) Again the Lord has said: "Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory [prior to the resurrection] shall then receive of the same, even a fulness." (D&C 88:29.) We must obtain a portion of the celestial glory by obedience to the Gospel; and in this way we may be prepared for the fulness of glory and power the Lord has promised to give to the faithful in the resurrection. The Gospel is, therefore, essentially a principle of power. It is "the power of God unto salvation." (Romans 1:16-17.) The Lord therefore explained in Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants that which is necessary for us to receive to inherit the celestial kingdom. In other words, here again He defined His Gospel, saying:

And again we bear record—for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just—

They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—(D&C 76:50-51.)

Here is the doctrine of justification to which we have referred previously—the doctrine by which Jesus, through His atonement, takes upon Himself the sins of mankind and justifies man before the bar of God. The revelation goes on:

That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true. (D&C 76:52-53.)

In this quotation and the one above is another succinct statement as to what constitutes the Gospel. The Gospel consists of the requirements to have genuine faith—living faith—in Jesus Christ, of repentance, of baptism, and of the sanctifying powers that come essentially through the Holy Ghost. Those individuals who are justified under this divine plan and who are thereafter sanctified may then be sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise unto eternal life. When they have been justified, sanctified, and sealed, they are made Christ's and are brought forth as His sons and daughters in the celestial kingdom.

This divine plan by which man may rise to celestial glory and power must be viewed in light of his fallen state in mortality. Here he is in the midst of a battlefield that has been established to test his integrity and provide experiences for the growth that is necessary to come back into God's presence. To see the nature of this struggle, let us first look at the condition of man's spirit, as it comes to this probationary state. Said the Lord:

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God.

(D&C 93:38.)

The word "beginning" in this scripture seems to have reference to the spirit's initial organization in its primeval birth, when it was born as a son or a daughter of our Eternal Father. At the time of this initial organization, the spirit was innocent. Then, by the power of the atonement, man is again given a clean slate, in that he is innocent before God when he enters this life of mortality. When this statement by the Lord is coupled with His promise that those who are born again into the Kingdom of God receive a remission of sins and are thereby made innocent in Christ, the idea is suggested that man is innocent as he enters each of the three great spheres of life in which he must develop to become a resurrected celestial being. These spheres of life are: first, the sphere of spirit life that commenced with the organization of our spirits in the pre-mortal world; second, the sphere of physical life which we enter by birth into mortality; and, finally, the sphere of divine or eternal life which we enter by being born by the ordinances of the Gospel—by faith in Christ, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost—into the Kingdom of God. More will be said of these three spheres of life a little later in this lecture.

Because man is innocent as he enters mortality, we can assume that the natural disposition of the spirit is to do good and to follow the promptings of the Spirit that is given unto him through Christ. This desire, however, may not be of the same intensity within every person who comes to mortality. Nor does each spirit possess the same innate abilities and latent potentials. Because of these basic differences, they do not possess the same powers of character to draw upon and to utilize the light and truth that are extended to man in mortality through Christ.

Finally, we must recognize that, as the spirit of man enters mortality in a state of innocence, it becomes voluntarily a fallen creature, in that by this action it leaves the presence of God and enters this fallen mortal state. This, however, as we have said, is a voluntary fall, for which there is no condemnation.

Now let us look at the other side of man's dual nature. As we enter mortality, each of us receives a physical body. These endowments of the flesh are good and are designed to enhance or increase the power and joy of man. Abraham was shown that those who kept their first (or pre-mortal) estate would be added upon. Acquisition of a physical body is just that; it is an adding upon of new attributes and powers. And these physical attributes are essential to man's eternal power and happiness. Let us not be like those who deprecate and seek to repudiate the physical attributes and drives that God has given unto us.

But let us also keep in mind that this mortal body is subject, for the present, to the conditions and powers of the Fall. By the Fall of Adam, there was introduced into the flesh certain disintegrating and degenerating elements that tend to pervert the physical endowments we receive and, eventually, bring about death. This mortal body is therefore a corrupt body. The Apostle Paul speaks of it as a corrupt body and so does the Book of Mormon. (See I Corinthians 15:42, 50; Romans 8:21; Galatians 6:8; Alma 5:15.) Paul was a very diligent student of the scriptures—one who knew the law and endeavored to follow it. Before his conversion to the Gospel of Christ, he had a great desire to live the strict letter of the law. But he did not then possess the regenerating, purifying and stabilizing powers of the Gospel. Consequently, he could speak of the gap that often exists between one's ideals and one's actions, particularly where the powers of the Gospel are not employed to bridge the gap. Said he:

... for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate that do I. ...

Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.

For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not.

For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. (Romans 7:15, 17-19.)

How many of us find ourselves in this situation? It comes about because in mortality we are in the middle of a battlefield where the powers of corruption in the flesh are dominant over our lives, unless we reach out by faith and draw upon the spiritual powers of Christ to aid us in our quest for righteousness. The great prophet, Mahonri Moriancumr, spoken of in the Book of Mormon as the brother of Jared, once went to pray about a particular matter. As he pleaded with God, he made this very meaningful statement:

... Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil continually; ... (Ether 3:2; italics added.)

In other words, man in mortality is introduced to the challenges of the flesh. And just as death is dominant in mortality, so also is the corruption that is in the flesh, in its power to pervert and change his nature. Hence, an angel revealed to King Benjamin that the natural man (that is, the man who is conditioned to and follows after the impulses of this fallen world) is an enemy to God. (See Mosiah 3:19.) The forces of degeneration within the flesh so deflect man's emotional impulses that, if no other considerations than the powers of this world come into the picture, man must become carnal, sensual and devilish. His will to do good, unaided by the powers of God, is not enough to keep him from sin.

We have other great testimonies verifying this fact. Let me develop this theme somewhat to show the need for acquiring and applying the power of God in order to come forth out of this world of sin, of death, and of subjection to the flesh into the life of righteousness that leads to celestial glory. Nephi also spoke of the struggle that exists between the flesh and the spirit, when he said: "... O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities." (2 Nephi 4:17.) Then, after talking about the glorious things that he had beheld in vision, he again laments: "And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh?" (2 Nephi 4:27.)

May I say, parenthetically, that Nephi was not a hypocrite who never lived the Gospel after all. Instead, he realized very keenly that so long as man is in mortality there are certain corrupt elements in the flesh that tend to pull man away from the standard of righteousness. We never get rid of all of these corrupt elements until the resurrection (except it be by translation). The Apostle Paul says we are sown in corruption—that is, buried at death in corruption—and raised in incorruption. We are sown in weakness and raised in power. And I presume that the nearer we come to God, the more we are aware of our weak natures in mortality and lament the slightest tendency we may have to deviate from the true standard of righteousness. Nephi, I believe, was lamenting his fallen state and nature, which caused him sorrow. He was not confessing that he was a hypocrite. He had beheld and partaken of the glory of God; and he longed for that day when his corruption would put on incorruption.

Lehi stated to his sons the alternatives that faced them—the alternatives of seeking liberty and eternal life by the Spirit and power of the Gospel or of being brought into captivity and death by the power of the Adversary. Having done so, he made this concluding statement:

And now, my sons, I would that ye should look to the great Mediator, and hearken unto his great commandments; and be faithful unto his words, and choose eternal life, according to the will of his Holy Spirit;

And not choose eternal death, according to the will of flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that he may reign over you in his own kingdom.

(2 Nephi 2:28-29; italics added.)

Where is the evil? It is in the flesh. And what is the result of the fact that the flesh has within it certain elements of weakness and corruption? The Adversary has an avenue to approach man and bring him down into captivity. Here, then, are the alternatives that confront man. The spirit of man comes here to mortality innocent before God. Its basic aspirations are good. But it comes here under the conditions of the Fall; and, under the conditions of the Fall, all other things being equal, the flesh is dominant. Within the flesh there are seeds of corruption which introduce the spirit, as it undertakes its mortal experience, to weakness, temptation, and so forth. Through the weaknesses of the flesh, the door is opened for Satan to exercise his power upon the individual. If man succumbs to the temptations of the Adversary, as Satan acts through the corrupt elements that are in the physical body, he becomes an enemy to God. On the other hand, if the spirit has enough integrity to reject temptations that come through the flesh by seeking after the light and truth of God, then it may by that power in a measure sanctify the flesh—not by its own power, but through the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And the flesh having been sanctified by the power of God may then come forth in the resurrection to a state of glory. President Brigham Young summed the situation up as follows:

Now I want to tell you that he [i.e., Satan] does not hold any power over man, only so far as the body overcomes the spirit that is in man, through yielding to the spirit of evil. The spirit that the Lord puts into a tabernacle of flesh, is under the direction of the Lord Almighty; but the spirit and body are united in order that the spirit may have a tabernacle, and be exalted; and the spirit is influenced by the body, and the body by the spirit. In the first place the spirit is pure, and under the special control and influence of the Lord, but the body is of the earth, and is subject to the power of the Devil, and is under the mighty influence of that fallen nature that is on the earth. If the spirit yields to the body, the Devil then has power to overcome both the body and spirit of that man. (Journal of Discourses, II, 255-256; hereafter cited JD.)

The natural man is one who follows the dictates of his natural impulses in mortality. Those impulses, due to the Fall and the corrupt elements that are in the flesh, alienate the individual from God. In Section 67, the Lord makes a statement concerning the nature of the natural man and how it is impossible for him to come into the presence of God. Said He:

For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God.

Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind. (D&C 67:11-12.)

No natural man has ever seen God, for such a person cannot bear the presence of Deity. He must first be relatively innocent or be sanctified by the powers of the Spirit, and this through living faith in Christ. He may then, by being enveloped in the powers of the Holy Spirit (or encircled in God's glory) be transfigured and brought into the presence of God. (See D&C 67:11; Moses 1:2, 11.) This applies to the conditions under which mortal man may see God. Such a program of sanctification and endowment with divine powers is also necessary for man to abide permanently in the presence of God hereafter. The Lord therefore explained to the Saints:

... Inasmuch as you strip yourselves from jealousies and fears, and humble yourselves before me, for ye are not sufficiently humble, the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and know that I am—not with the carnal neither natural mind, but with the spiritual. ...

Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now, neither the ministering of angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected.

Let not your minds turn back; and when ye are worthy, in mine own due time, ye shall see and know that which was conferred upon you by the hands of my servant Joseph Smith, Jun. (D&C 67:10, 13-14.)

Can we comprehend from this statement that which has been conferred upon us in the restoration of the Gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith? We have been given the divine powers by which we may mature spiritually until, eventually, we can come back into God's presence. Here is our opportunity. And here is our challenge.

Here, then, is the situation that confronts us. The way to overcome the flesh is not by simply teaching ethics and moral values, as important as they are. Instead, it is by doing those things that will bring into man's life that power, that influence, that regenerating force that we call the Gospel. This divine plan requires faith in Christ, along with dedication and will power to uphold high ethical standards. But it also requires the action of a divine power outside of man's power, as an all-important factor enabling one to achieve the Christian life; and without the influence of this divine power, man cannot achieve the full Christian life. On one occasion our father Adam asked God why it was necessary to be baptized, and the Lord gave him what is in my estimation the classic of all explanations of the doctrine of birth into the Kingdom of God and how it applies to the ultimate acquisition of celestial glory. This scripture is as follows:

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden. [Thus, Adam and his posterity had a clean slate to start on.]

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, That the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world.

And the Lord spake unto Adam, saying: Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, ... (Moses 6:53-55.)

May I pause and say that we do not like that statement, "conceived in sin." We do not like it because it reminds us of a perverse doctrine among the sectarians, to the effect that the act of conception is sin. But let us reason this way. I do not know of one principle of the Gospel which, through the apostasy, has not been perverted. Just because some people believe in sprinkling, pouring, or dry-cleaning, and call it baptism, does not mean that we view baptism in this light, does it? Nor does it mean that we should discard the word baptism as part of the plan by which man may be born into the Kingdom of God. Similarly, the doctrine of being conceived in sin has been perverted. But when properly understood, it is true; and the Lord here puts his stamp of approval upon it. Note that Adam was forgiven of the original sin and his children freed from its power or obligation, but God still said that Adam's children were conceived in sin. To be conceived in sin is therefore something different than the original guilt of Adam's transgression. God declared the latter doctrine to be true, but He means by it that man is conceived in a fallen situation where sin is dominant, where the natural man is dominant, where other effects of the Fall are dominant over him in his fallen or natural state. He does not mean that conception in itself, properly controlled, is transgression or sin. Note that God said:

... Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good. (Moses 6:55.)

The Lord is here saying essentially the same thing that Lehi later said—that there is evil in the flesh, so that when man's physical body develops, he is introduced to the temptations of the Adversary through the corrupt elements in the flesh. People are not predestined to sin and to transgress, but in mortality they are introduced to those weaknesses which can, if they are not checked by spiritual powers coming from Christ, cause them to transgress.

When do these weaknesses and perversions become associated with the individual? When are the seeds of corruption and death planted within the body? Is it after one has been born, at birth, or when the physical embryo is first started—at conception? I think we have to accept that it is at conception. If the seeds of death are transmitted to each new embryo at conception, are not the other effects of the Fall also present in the flesh at conception? Is not a person then conceived in sin and not born in sin? There is a time differential in the meaning of the two terms. The embryo that is formed at conception is predestined to die because the seeds of corruption are there at conception. It is also predestined to grow up, if it lives, with certain weak and fallen tendencies which, if not checked and overcome, deflect and pervert the natural impulses of the body.

Again, if unaided by the light and truth that comes from Christ, the power of the Fall in the flesh is dominant and will gain the mastery over the spirit. For this reason, an angel told King Benjamin that "men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, ..." (Mosiah 3:18.)

In other words, we are standing in mortality at the crossroads. The individual is in a position where, through the natural development of his physical nature, he is introduced to the temptations of the Adversary. This is one of the great purposes of mortality. In order for man to be born out of this fallen condition into a new element of spiritual life, the Lord continued in His statement to Adam:

Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying:

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory; (Moses 6:58-59.)

Here is the doctrine of birth into the Kingdom of God and a statement of the blessings to be derived therefrom—the blessing of being sanctified from all sin, of enjoying the words of eternal life by the revelations of the Spirit in this life, and of receiving eternal life in the world to come, even the divine endowments of immortal glory. Then, to those who are born into the Kingdom of God, the Lord made this promise, as one of the most important statements of scripture pertaining to this basic doctrine:

Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment. (Moses 6:61.)

The Comforter here promised is the Holy Ghost; and by birth into the Kingdom of God its divine power begins to abide within man. The light and the truth that in their fulness constitute God's glory also begins to abide within man. That quickening power—the power of God that is in all things and through all things—likewise begins to abide within man. Here are the benefits that one may receive by being born into the Kingdom of God. The Lord then emphasized in conclusion:

And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time.

(Moses 6:62.)

What is the plan of salvation, according to this statement? It consists of the need to receive two births. By the first birth, we receive a physical body. By the second birth, man may attain those powers necessary to make this physical body a celestial body. Just as acquisition of a physical body is contingent upon the processes of birth—this is the irrevocable law—so also is acquisition of a celestial body contingent upon the processes of birth into the Kingdom of God. It is only through this channel that those powers that quicken all things, that have all knowledge, and that are the enlightening powers of truth in all things, can be developed within man to an eternal fulness. If we have been born of water and of the Spirit, we can therefore say as Paul did in his epistle to the Romans: "For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection." (Romans 6:5.)

It is for this reason that baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost constitute the gateway to that path that leads to the celestial kingdom. Here are the channels through which those powers that will make man a celestial being are given. Sometimes I think we, as Latter-day Saints, believe that the celestial kingdom is simply a place of residence. I grant that it will have a geographical location, but if you were to be given those powers that would make you a celestial being—that would enable you to dwell in full rapport, in full union, with the glory of God—I do not care where they might put you, you could make a heaven out of your surroundings. Think for a moment of the intelligence you would then possess. The way we may receive these celestial powers is through baptism and its associated principles and ordinances of the Gospel.

When we begin to receive these divine powers, we can then begin to have hope of being like Christ in the resurrection, as John said:

Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. (I John 3:2.)

Why did the Saints in John's day know they would be like Christ? They knew that they had complied with that program which would make them, in the resurrection, beings like unto their glorified Savior. That process is the process of birth into the Kingdom of God. This is the channel—and the only channel—by which the perfecting powers of God are given unto mankind in the abundance necessary to make men celestial beings in the resurrection. Then, having received these ordinances in faith, man must develop and mature in the powers of the Spirit until he comes back into the full measure of God.

To be more specific in our approach to this subject, the scriptures teach us that, in the overall plan of life, from the time man existed as "intelligence or the light of truth" until he rises in the resurrection to be endowed with eternal life or celestial glory, there are three basic relationships of life into which he must enter by a birth process and in which he must thereafter mature. In the first of these great relationships of life, the basic intelligence of man, with the spirit matter of which it was inherently a part, was organized by a conception and birth process into an organized spirit personage. Our Eternal Father and Mother were our divine parents in this pre-mortal spirit life; and Jesus was our Elder Brother, the Firstborn of every creature. This was the first birth and the first relationship of life in which we were required to mature along the great pathway to eternal life. By that organization, the basic intelligence that constitutes man's ego was given greater powers of expression and a greater capability for development.

The second of these three births is that which we experience in coming to mortality. Thereby we acquire all the physical attributes that are necessary to the ultimate end of possessing eternal life. Thus, by birth into mortality, we enter into the physical relationships of life and acquire the endowments and attributes thereof. And thereafter we must mature these endowments to their destined fulness.

Those who would enter the Kingdom of Heaven must undergo a third birth process, being born of water and of the Spirit, as Jesus explained to Nicodemus. (John 3:5.) (This is the rebirth or the second birth required of men in mortality, if they are to obtain celestial glory.) Thus having become sons and daughters of the Eternal Father, Elohim, in the premortal spirit birth, and having become sons and daughters of mortal parents in the flesh, those who would enter into celestial glory must then become sons and daughters of Christ in the divine endowments that lead to eternal life. Here are the three births and the three relationships of life required to attain eternal life.

To see this matter a little more clearly, let me first refer to Christ and then to man, showing the eternal genealogy of each. Jesus is the Son of the Eternal Father, Elohim, in all three of these relationships of life. First, He was the first-born of the Father's spirit children in the pre-mortal life. Next, He was the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. Finally, Christ was the Son of the Eternal Father in acquiring the divine endowments of truth and light that lead to eternal life. For example, John testified of Christ, saying:

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness;

And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first. (D&C 93:13-14; italics added.)

According to this statement, for what reason was Christ called the Son? It was not because of His pre-mortal spirit birth. Nor was it because He was the Son of God in the relationships of the flesh. Instead, He is here said to be the Son of God in acquiring the divine endowments of glory that lead to eternal life. Here also Christ was subordinate to the Father as a Son: "And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first." (D&C 93:14.)

Man's eternal genealogy of life has a similar beginning, in certain respects, to that of Christ, in that he was a son of his Eternal Father in the pre-mortal, spirit relationship of life, Christ being the first-born, however. But in mortality we become the sons and daughters of men. And here there is a distinction between us and Christ. Again, we differ in the issue of from whom we receive the divine endowments that give eternal life. Christ is the only person that receives these divine attributes and endowments directly from the Father, without a mediator in between. Here, also, He is the Only Begotten of the Father, as well as in the flesh. There is no other person who is directly and immediately the Son of Elohim in glory. Christ alone has this distinction. But having made the atonement and acquired these divine endowments of glory in their fulness, Jesus was fully prepared to extend the remission of sins and the endowments of the Spirit and glory of His Father to men. Thus, as men are born into the Kingdom of Heaven by obedience to the ordinances of His Gospel, they become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ in those new and divine relationships by which they acquire eternal life. Hence, for us, Christ is the father of divine and eternal life.

One of the great issues that we were confronted with in coming to mortality was the fact that we would be severed from our prior relationship with our Father, as sons and daughters in the pre-mortal world. We would no longer—directly, at least—be able to claim the privileges we had as sons and daughters of God, except through our allegiance to Jesus Christ. Our previous blessings—the rights we had in the pre-mortal world to draw upon the spiritual powers of God's glory—were temporarily suspended by the spiritual fall. Thus, we can only go back into God's presence and receive an inheritance as sons and daughters therein by entering into a new relationship of life, in which we become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. Thus, Jesus prayed in the garden concerning His disciples before His betrayal, stating to the Father: "Thine they were, and thou gavest them me." (John 17:6.)

To achieve this new relationship of life, we must be born again and thereby become sons and daughters of Christ. He then becomes our Father, and we become heirs to celestial glory through Him. In the final analysis, we will therefore add to the fact that we are sons and daughters of Elohim the further fact that we are sons and daughters of our mortal parents in the flesh; and then, in addition, we will be sons and daughters of Christ in the endowments of eternal life and glory. Here is the plan of life and of salvation. Thus it is written that in Christ was life; and that that life is the light of men. (See John 1:4.) He came that men might have life and that more abundantly, so that by believing in Him we might have life through His name, even eternal life. (See John 20:31.)

May I suggest this view of the matter. All people are children of the Eternal Father, Elohim, by reason of a pre-mortal birth. But as they enter mortality and become accountable before God, they become estranged by their deeds of misconduct and thereby lose their rights and prerogatives as members of the divine family. In other words, they no longer have immediate access to the spiritual blessings and powers of Deity that they had as the sons and daughters of Elohim in the pre-mortal world. To acquire these family rights again and thereby have access to the Divine powers that rightfully belong to the sons of God, they must subscribe to what Joseph Smith called "the Articles of Adoption"; in doing so, they then become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ, and through Him partake of the divine attributes and powers of Deity that were lost to them by their estrangement from God. The challenge is therefore to become the sons and daughters of Christ. (See D&C 39:1-4.) The Apostle Paul could therefore declare: "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." (Romans 8:14.) Continuing, he explained:

For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God:

And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.

For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. (Romans 8:15-19.)

Note that those who follow the Spirit are to be glorified with Christ, when God's glory should be revealed in them. Herein is the Gospel manifest. And herein lies the hope of true Christians, for they stand in the hope of the glory of God. (See, for example, Jacob 4:11; Mosiah 4:12; Alma 14:11, 22:14; 36:28.)

In a previous lecture I discussed the doctrine that those who receive the Gospel (those who are born into the Kingdom of God) and mature in its divine powers to where they overcome all things may attain the Second Comforter, the promise of eternal life, and the privilege of coming back into divine presence to communicate with beings in glory. One person who received this promise was Vilate Kimball, the faithful wife of Heber C. Kimball. Here is a part of her patriarchal blessing, where this glorious promise is given by Patriarch Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's brother:

Beloved sister, I lay my hands upon your head in the name of Jesus, and seal you unto eternal life—sealed here on earth and sealed in heaven, and your name written in the Lamb's book of life never to be blotted out.

The same is mentioned and manifest to comfort your heart, and to be a comfort unto you henceforth all your days. It is even a promise according to the mind of the Spirit, and the Spirit shall bear record of the truth; the same is called the second Comforter, not His presence, but His promise. [That is, he sealed upon her head the promise of eternal life, which may or may not include immediately the blessing of coming into the presence of God, as this is governed by the will of God.] The same is as immutable as an oath by Himself, because there is none greater, and there is no greater promise nor no greater blessing that can be given. (Solomon F. Kimball, Life of David P. Kimball, pp. 127-128.)

Certainly such a promise as this would be a comfort, would it not? It is my belief that no person will have a place in the celestial kingdom until he or she has developed spiritually to where he or she is sufficiently mature to receive the promise of eternal life and with it the right to come into the celestial kingdom and abide there in glory. This we may do by receiving the Gospel and enduring in its spiritual blessings and powers to the end of this day of probation. The promise we then receive is that we shall have eternal life. That promise, however, may be secured unto us by our faithfulness, even before we pass from this life.

The brother of Jared is a good example of one who, in mortality, received the right by faith to come back into God's presence. By true faith he pierced the veil because he had paid the price necessary to receive the Second Comforter. It is necessary for a person to develop the powers of godliness before he can attain this blessing. To do so, the powers of the Holy Ghost must be utilized to such an extent that the individual is filled with that perfect love which we call charity, which charity is necessary before the sealing powers of the priesthood can operate. At a conference of the Church, held October 25, 1831, the Prophet made this statement:

The order of the High Priesthood was, that they have given them power to seal up the Saints unto eternal life. ... [This, essentially, is the basic purpose of the Holy Priesthood.] But until the Saints had perfect love they are liable to fall. When they had a testimony that their names were sealed in the Lamb's Book of Life, they had perfect Love, and then it was impossible for false Christs to deceive them.

(Journal History, under date.)

Let me stress again that this perfect love which we call charity comes only as an endowment of the Holy Ghost. It is that kind and quality of love that only the Spirit can mature within man, by man's obedience to the Gospel.

Here, then, is the purpose of the Holy Priesthood, to reveal those divine principles and powers by which man may eventually be sanctified and sealed unto eternal life and come back into God's presence. A revelation to Joseph Smith therefore declared:

The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—

To have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant.

(D&C 107:18-19.)

The powers of the Priesthood, then, constitute the means by which man may commune with God and heavenly personages and come back into their presence. Doctrine and Covenants 124:38 declares that to come into God's presence it is necessary to have temples where the higher ordinances of the Priesthood are ministered to men. Section 84 also gives us this very important statement:

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. [Here, in other words, is the means by which a person might come up and receive the knowledge of God, even the Second Comforter.]

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; (D&C 84:19-21.)

The revelation then continues by stating that Moses endeavored to teach his people this very important fact, that they might come forth and behold the face of God—that is, develop spiritually to where they could abide his presence. The revelation says:

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory. (D&C 84:24; italics added.)

Let me say a word about the scriptural concept of rest. What does it mean "to enter into God's rest"? This term is used several times in holy writs. In Alma, chapter 13, the idea of entering into rest is explained as a blessing coming through the Melchizedek Priesthood. There Alma said:

Now, as I said concerning the holy order of this high priesthood, there were many who were ordained and became high priests of God; and it was on account of their exceeding faith and repentance, and their righteousness before God, they choosing to repent and work righteousness rather than to perish; (Alma 13:10.)

Having made this statement, Alma points out that it is through the Priesthood and its sanctifying powers that one enters into a state of rest:

Therefore they were called after this holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb.

Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there were many, exceeding great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God. (Alma 13:11-12.)

Again, what does it mean to enter into rest? It means, first, to attain that condition of sanctification where one has gained mastery over the flesh. Thus, there is in some measure a cessation of conflict in which victory has been achieved through the Gospel; and by the individual's faith the body is subjected to the power thereof. One, then, has mastery over the flesh through Jesus Christ and through His Gospel. This is a condition of rest. The inner struggle thus ends in victory through the power of the Gospel. This does not mean, however, that he cannot fall from that state should he cease to persist in righteousness. See, for example, Doctrine and Covenants 20:32-34. The second idea inherent within this concept is that by entering into rest man may acquire that assurance and peace that comes through the promise of eternal life. Would not this Comforter bring rest?

Thirdly, to enter into the Lord's rest is to have the privilege of enjoying God's glory or presence here and hereafter, having overcome the spiritual fall. Note that Doctrine and Covenants 84:24, cited above, equates rest with entering into "the fulness" of God's glory. In coming into the presence of the Lord, one has overcome the things of this world and triumphed over the Fall. The struggle of the flesh results in victory, and the faithful individual may then be sealed unto eternal life, to enjoy the powers and blessings of celestial glory. Said the Prophet about the importance of understanding these principles of truth:

I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of His ordinances, and in answer to prayer. The Hebrew Church "came unto the spirits of just men made perfect, and unto an innumerable company of angels, unto God the Father of all, and to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new covenant." What did they learn by coming to the spirits of just men made perfect? Is it written? No. What they learned has not been and could not have been written. What object was gained by this communication with the spirits of the just? It was the established order of the kingdom of God: The keys of power and knowledge were with them to communicate to the Saints. (History of the Church, VI, 50-52, hereafter cited DHC; italics added.)

When one enters into rest, he has traversed the pathway back into God's presence and may have the opportunity, even while yet on earth, subject to the will of God, to come into the presence of those who dwell in glory beyond the veil. To fulfill this great purpose is "the established order of the Kingdom of God." But let me emphasize that this can only be done through the ordinances and the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood. That is why Paul reasoned that if perfection came by the Levitical Priesthood, why then was it necessary to have the Melchizedek Priesthood? And the inference he made was that perfection comes only by and through the Melchizedek Priesthood. That Priesthood holds the keys by which the truths and the powers of celestial beings are administered unto men, sufficient to bring them back into the presence of God. Of those who embrace the Gospel and thereby achieve this objective, Section 76 says:

They are they who are the church of the Firstborn [i.e., those who are sanctified and sealed unto eternal life].

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory;

And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ in God's.

And they shall overcome all things.

Wherefore, let no man glory in man, but rather let him glory in God, who shall subdue all enemies under his feet.

These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever.

These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people.

These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection.

These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just.

These are they who are come [by the powers of the Gospel] unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all.

These are they who have come [by receiving the Second Comforter] to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and Church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn.

These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judges of all.

These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood.

These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical. (D&C 76:54-70.)

Those who come forth in celestial glory are gods, even the sons of God. They are members of the divine family and have partaken of the divine nature. By being born into the Kingdom of God, they have become sons of God; and having developed in the acquisition of divine powers through Christ, they have matured to become gods in celestial glory. They overcame all things. They dwell in the presence of the Eternal Father and His Christ forever and ever. In other words, they dwell in everlasting burnings, where they sit in glory as do those who are enthroned in everlasting power. They will come with Christ, when He appears in glory in His second coming.

These are they who have traversed the pathway from this corrupt and fallen state of mortality back into God's presence. They therefore come unto Mount Zion and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all. They who attain unto celestial glory are they who, by the power of the Gospel, have received the Second Comforter and thereby come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn. That is, they who attain the celestial kingdom are they who come up and obtain communion with such glorified personages, by accepting and applying the Gospel of Christ.

Included among those who come forth unto the celestial kingdom are those who are just men made perfect, through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant. Note that they are made perfect by Jesus. Christ is the great perfector of men. Men do not perfect themselves, except as they comply with the requirements by which they are made perfect in Christ. "Just men" are those who, in mortality, are just and virtuous under the law of God; and having endured in the blessings and powers of the Gospel unto the end of their mortal probation, they are made perfect by receiving the endowments of truth and light (or divine intelligence) that constitute celestial glory. They receive these perfecting endowments in large measure as they enter the spirit world after death. For this reason, a revelation observed that the spirits of just men made perfect inherit celestial glory upon their departure from this life. (See D&C 129.) The Prophet Joseph Smith declared:

The spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work; hence they are blessed in their departure to the world of spirits. Enveloped in flaming fire, they are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions, and are often pained therewith.

(DHC, VI, 52.)

We should clarify that, while the spirits of just men made perfect inherit celestial glory upon their departure from this life, they may only receive this divine intelligence in its fulness as resurrected beings. Only then can they be perfected in the full attributes and powers of celestial life. To be perfected, in this sense of the word, is to receive the full attributes and powers of that divine intelligence that center in Christ. One is then perfected in Christ by being conformed to His divine or glorified image. Here is the perfection to which the Gospel leads.

Such beings dwell in celestial glory. As observed in Doctrine and Covenants, Section 130, "They reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord." (D&C 130:7.) This earth, when it becomes a celestial sphere, Brigham Young tells us, "will not then be an opaque body as it is now, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory." (JD, VII, 163.)

Those who reside on our future celestial earth will be resurrected beings, whose bodies are spiritual and immortal. Explained a revelation: "For notwithstanding they die, they also [with this earth, which will also die and pass away] shall rise again, a spiritual body." (D&C 88:27.) This earth will then be a spiritual sphere, and those who are brought forth to reside thereon will be spiritual beings whose resurrected bodies will be quickened by Spirit or glory and not by blood, thereby becoming spiritual bodies. The glorified, resurrected body is a spiritual body by virtue of the spiritual powers that are centered therein. As such, celestial man can see and communicate his will in eternity through these divine powers. And being organized in union with them, a resurrected body can waft itself through space at a speed that may exceed many times the speed of the mortal light with which we are acquainted. They are centers of divine light and power and may use the light and power within themselves to perform the functions of eternal or celestial life.

Here, then, is the faith of a true Saint. As the Apostle Paul said, through the grace of Christ "we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God." (Romans 5:2.) We look forward to the "glory which shall be revealed in us." And we conclude with Paul that "the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God." (Romans 8:18-19.) But this is not merely something to be manifest in the resurrection, for to a limited degree man can partake of these divine powers in mortality through the Gospel. And having partaken of them to a small degree, he must mature therein until in the resurrection he becomes a glorified being like unto Christ. The Apostle Paul therefore wrote:

We all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

(II Corinthians 3:18; italics added.)

This same hope was expressed by Alma to the Church in his day, when he said:

And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his [divine] image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?

Do you exercise faith in the redemption of him who created you? Do you look forward with an eye of faith, and view this mortal body raised in immortality, and this corruption raised in incorruption, to stand before God to be judged according to the deeds which have been done in the mortal body? (Alma 5:14-15.)

This same issue is also ours. Do we view things in this light? Have we received this mighty change that comes by the power of the Gospel, or have we received but a dead ordinance? Here is the challenge that confronts each one of us. Do we look forth with an eye of faith and view this mortal body changed to a celestial body, this corrupt body raised to an incorrupt body, this natural body made into a spiritual or celestial body? Do we anticipate the time when we can dwell in the everlasting burnings of celestial intelligence and be perfected in all the attributes thereof? And are we living in union with the powers of the Gospel so as to prepare ourselves for that great change of circumstances?

May God bless us to seek and acquire the saving faith that leads to spiritual union with Christ, here and in eternity, I pray in the name of our glorified Redeemer, Jesus Christ. Amen.
