John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

BOOK ONE

Some Latter-day Saint Philosophy

Religiona-Taylor, JohnTP". . . . We must be philosophers too, and make it appear that our philosophy is better than theirs and then show them that religion is at the bottom of it."

Religiona-Taylor, JohnTP—JOHN TAYLOR

Religiona-Taylor, JohnTPAugust 22, 1852.

CHAPTER I

WHAT IS MORMONISM

THE MEANING OF MORMONISM

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPSIGNIFICANCE OF THE TERM.—Mormonism is . . . . a revelation from the heavens to man, introducing a new dispensation to the human family, viz.: the everlasting gospel, which has been corrupted, transformed and changed. It is the religion that Adam, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Jesus, and the apostles had . . . . and that Lehi, Nephi, Alma, Moroni, Mormon, and a host of others had. . . . It has its origin from God, and is merely, at present, introductory to the fruition of the hopes of those men of God, who though believing, died "in faith," without the possession, "having seen the promise afar off." It is the living, breathing, energetic, intelligent power; instead of the dead, withered, lifeless, inaminate body or form. It introduces man to a knowledge of himself, shows him his relationship to his fellow man, to the world, to saints, angels, spirits, and to God. It unfolds his origin and destiny, and unlocks the dark, impenetrable future; the heavens are unveiled, and eternity is laid open.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ETERNAL VISTA.—Standing upon its broad platform, encircled by the mantle of truth, the man of God, by faith, peers into the future, withdraws the curtains of eternity, unveils the mystery of the heavens, and through the dark vista of unnumbered years, beholds the purposes of the great Elohim, as they roll forth in all their majesty and power and glory. Thus standing upon a narrow neck of space, and beholding the past, present, and the future, he sees himself an eternal being claiming an affinity with God, a son of God, a spark of Deity struck from the fire of his eternal blaze. He looks upon the world and man, in all their various phases, knows his true interests, and with intelligence imparted by his Father Celestial, he comprehends their origin and destiny. Such was the religion of the aforesaid worthies; it was not an idle fable; they knew in whom they believed, and knowing, filled with the spirit of prophecy and revelation, "they spake as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost." Such also is Mormonism. It is no vain faith, no trite, hackneyed shavelings or priestly, canting creed, that would hang man's destiny over a yawning gulf with a fragile, brittle thread, and threaten him with fiery, liquid flames, pitchforks, gridirons, serpents, and eternal fires, to frighten him to fear a God whom they describe, the which he cannot love.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MOTIVATION OF THE MORMON.—His intelligence, lit up by God and followed out, will be expansive as the world and spread through space; his law is the law of love; his rule, the rule of right to all. He loves his neighbor, and he does him good; he loves his God and therefore worships him; he sees the power of truth, which, like the light of God, spreads through all space, illuminates all worlds, and penetrates where men or angels, God or spheres are known; he clings to it. Truth is his helmet, buckler, shield, his rock, defense; his all in time and in eternity. Men call him a fool because he cannot be directed by their folly, nor follow in their erratic, truculent wake. But while they are grasping at shadows, he lays hold of the substance. While they are content with a rickety, sprawling religion, fashionable for a time, but having nothing to do with eternity, and smother the highest, noblest principles of man, he dare acknowledge God; and acknowledging him, he dare obey him and confess that faith which God has given to him. He grasps at all truths, human and divine. He has no darling dogma to sustain or favorite creed to uphold. He has nothing to lose but error, and nothing to gain but truth. He digs, labors, and searches for it as for hidden treasure; and while others are content with chaff and husks of straw, he seizes on the kernel, substance, the gist of all that's good, and clings to all that will ennoble and exalt the human family.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPRESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS: SOME CONCRETE MEANINGS.—Such was the religion of the ancients, both upon the continents of Asia and America. The everlasting gospel made known in the last days is nothing more nor less than the ancient religion restored. It is the commencement of the "restitution of all things, spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world was." It is the bringing back of ancient, eternal principles, whereby men can know God as they knew him formerly; not a vague fantasy, not a simple form, but a living reality. Its doctrines, its ordinances, its principles, its priesthood are from above, revealed from the heavens, and yet strictly in conformity with all former revelations. It has not been, it cannot be successfully controverted, either in its divine authenticity, its doctrines, ordinances, or priesthood. It is adapted to the wants of the human family, to the world morally, socially, religiously and politically. It is not a sickly, sentimental, effeminate plaything; not a ghostly, spiritual, sing-song, ethereal dream, but a living, sober, matter-of-fact reality adapted to body and spirit, to earth and heaven, to time and eternity. It enters into all the ramifications of life. It does not adapt itself to the philosophy, politics, creeds, and opinions of men, but fashions them in its divine mold. It cannot be twisted into the multitudinous latitudinarian principles of a degenerate world; but lifts all that are in the world, who will be subject to its precepts, to its own ennobling, exalted and dignified standard. It searches all truth, and grasps at all intelligence. It is the revealed living and abiding will of God to man; a connection between the heavens and the earth. It is nature, philosophy, heavens and earth, time and eternity united. It is the philosophy of the heavens and the earth, of God, and angels, and saints.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPDid ancient men of God revel in the truth? So do we. Did they have revelations and visions? So do we. Did they prophesy? So do we. Did God communicate with them? He does with us. Did they prophesy of "the restitution of all things?" We say it is at our doors. Did they prophesy of a kingdom of God? We are helping to build it up. Had they the ministering of angels? So have we. Had they prophets, apostles, pastors, teachers, and evangelists? So have we. Had they the spirit of prophecy and revelation? So have we. Did they look for the second advent and glorious appearance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? So do we. Did they expect that God would purge the wicked out of the earth and introduce a reign of righteousness? So do we. Did they look for Jesus and the saints to reign on the earth? So do we. We are, in fact, looking for all things that they did; seeking to know all things that they knew, and to bring to pass all things that they prophesied of, the great consummation of which is the restitution of all things; and men may lie and rant and rave; they cannot frustrate the designs of God, nor stop the progress of eternal truth one moment—its course is onward, ONWARD, ONWARD, and it defies opposition.. . . .

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPThe omnipotent power of eternal truth will stand unscathed in the view of gathering hosts, and the nations will know that God rules in the heavens, that Mormonism is not a vague phantasy and wild chimera, but the greatest boon that could be conferred upon man; the offspring of heaven, the gift of the Gods, a celestial treasure, an earthly, heavenly inheritance, a living, abiding, and eternal reality.—The Mormon, Vol. 1, No. 23, July 28, 1855.

TRUE PHILOSOPHY

RELATES MAN AND TRUTH.—What is true philosophy? It seems to me to be a true principle for men to try and find out who they are. I like to examine myself a little, and I sometimes ask who am I? where did I come from? what am I doing here? and what will be the condition of things when I leave here?

If there is anybody who can tell me anything about these things, I want to know. If I had an existence before I came here, I want to know something about it; and if I shall have an 6:823-825, March 1, 1845. existence hereafter, I want to know what kind of existence it will be. I do not want to be frightened about hell-fire, pitchforks, and serpents, nor to be scared to death with hobgoblins and ghosts, nor anything of the kind that is got up to scare the ignorant. But I want truth, intelligence, and something that will bear investigation. I want to probe things to the bottom and to find out the truth, if there is any way to find it out.—JD,11:317, February 24, 1867.

IS MORMONISM PHILOSOPHICALLY TRUE?—It may be asked: Are all Mormons, then, philosophers?

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPTo this we answer: Not in the general acceptation of the term. Mormonism is philosophically true, but all Mormons are not philosophers—neither do we consider it necessary. A man may understand first principles, without knowing the mysteries. He may also enjoy certain influences and powers and priesthood without being able to define the cause of those operations or their scientific bearings. We have taken the pains to investigate this subject, but the Mormons arrive at conclusions by a much shorter route. The above may be necessary to some. The Mormons know by obedience. They may not all be philosophers, but they know it by inspiration through obedience. A blacksmith can heat iron in a fire, as well as a philosopher; a lady . . . . can make bread, without understanding how wheat is raised, dressed, or ground into flour. Nor is it necessary for an elder, who "baptizes for the remission of sins," or "lays on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost," to understand the philosophy of its operations. They are God's ordinances, and he bestows the blessings promised through obedience to his commands. The blind man might not know much about Jesus nor, be acquainted with the mysticisms and intricacies of Jewish theology; but one thing he knew as well as any theologian, that he "was once blind, but he then could see." The ancient apostles were not all philosophers, but Jesus told them that they should heal the sick and cast out devils in his name. They simply believed him, tried the experiment, and found it effectual; and, when they returned from a mission, reported that even "devils were subject to them in his name," or by his power. This was all they understood about it at that time. They could not tell how the Spirit operated, nor by what invisible agency the devils were subjected or banished; they simply knew it by its effects—just the same as a boy would know that a ball would rebound if struck against a wall or the ground, without knowing the properties of matter or the nature either of resistance, elasticity, or projectile force. A man, under the direction of another, may be able to make an electrical machine and not understand its properties nor the nature and force of electricity. So a man may receive the gospel through faith in testimony. By yielding obedience, by baptism administered by an authorized agent, and having hands laid upon him for the gift of the Holy Ghost by an elder legally qualified, the blessing will follow the administration, whether the person to whom it is administered or the administrator be a philosopher or not. Furthermore, God imparts his philosophy frequently to men of limited abilities. They follow his teachings—the result is, they confound the wise. It is not their philosophy, but God's; but being true to law, it is always obedient thereto. A boat with a hole in it will sink with a good man in it—a sound boat will bear up a wicked man. Telegraphic wires will operate as they are operated upon, and might convey either a revelation of God or of the devil. So, when the apostles were put into communion with God, although illiterate, "they spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." Hence they became intelligent and "a mouth and wisdom was given to them that all their adversaries were not able to gainsay nor resist." They had the gift of the Holy Ghost, that brought things past to their remembrance, led Holy Ghost, that brought things past to their remembrance, led them into all truth, and showed them things to come. They had a principle of living revelation, or a living fountain of true eternal principles. Those principles would always overturn the puerile principles of a corrupt philosophy and the ridiculous fantasies of a false religion and vanquish them; they might not always understand why—it was the gift of God to them; but it was philosophical. Such is Mormonism.—The Mormon, Vol. 2, No. 3, March 8, 1856.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE COMPREHENSIVE NATURE OF MORMONISM.—Is there a true principle of science in the world? It is ours. Are there true principles of music, of mechanism, or of philosophy? If there are, they are all ours. Is there a true principle of government that exists in the world anywhere? It is ours, it is God's; for every good and perfect gift that does exist in the world among men proceeds from the "Father of lights with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning." It is God that has given every good gift that the world ever did possess. He is the giver of all good principles,—principles of law, of government, and of everything else, and he is now gathering them together into one place, and withdrawing them from the world, and hence the misery and darkness that begin to prevail among the nations; and hence the light, life, and intelligence that begin to manifest themselves among us.—JD, 10:57, May 18, 1862.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ENIGMA OF MORMONISM.—Mormonism is an enigma to the world.. . . . Philosophy can not comprehend it; it is beyond the reach of natural philosophy. It is the philosophy of heaven; it is the revelation of God to man. It is philosophical, but it is heavenly philosophy, and beyond the ken of human judgment, beyond the reach of human intelligence. They cannot grasp it; it is as high as heaven; what can they know about it? It is deeper than hell; they cannot fathom it. It is as wide as the universe; it extends over all creation. It goes back into eternity and forward into eternity. It is associated with the past, present, and future. It is connected with time and eternity, with men, angels, and Gods, with beings that were, that are, and that are to come.—JD, 15:25, April 7, 1872.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE STRENGTH OF MORMON DOCTRINE.—I have traveled to preach these doctrines in most of the United States and in the Canadas; I have preached them in England, in Scotland, in Wales, in the Isle of Man and the Jerseys, in France, Germany, in the principal cities of America and Europe, and to many prominent men in the world; and I have not yet found a man that could controvert one principle of Mormonism upon scriptural grounds.—JD, 5:239, September 13, 1857.

Spiritualitya-Taylor, JohnTPThere is a spirit in man, possessed of so much "divinity," that it will discover truth by its own light; no matter whether it is covered with a "sectarian cloak," or thrown among the rubbish of scoffers.—TS, 6:855, April 1, 1845.

THE ORIGIN OF MORMONISM

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPCOMMITTED FROM THE HEAVENS.—How did this state of things called Mormonism originate? We read that an angel came down and revealed himself to Joseph Smith and manifested unto him in vision the true position of the world in a religious point of view. He was surrounded with light and glory while the heavenly messenger communicated these things unto him, after a series of visitations and communications from the Apostle Peter and others who held the authority of the holy priesthood, not only on the earth formerly but in the heavens afterwards.

That they hold it in the heavens we know from the scriptures. In them there are certain principles revealed in relation to that matter that nobody could reveal unless they were acquainted with the principle of revelation. Moses and Elias were seen with Jesus on the mount, when Peter and his brethren saw them, who said, "Master, it is good for us to be here, let us build three tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias." Who was this Moses? He was a man who had officiated before on the earth, had held the holy priesthood, had been a teacher of righteousness, and who, with the elders of Israel, had talked with God, and had received revelations from him, holding the priesthood that administered in time and eternity. When he got through with this world, his official duties were not ended, for he appeared to Jesus, Peter, James, and John upon the mount, to confer on them certain principles, authorities, and priesthood, that they might also be enabled to administer in the ordinances of salvation, and officiate as the representatives of God upon the earth.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd hence, when Joseph Smith came, those who had held the keys before came to him, so he told me and others, and revealed unto him certain things pertaining to the kingdom of God upon the earth, and ordained him and set him apart to the ministry and apostleship unto which he was called.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPHe presented himself before the world and informed the people that God had spoken, and that he had spoken to him. He told them that the heavens had been opened and that angels clothed in light and glory had appeared to him and revealed unto him certain things. Then we have Oliver Cowdery, who tells us something about these things, and gives his testimony as a living witness. Again, there were eleven witnesses in relation to the Book of Mormon, who testify that the Book of Mormon was a divine revelation from God. And some of these witnesses tell us that an angel of God came and laid before them the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and they knew that their testimony was true and faithful. Others saw and handled the plates from which the record was taken. I have conversed with several of those men who say they have seen the plates that Joseph Smith took out of the Hill Cumorah; I have also conversed with Joseph Smith, who has told me of these things and many more. . . . Here, then, is an abundance of testimony that assumes a supernatural agency—an interposition of the Almighty—an opening and an unfolding of something to the human family with which they have been unacquainted.—JD, 10:127-128, March 1, 1863.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPNOT THE PRODUCT OF MEN.—Neither Joseph Smith, nor Hyrum Smith, nor Sidney Rigdon, nor Brigham Young, nor myself, nor anybody associated with the Church at the present time, has had anything to do with the origination of these things. This work was commenced by the Almighty; it has been carried on by him, and sustained by his power, and if it is ever consummated it will be by the power and direction and sustenance of the Lord Jehovah, of Jesus, the mediator of the new covenant, and then through the medium of the priesthood here upon the earth. These things originated in the heavens, in the councils of the Gods; and the organization of the priesthood and the power thereof, and everything pertaining thereto, have been committed from the heavens through Joseph Smith, principally, and through others who have been associated with him in this great work.—JD, 24:227, 1884.

THE POSITION OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION.—There is one of two things true. We are either laboring under one of the greatest delusions that ever afflicted the human race, or we are under the direction of the great God. There is no half-way business about it. I have said to men where I have been preaching, when they professed to believe me to be honest but deceived, I did not want them to set me down so for I was either right or I was a hypocrite and a deceiver. We know that we have embraced the principles of eternal truth, and we also know that we cannot get rid of them. I tested them thoroughly at the commencement. If I could have overthrown them by truth, I would; but I could not. I have either to embrace Mormonism or acknowledge myself dishonest. I believed, obeyed, and rejoiced in the gospel. Since I received and obeyed the truth, I have never seen anything to cause me to waver. I have examined our religion closely and have found nothing to doubt. Neither has anything crossed my mind in regard to the saints' accomplishing the purposes of the Almighty upon the earth nor that has caused me to fear and tremble, but I have ever felt strong in the Lord God of Israel, and I feel today, as I have felt for the last twenty years.—JD, 9:342-343, April 13, 1862.

A STATEMENT OF THE MORMON POSITION.—I am aware of the position that we occupy today. I feel that I am surrounded by a large number of intelligent men and women, and while I am addressing you, I am also addressing the world, for the remarks I make will be reported and published to the world. Therefore, I am desirous to advance such sentiments as will be in accord with the enlightenment of the Latter-day Saints, with the intelligence of the . . . . century, and with the principles that have emanated from God.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPAny intelligence which we may possess and which we may be able to impart, is not of ourselves, but of God. It did not originate with us; it did not originate with Joseph Smith, with Brigham Young, with the Twelve Apostles, nor was it received from any institution of learning, nor of science, either religious, political, or social. Our philosophy is not the philosophy of the world; but of the earth and the heavens, of time and eternity, and proceeds from God.—JD, 23:48, April 9, 1882.

Mission of the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPAIMS AND OBJECTS.—Do we expect to immortalize our fame by demolishing cities, wasting countries, and destroying their inhabitants? No. Do we expect to have our name perpetuated by being embalmed and laid by, as the Egyptians were after they died? No. Do we expect to perpetuate our fame by building cities and monuments? No. What then? We expect to perpetuate our fame and our name by living and propagating correct principles—by the establishment of correct laws—by the building up of the kingdom of God—by imbibing and receiving light and intelligence from the living God—by living in the enjoyment of all the blessings that God has in reserve for his saints—by driving back the dark cloud of error and superstition that has overspread the moral horizon of the world—by establishing a nucleus of truth, intelligence, light, morality, philosophy, religion, government, and everything else that is calculated to promote and exalt the human family in time and in all eternity; and then, like some of the ancient patriarchs—like Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and many of the ancient saints—enter into the New Jerusalem, and there live with our posterity, our friends, and relations; and then pass on by the eternal laws of progression to associate with the Gods, worlds without end, in all intelligence and perfection, and in promoting the happiness of all beings pertaining to this world and the world that is to come.—JD, 8:5-6, February 19, 1860.

"FOR HEAVEN AND HAPPINESS."—So far as I am personally concerned, I am here as a candidate for eternity—for heaven and for happiness. I want to secure by my acts a peace in another world that will impart that happiness and bliss for which I am seeking. If I am driven with my brethren as I have been, I ask myself what is the meaning of it. If I have to pass through afflictions, I wish them to be sanctified to my good.—JD, 7:197, November, 1859.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTP"WE ARE. . . . CITIZENS OF THE WORLD."—Some people will say, "You are harsh; you are exclusive; you do not wish to associate and to mix with others." To a certain extent we do, and to a certain extent we do not. To a very great extent we feel very much interested in the welfare and happiness of the human family. I very much question whether greater philanthropy has been developed among this people. I am at the defiance of anybody, or class of men, or nation, to show that greater sacrifices, so to speak, have been made anywhere than have been made among the elders of this church to promulgate among the people that dwell upon all the earth the things that God has revealed unto them. Can you point out another people who have exhibited the same degree of intelligence, earnestness, and zeal in travelling from nation to nation, from city to city, by land and sea, over mighty oceans and desert wastes, even to the ends of the earth in order to promote the happiness and well being of their fellow men? There are no philanthropical societies existing in the world that have done what the elders of this church have done.

Are we misanthropists? No. We are cosmopolitans, citizens of the world, and have implanted in our bosoms the spirit of the living God, which prompts us to seek for the welfare and happiness of all the human family. All this, and more, we have done, and I very much question whether you can find anybody that would dispute it. They would say we are in error. That they have a right to say, and to think, if they please. But there is not one who can say in truth that we have not done all we claim to have done.—JD, 11:55, January 18, 1865.
