John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER II

ETERNALISM

AN INTERPRETATION OF LIFE

Eternal Progressiona-Benson, Ezra TaftTPTHE VITAL PROBLEMS.—We frequently talk of the advancements made in society and the progression of the world generally in intelligence, in science, in literature. But what is all that to a man when he is about to leave his earthly tenement, to go hence? Of what moment is it to him how bright his genius, or how expansive and varied his learning may be? It makes no difference; he is gone and is apparently helpless and inanimate, at least so far as the body is concerned. We struggle sometimes while we are occupants of these mortal bodies, for riches and position, for fame and honor. We jostle one against another, entertaining various conflicting sentiments, ideas, and theories, but they are all leveled with the balance in the grave. Such has been, and such is the position of the human family.

a-Taylor, JohnEternal ProgressionTPPURPOSE IN LIFE.—There is a scripture which reads, "And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment" (Hebrews 9:27). If we are to be associated only with this world, if, when this vital spark expires, we end our entire existence, it would be scarcely worth while to pay that attention to its affairs that we do, merely for so short a time. But when we reflect, we are reminded that man is a dual being, possessing a body and a spirit, and that he is associated with this world and the next, that he is connected with time and eternity. It then becomes a matter of more grave and serious importance. These are things which we cannot ignore, even if we would. According to our ideas of things as they have been revealed to us, we had an existence before we came here. We came here to accomplish a certain purpose which was decreed by the Almighty before the world was. We came to receive bodies or tabernacles, and in them to pass through a certain amount of trial in what is termed a probationary state of existence, preparatory to something to be developed hereafter. Hence this world is the state of our probation, and we look forward to the future as something with which we are as much connected as we are with anything pertaining to time. We look forward to another state of existence with that degree of certainty and confidence that we do when we go to bed in the evening expecting to see the light of the sun in the morning, or that we do with anything else that is associated with any of the affairs of this world upon which we place any degree of certainty. Were it not so, it would be, as I have already stated, of very little importance what our struggles were, or what we had to do with in this world.—JD, 18:306-307, December 31, 1876.

ETERNITY OF THE GOSPEL.—It has been remarked frequently that we are in eternity, and that we have now begun to live for ever. A great many are at a loss to understand the nature of this eternal life, and how we are connected with eternity. The remarks are certainly novel; and in order to get at the subject, it will be necessary for us to investigate in some measure the meaning of the word eternity. In entering upon this subject, I shall necessarily have to refer to certain remarks which I advanced last Sabbath in relation to the everlasting, unchangeable principles of the gospel; but as every principle pertaining to the gospel of Jesus Christ is eternal, it is all relevant to the subject about which we are now speaking.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPThe same principles that now exist, in relation to the gospel, existed in the various dispensations that have been in being in the different ages of the world. They existed in the days of Moses, in Enoch's day, and in the days of Adam; and they existed in eternity in the mind of God, before this world rolled into existence, the morning stars sang together, or the sons of God shouted for joy. When we speak of these things we have reference not so much to our existence here on the earth, as we have with regard to principle; principles relative to our coming into existence in this time, to live upon the face of the world a few years. For although we came into corporal existence here, we existed thousands of ages before we came here. We only came here to live on this stage of action, whereon we are to work out our probation, and to prepare ourselves for the eternal courts of glory and a celestial kingdom of God. Time is a short space between, or in, eternity. Eternity existed before time was, and will exist when time will cease; and so did we.—MS, 8:84-85, July 6, 1845.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GOSPEL IS EVERLASTING.—What is meant by the everlasting gospel? I know that some people think there was no gospel until Jesus came; but it is a great mistake. Adam, Noah, Abraham, and Moses had the gospel; and when Jesus came he came to offer himself a sacrifice for the sins of the world, and to bring back the gospel which the people had lost. "Well," says one, "do you mean to affirm that the men you have just named had the gospel? I do, and hence it is called the everlasting gospel. "How do you know?" Why, the Scriptures say the gospel held the keys to the mysteries of the revelation of God. Now, Adam was in possession of these things; he was in possession of the spirit of prophecy and revelation. He talked with God, and it was through the medium of the gospel he was enabled to do it. Enoch also conversed with and had revelations from God, and finally he was not, for God took him. Noah conversed with God, and God told him to build an ark, and gave him revelations about the size of it and the kind of animals he was to introduce into it. And wherever the gospel existed there was a knowledge of God. Moses had the gospel and so had Abraham, and they communicated with Him from time to time. And by what medium was this done? It was through the medium of the Gospel. "Do you mean to affirm," says the objector, "that Moses had the gospel?" Yes, let us take the Bible for it, we all believe in that. In that book we read that "unto us was the gospel preached as well as unto them." We are also told that the gospel was preached to them, but it did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in those who heard it. Therefore the law was added because of transgression. Added to what? Why, the gospel, which the Scriptures say Moses preached to the children of Israel. In the New Testament we read, Galatians, 3rd chapter and 8th verse. "And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all nations be blessed." It was through the medium of the gospel that Abraham obtained these promises. Now, some people think the law of Moses, as it is called, was given to the children of Israel as a peculiar kind of a blessing; but it was a peculiar kind of a curse, added because of transgression. It was as Peter said—neither they nor their fathers were able to bear it.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPWe read also that Jesus came and was a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. Who was Melchizedek? He was the man who blessed Abraham, the father of the faithful, yet Melchizedek was greater than Abraham, for verily the lesser is blessed of the greater. For wherever and whenever the gospel has existed there has been the opening of the heavens, revelations and visions given to men; and wherever the gospel has not existed there has been no vision, no revelation, no communication between the heavens and the earth. Hence that which is called the Gospel in the Christian world is not the gospel, but a perversion of it.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPWhen Jesus came he came to do away with the law and to introduce the gospel that their fathers had lost because of transgression. After its restoration by Jesus the same results followed: the heavens were opened, the purposes of God unfolded, and His power made manifest among the people.—JD, 13:17-19, March 14, 1869.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPETERNALISM IN HUMAN RELATIONS—Others make their marital relations to end in death; their covenants last only till death does them part. Ours take hold of eternity, they enter into the eternal state of existence, and contemplate and eternal union of the sexes worlds without end.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPWe believe in the resurrection of the dead and in the life in the world to come; and not only in the resurrection of the male, but also of the female. We believe also in eternal unions, union on earth and in heaven. And as the heavens declare the glory of God, and the stellar universes roll on according to eternal laws implanted in them by the Deity, and perform their revolutions through successive ages, so will man progress and increase—himself, his wives, his children—through the eternities to come.—JD 23:65, April 9, 1882.

ETERNALISM AND EARTH LIFE

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DOCTRINE OF ETERNALISM.—We are not connected with a something that will exist only for a few years, some of the peculiar ideas and dogmas of men, some nice theory of their forming. The principles that we believe in reach back into eternity. They originated with the Gods in the eternal worlds, and they reach forward to the eternities that are to come. We feel that we are operating with God in connection with those who were, with those who are, and with those who are to come.—JD, 17:206, October 7, 1874.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPAs eternal beings, we existed with our Father in the eternal worlds. We came on this earth, and obtained tabernacles, that, through taking possession of them, and passing through a scene of trial, and tribulation, and suffering, we might be exalted to more glory, dignity, and power than would have been possible for us to obtain had we not been placed in our present position.—JD, 1:230-231, April 8, 1853.

Body, Physicala-Taylor, JohnTPEARTH LIFEONE STAGE OF EXISTENCE.We are here for a short time only. Our spirits dwelt with our Father before we came to the earth. In coming here we took upon ourselves bodies according to the decree of the Almighty, and if our bodies are required, it would not be for me or for you to say when or how these things shall be. It is the Lord who directs in all these matters, both in regard to us individually and also in regard to the whole human family.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPThe present is only one stage of our existence. We existed before we came here; we exist here for a time; and when we depart from this mortal life, we shall have a spiritual existence, an existence without the body, and then again with the body. And it is for those who manage and manipulate these matters to do as seemeth good in their sight, and it is for us to yield a willing and an obedient submission to the will of our Heavenly Father, feeling always that whatever he does is perfect and right.—JD, 22:354-355, January 29, 1882.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPWe came forth from our Father in heaven, having the privilege of taking bodies in this world. What for? That our bodies and spirits together might accomplish the will of our Heavenly Father, and find their way back again into his presence; that while we are upon the earth, we might be governed by his wisdom, by the intelligence and revelations that flow from him; that he might be a guide and dictator of our steps while we sojourn here; and that we might fill up the measure of our creation in honor to ourselves, in honor to our progenitors, and in honor to our posterity; and finally, find our way back into the presence of God, having accomplished the object for which we came into the world.—JD, 1:368, April 19, 1854.

GOD'S INTEREST IN EARTH LIFE.GOD has always felt interested in the welfare of the human family. But there are certain eternal laws associated with his economy that have to be carried out, whether in his Church or out of his Church. From the members of his Church he expects a higher state of morality than he does from those that are outside. All men will be judged according to the deeds done in the body, whether they be good or evil. The gospel has been sent to them from time to time. The old disciples were told to go to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, and proclaim its glad tidings, and the people on this continent had the same testimony delivered among them. In the last days there was another angel to fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth. What gospel? The same gospel that Adam had, the same gospel that Enoch had, the same gospel that Seth and Mahalaleel and Noah had, the same gospel that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had, and that Moses and the prophets had, the same gospel that Jesus had, the same gospel that was taught on the Asiatic continent and on the American continent, and proclaimed to the various peoples of the earth.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPAs Latter-day Saints we believe this gospel has been restored, and further, we know that we are in possession of it.. . . . Through obedience to its principles, and the reception of the Holy Ghost, you Latter-day Saints do know that this is the work of God; and if you don't know it, it is because you are not living your religion, and keeping the commandments of God.—JD, 25:94-95, February 10, 1884.

God is interested in the welfare of all humanity that has ever lived, that now lives, or that ever will live. He is, we are told, the God of the spirits of all flesh, and he has introduced principles which have been made known to us for the benefit of all. The principles that we are associated with reach back into eternity and forward into eternity.—JD, 23:23-24, December 11, 1881.

SOME PRINCIPLES OF EARTH LIFE.We believe in the restoration of all things. We believe that God has spoken from the heavens. If I did not believe he had, I would not be here. We believe that angels have appeared, that the heavens have been opened. We believe in eternal principles, in an eternal gospel, and eternal priesthood, in eternal communications and associations. Everything associated with the gospel that we believe in is eternal. If it were not so, I would want nothing to do with it. I do not want to make a profession, and worship a god because this one, that one, or the other one does it, and I not know whether I am right, and those whom I imitate not know, any more than myself, whether they are right or wrong.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPI profess to know for myself, and if I did not know for myself, I would have nothing to do with it. Acting upon this principle, I associated myself with the Latter-day Saints. I preach that doctrine which I verily believe with my whole soul. I believe in its principles, because there is something intelligent about it. For instance—if I am an eternal being, I want something that is calculated to satisfy the capacious desires of that eternal mind. If I am a being that came into the world yesterday, and leaves it again tomorrow, I might as well have one religion as another, or none at all; "let us eat, drink and be merry; for tomorrow we die." If I am an eternal being, I want to know something about that eternity with which I am associated. I want to know something about God, the devil, heaven, and hell. If hell is a place of misery, and heaven a place of happiness, I want to know how to escape the one, and obtain the other. If I cannot know something about these things which are to come in the eternal world, I have no religion; I would not give a straw for it. It would be too low and grovelling a consideration for a man of intelligence, in the absence of this knowledge. If there is a God, I want a religion that supplies some means of certain and tangible communication with him. If there is a heaven, I want to know what sort of place it is. If there are angels, I want to know their nature, and their occupation, and of what they are composed. If I am an eternal being, I want to know what I am to do when I get through with time; whether I shall plant corn and hoe it, or be engaged in some other employment. I do not want any person to tell me about a heaven that is "beyond the bounds of time and space," a place that no person can possibly know anything about, or ever reach, if he did. I do not wish any person to frighten me . . . . by telling me about a hell where sinners are roasted upon gridirons, and tossed up by devils upon pitchforks and other sharp-pointed instruments.. . . . I want nothing to do with such things, I care nothing about them. But as an intelligent being, if I have a mind capable of reflection, I wish to contemplate the works of nature, and to know something of nature's God, and my destiny.

God As Creatora-Taylor, JohnTPNATURE AND BELIEF IN GOD.—I love to view the things around me; to gaze upon the sun, moon, and stars; to study the planetary system, and the world we inhabit; to behold their beauty, order, harmony, and the operations of existence around me. I can see something more than that mean jargon, those childish quibbles, this heaven beyond the bounds of time and space, where they have nothing to do but sit and sing themselves away to everlasting bliss or go and roast on gridirons. There is nothing like that to be found in nature—everything is beautifully harmonious, and perfectly adapted to the position it occupies in the world. Whether you look at birds, beasts, or the human system, you see something exquisitely beautiful and harmonious, and worthy of the contemplation of all intelligence. What is man's wisdom in comparison to it? I could not help but believe there is a God, if there were no such things as religion in the world.—JD, 1:151, 152, June 12, 1853.

SOME PROBLEMS OF ETERNITY

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPETERNAL CONFLICT.—There has been a conflict in the world ever since the creation of man to the present time. And that spirit of antagonism to the truth that existed in former ages exists in this age, and we have reason to know it.—JD, 24:36, January 21, 1883.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ROLE OF EXPERIENCE.—What is eternity? It is duration. It had no beginning, and it will have no end. What is the priesthood? It is everlasting; it had no beginning and will have no end. What is matter? It is eternal. What is spirit? It is eternal. God did not make this world out of nothing—that would be impossible. But the Christians say nothing is impossible with God. He made the world out of matter that existed before he framed it. He spake, chaos heard, and the world rolled into existence. There is no end to the works of the Almighty, and we may soar amidst the knowledge of God forever.. . . .

Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPIt is also necessary that we should learn the principles of order and government, but we must first learn how to govern ourselves, then how to govern our families, and lastly, learn how to be governed, which is the most difficult lesson that can be set us—it is infinitely worse than governing others. Jesus was not prepared to govern till he was placed in circumstances that gave him experience. The scriptures say it was necessary to the bringing of many souls to glory that the captain of our salvation should be made perfect through sufferings; so he was not perfect before, but had to come here to be made perfect. He had to come here to pass through a multitude of sufferings, and be tempted and tried in all points like unto us, because it was necessary. Had it not been necessary, he would not have been placed in those circumstances, and this is the reason why we are here, and kicked and cuffed round, and hated and despised by the world. The reason why we do not live in peace is because we are not prepared for it.—MS, 8:87, July 6, 1845.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPWe are engaged in a work of importance. We are immortal beings. We are dual beings associated with time and eternity; I might say associated with the past, the present, and the future. We have a work to perform here upon the earth, and with the help of Israel's God we expect to do that work.—JD, 25:93, February 10, 1884.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPETERNAL MARRIAGE. [^1]—What man has a claim upon his wife in eternity? It is true that some of the writers of the yellow-backed literature have a philosophy a little in advance of the priests of the day. Some of them do tell us about eternal unions. They expect to be married here and hereafter. They know nothing about it, still they are in advance of the clergy. They follow the instincts of Nature, and Nature unperverted looks forward to a reunion. We are not governed by opinion in these matters. God has revealed the principle, and our wives are sealed to us for time and eternity. When we get through with this life, we expect to be associated in the next, and therefore we pursue the course that we do, and no power this side of hell, nor there either, can stop it.—JD, 13:230, May 6, 1870.

Covenantsa-Taylor, JohnTPLAW AND JUSTICE.—We enter into obligations here as young men or young women, or as old men or old women, as the case may be, no matter what or how we enter into covenants before God, holy angels, and witnesses, and pledge ourselves in the most solemn manner to be true to these covenants. If we violate these covenants, and trample under foot the ordinances of God, we ought to be dealt with by the church and either repent of our sins or be cut off from the church, so that by purging the church from iniquity, we may be acceptable before God; for the Gods spoken of are not going to associate with every scalawag in existence; scalawags are not going where they are; and if men do not live according to the laws of a celestial kingdom, they are not going into a celestial glory; they cannot pass by the angels and the Gods, who are set to guard the way of life. Straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it.

Degrees of Glorya-Taylor, JohnTPIs God merciful? Yes. Will he treat his children well? Yes. He will do the very best he can for all. But there are certain eternal laws by which the Gods in the eternal worlds are governed and which they cannot violate, and do not want to violate. These eternal principles must be kept, and one principle is that no unclean thing can enter into the kingdom of God. What, then, will be the result? Why, the people I have referred to—people who do not keep the celestial law—will have to go into a lesser kingdom, into a terrestrial, or perhaps a telestial, as the case may be. Is that according to the law of God? Yes, for if they are not prepared for the celestial kingdom, they must go to such a one as they are prepared to endure. Certain principles have been developed, and a great many have not. But we are here in a school to learn, and it is for the elders of Israel who are desirous to do the will of God, and keep his commandments, to put themselves in the way of doing so, to seek to the Lord for his guidance and direction, to repent of their follies, their nonsense, and wickedness of every kind, and to come out for God and his kingdom, and to seek to build up the Zion of God and the kingdom of God upon the earth, and if we do this, God will bless us and exalt us in time and throughout the eternities that are to come.—JD, 25:165, 166, June 15, 1884.

Jesus Christ As Head of Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPLAWS AND KINGDOMS OF GLORY.—We ought to observe the laws of God. The Lord has taken a great deal of pain to bring us where we are and to give us the information we have. He came himself, accompanied by his Son Jesus, to the Prophet Joseph Smith. He didn't send anybody, but came himself, and introducing his Son, said: "This is my beloved Son, hear him." And he permitted the ancient prophets, apostles, and men of God that existed in different ages to come and confer the keys of their several dispensations upon the prophet of the Lord, in order that he should be endowed and imbued with the power and Spirit of God, with the light of revelation and the eternal principles of the everlasting gospel, and that the keys committed to him, might, through him, be conferred upon others, and that the principles of eternal truth as they exist in the heavens, might extend to the nations of the earth, that these degrading, loathsome, damning principles might cease, that his people might be gathered to Zion from the four corners of the earth, and learn his laws.—JD, 21:116-117, November 28, 1879.

Degrees of Glorya-Taylor, JohnTPWe are told that if we cannot abide the law of the celestial kingdom we cannot inherit a celestial glory. Is not that doctrine? Yes. "But," says one, "are not we all going into the celestial kingdom?" I think not, unless we turn round and mend our ways very materially. It is only those who can abide a celestial glory and obey a celestial law that will be prepared to enter a celestial kingdom. "Well," says another, "are the others going to be burned up?" No. "Do you expect everybody to walk according to this higher law?" No, I do not. And do I expect those that do not are going into the celestial kingdom? No, I do not. "Well, where will they go?" If they are tolerably good men and do not do anything very bad, they will get into a terrestrial kingdom, and if there are some that cannot abide a terrestrial law, they may get into a telestial kingdom, or otherwise, as the case may be.—JD, 26:133, October 6, 1883.

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPCONFORMITY.—We are living in a very important day and age of the world, in a time which is pregnant with greater events than in any other period that we know of, or in any other dispensation that has existed upon the earth. It is called "the dispensation of the fulness of times," when God "will gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth"; for the heavens, the Gods in the eternal worlds, the holy priesthood that has existed upon the earth, the living that live upon the face of the earth, and the dead that have departed this life, are all interested in the work in which we are engaged. Consequently, it is of the greatest importance that everything we do, that every ordinance we administer, that every principle we believe in, should be strictly in accordance with the mind and word, the will and law of God.—JD, 25:177, May 18, 1884.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ESSENTIAL EQUALITY OF MEN.—Looking upon ourselves as eternal beings, connected with heaven as well as earth, with eternity as well as time, what difference is it to us what our lot may be, whether we abound in wealth, or whether we have to struggle with grim poverty; whether we possess the good things of this world, or have to crawl around as Lazarus did, and be glad to eat of the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table? It will soon be with the rich as if they were not rich, and with the poor as if they had not to struggle—all will find a level in the grave.—JD, 18:311, December 31, 1876.

Eternal Lifea-Taylor, JohnTPDEATH AND RESURRECTION.—We believe in a religion that will make a man go down to the grave with a clear conscience, and an unfaltering step, and meet his God as a father and friend without fear.. . . . We have no craven fear of death; we are looking for life eternal, and an association with the Gods in celestial mansions. We are not ashamed of our religion, and we believe God is not ashamed of us.—The Mormon, March 31, 1855.

Resurrectiona-Taylor, JohnTP"IT IS APPOINTED FOR MEN ONCE TO DIE."—When we reflect upon the position of the world that we live in and of humanity in general, look back through the dark lapse of ages that have transpired, and contemplate the millions upon millions, and hundreds of thousands of millions who have inhabited this earth, and that they have all of them gone, we see that there is no staying of these things, no arresting the course of destiny, no stopping the hand of fate, or the power of the destroyer. An eternal decree has gone forth, and it is appointed for all men once to die. It is impossible for us to evade this, and with the exception of the very few to whom I have before referred, [^2] all men have paid the great debt of Nature. The human body may be propped up through the ingenuity, nursing, and care of man for some time, but, like a sweeping flood, although you may dam up the water from its natural course and arrest it in its progress and keep it back, back, back, for a while, yet by and by it will rush over its barriers, seek its natural channel, pursue its own course, and find its own resting place. So it is with the human family. We come into the world; we exist for a short time; then we are taken away, no matter what our feelings, ideas, or faith may be; they have nothing to do with this great universal law which pervades all Nature.. . . .

Resurrectiona-Taylor, JohnTPWho is there that can stay the hand of death? What talent, what ingenuity, what philosophy, religion, science, or power of any kind? Who possesses that power, individually, in this assembly, or combined, to say to the great monster death, stand back, thou shalt not take thy victims? There is no such person, there is no such power, no such influence; such a principle does not exist, and it never will exist until the last enemy is destroyed, which the scriptures tell us is death. But death shall be destroyed, and all then, even all the human family, shall burst the barriers of the tomb and come forth—those who have done good to the resurrection of the just. Then and not until then will that influence, that fell tyrant, be destroyed.—JD, 15:347-348, February 23, 1873.

Life after Deatha-Taylor, JohnTPA SOLILOQUY ON DEATH.—A few days ago I attended the funeral of one of my wives; and while doing so I looked upon the great city of the dead. I thought to myself, here are thousands of honorable men and women who are sleeping the sleep of peace, who have served their God, and who have got through with the affairs of this world; and while their bodies are decaying here, their spirits are soaring in the heavens. Do I feel sorry for them? No, they have gone to rest, and all is peace with them, according to the mind and will of God in relation to those matters, he having appointed unto man that he must die.

Life, Purpose ofa-Taylor, JohnTPSince the organization of the world, myriads have come and have taken upon themselves bodies, and they have passed away, generation after generation, into another state of existence. And it is so today. And I suppose while we are mourning the loss of our friend, others are rejoicing to meet him behind the veil; and while he has left us, others are coming into the world at the same time, and probably in this our territory. There is a continuous change, an ingress of beings into the world and an egress out of it. As near as my memory serves me, from one-third to one-fourth of our population today are children under eight years of age. There are thousands of men upon the earth today, among the Saints of God, of whom it was decreed before they came that they should occupy the positions they have occupied and do occupy, and many of them have performed their part and gone home; others are left still to fulfil the duties and responsibilities devolving upon them.—JD, 23:177, July 24, 1882.

Immortalitya-Taylor, JohnTPFUNERAL CUSTOMS.—It is proper to sorrow; it is proper to show respect for the departed. It is proper that our sympathies should be drawn out; it is proper that we should assemble together to attend to appropriate funeral services, as we are now doing, that we may reflect upon our lives and upon the uncertainty thereof, and upon death and the results that may follow after; and that we consider the gospel of the Son of God, and reflect upon our position. But I have thought, and indeed President Young thought, and so did Brother George A. Smith and others with whom I have conversed upon this subject, that we pay too much attention to these outward forms. We, above all other people upon the face of the earth, ought to be free from outward show, and from the appearance of sorrow, and mourning, having had planted within us the germs of immortality and eternal life; inasmuch as when we get through with the affairs of this world, we not only expect, but we know that we will inherit eternal lives in the celestial kingdom of God. And knowing this, it would not be for us to mourn as people without any hope.—JD, 22:355, January 29, 1882.

PRIESTHOOD AND THE FUTURE STATE.—When men leave this earth, they leave it to occupy another sphere in another state of existence. And if . . . . they hold the priesthood that administers in time and in eternity . . . . they hold that priesthood in the eternal worlds, and operate in it there. It is an everlasting priesthood, that administers in time and in eternity. And the gospel that we have received unfolds to us principles to which we were heretofore entirely ignorant. It shows us the relationship that exists between God and man, and it shows us the relationship that exists between men who have dwelt upon the earth before and those who exist today. It shows that while God has revealed the priesthood to us upon the earth and conferred upon us those privileges, that in former generations he revealed the same priesthood to other men, and that those men holding that priesthood ministered to others here upon the earth; and that we are operating with them and they with us in our interests and in the interests of the church and kingdom of God, in assisting to build up the Zion of God, and in seeking to establish truth and righteousness upon the earth; and that there is a connecting link between the priesthood in the heavens and the priesthood upon the earth.

God, our Heavenly Father, has gathered unto himself, through the atonement of Jesus Christ, very many great and honorable men who have lived upon the earth, and who have been clothed with the powers of the priesthood. Those men having held that priesthood and administered in it upon the earth are now in the heavens operating with the priesthood in the heavens in connection with the priesthood that exists now upon the earth.—JD, 23:176, July 24, 1882.

Resurrectiona-Taylor, JohnTPNATURE OF THE RESURRECTION.—What, will everybody be resurrected? Yes, every living being. "But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Then cometh the end." That is, the saints shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years. One of the apostles says, "But the rest of the dead live not again until the thousand years are expired." But all must come forth from the grave, some time or other, in the selfsame tabernacles that they possessed while living on the earth. It will be just as Ezekiel has described it—bone will come to its bone, and flesh and sinew will cover the skeleton, and at the Lord's bidding breath will enter the body, and we shall appear, many of us, a marvel to ourselves.

I heard Joseph Smith say, at the time he was making a tomb at Nauvoo, that he expected, when the time came when the grave would be rent asunder, that he would arise and embrace his father and mother, and shake hands with his friends. It was his written request that when he died, some kind friends would see that he was buried near his bosom friends, so that when he and they arose in the morning of the first resurrection, he could embrace them, saying, "My father! My mother!"

Life after Deatha-Taylor, JohnTPHow consoling it is to those who are called upon to mourn the loss of dear friends in death, to know that we will again be associated with them! How encouraging to all who live according to the revealed principles of truth, perhaps more especially to those whose lives are pretty well spent, who have borne the heat and burden of the day, to know that ere long we shall burst the barriers of the tomb, and come forth living and immortal souls, to enjoy the society of our tried and trusted friends, no more to be afflicted with the seeds of death, and to finish the work the Father has given us to do!

Resurrectiona-Taylor, JohnTPI know that some people of very limited comprehension will say that all the parts of the body cannot be brought together, for, say they, the fish probably have eaten them up, or the whole may have been blown to the four winds of heaven. It is true the body, or the organization, may be destroyed in various ways, but it is not true that the particles out of which it was created can be destroyed. They are eternal; they never were created. This is not only a principle associated with our religion, or in other words, with the great science of life, but also it is in accordance with acknowledged science. You may take, for instance, a handful of fine gold, and scatter it in the street among the dust; again, gather together the materials among which you have thrown the gold, and you can separate one from the other so thoroughly, that your handful of gold can be returned to you; yes, every grain of it. You may take particles of silver, iron, copper, lead, and mix them together with any other ingredients, and there are certain principles connected with them by which these different materials can be eliminated, every particle cleaving to that of its own element.—JD, 18:333-334, December 31, 1876.

Says John, when wrapt in prophetic vision, and clothed upon with the Spirit and power of God and the revelations of Jehovah, "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; . . . And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works" (Revelation 20: 12, 13).

Resurrectiona-Taylor, JohnTPI want a part in the resurrection. The angel said, "Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection." I want to have part in the first resurrection. It is that which leads me to hope. It is that hope which buoys me up under difficulties and sustains me while passing through tribulation, for I know as well as Job knew that my "Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand in the latter day upon the earth," and I know that I shall stand upon it with him. I therefore bear this testimony.—JD, 13:231, May 6, 1870.

ETERNAL JUDGMENT.—President Young remarked . . . . that "God sees and knows the acts of all men." We read something like this, "But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment." Now, this is a remarkable declaration. Look at the millions of human beings that inhabit this earth, and that have inhabited it from the creation up to the present time. It is supposed, generally, by the best authorities, that from eight hundred to a thousand millions of people live upon this earth at the same time, that is, this has been the case for a great many generations at least; they are coming and going continually; they pass into the world by thousands and tens of thousands, and go out of it in the same way daily; a daily stream of this kind is coming and going. Then, if we could discover the thoughts and reflections of these numerous millions of human beings, look at the wisdom, the intelligence, the folly, the nonsense, the good and the evil that are connected with every one of them! It is so vast and complicated that the human mind could not receive it, and it seems as if it would be almost a thing impossible for God to gaze upon the whole of them—to comprehend the whole, and judge of the whole correctly. How shall this be done? My understanding of the thing is, that God has made each man a register within himself, and each man can read his own register, so far as he enjoys his perfect faculties. This can be easily comprehended.

Judgment Daya-Taylor, JohnTPLet your memories run back, and you can remember the time when you did a good action; you can remember the time when you did a bad action; the thing is printed there; and you can bring it out and gaze upon it whenever you please. As I stated before, if you have studied language, you can call that out at pleasure; you can show the distinction between the different parts of speech very readily. If you have studied mechanism, your mind will go to the place where you saw a certain machine, and you will go to work and make one like it. If you have traveled in cities, you can tell what kind of houses and streets composed the different cities you passed through, and the character of the people you associated with; and you can ruminate upon them, and reflect upon them by day or by night whenever you think proper, and call the things up which you did and saw. Where do you read all this? In your own book. You do not go to somebody else's book or library. It is written in your own record and you there read it. Your eyes and ears have taken it in, and your hands have touched it; and then your judgment, as it is called, has acted upon it—your reflective powers. Now, if you are in possession of a spirit or intellectuality of that kind, where by you are enabled to read your own acts, do you not think that that being who has placed that spirit and that intelligence within you holds the keys of that intelligence, and can read it whenever he pleases? Is not that philosophical, reasonable, and scriptural? I think it is. Where did I derive my intelligence from that I possess? From the Lord God of Hosts, and you derived your intelligence from the same source. Where did any man that exists or breathes the breath of life throughout this whole universe get any intelligence he has? He got it from the same source. Then it would be a very great curiosity if I should be able to teach you something and not know that something myself. How could I teach you A, B, C, if I did not know the alphabet, or the rudiments of the English grammar, or anything else, if I did not know it myself? I could not do it. Well, then, upon this principle we can readily perceive how the Lord will bring into judgment the actions of men when he shall call them forth at the last day.—JD, 11:77-78, February 5, 1865.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This is the title of Elder Taylor's editorial in the Times and Seasons from which the following selection has been taken.
[^2] Jesus himself makes the statement in response to questioning Pharisees. See John 8:58 and passim.
