John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER III

THE CONCEPT OF GODHOOD

"THE LIVING GOD" [^1]

PLURALITY OF GODS.—It will . . . . be necessary to treat the subject of the "Living God," in contra-distinction to a dead God, or, one that has, "no body, parts, or passions," and perhaps it may be well enough to say at the outset that Mormonism embraces a plurality of Gods—as the Apostle Paul said, there were "gods many, and lords many," (I Corinthians 8:5.) in doing which, we shall not deny the scripture that has been set apart for this world, and allows one God; even Jesus Christ, the very eternal Father of this earth; and if Paul tells the truth,—"by whom also he made the worlds." (Hebrews 1:2.)

It was probably alluded to by Moses, when the children of Israel were working out their salvation with fear and trembling in the wilderness, at the time that he spake these words:

And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders;

And ye said, Behold, the Lord our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: We have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.

Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall die.

For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived? (Deuteronomy 5:23-26.)

Again, Moses in the before-mentioned quotation uses our text, the "Living God"; and who will undertake to say that he meant any other person than Jesus Christ, the Holy One of Israel? "Before Abraham was, I am." In all probability that meant Christ [^2] for these is but one God. . . . In Matthew we learn:

When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, whom do men say that I the Son of man am?

And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?

And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the son of the living God. (Matthew 16-13-16.)

Now, two facts, making two worldly mysteries, meet the mind in the foregoing passages. Jesus says he is the "son of man," and Peter says, he is the "son of the living God." This makes two "living Gods," because the Savior never once said that he begat himself, or came into the world of his own accord, or upon his own business; but upon the contrary, he came to do the will of his father who sent him.

What shall we say then, to make Moses', Jesus', and Peter's words true? We will say that Jesus Christ had a father and mother of his spirit, and a father and mother of his flesh; and so have all of his brethren and sisters: and that is one reason why he said, "ye are Gods"; or that Isaiah prophesied: "Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together." (Isaiah 41:23.) In fact, "the gods," in old times, was common intelligence. Satan, in his first sectarian sermon to Adam and Eve, told them, if they would eat of the forbidden fruit, they should become as "gods," knowing good and evil. (Genesis 3:5.)

This is not all: the first line of Genesis, purely translated from the original, excluding the first Baith (which was added by the Jews) would read: Rosheit (the head) baurau, (brought forth) Elohim (the Gods) ate (with) hah-shau-mahyiem (the heavens) ueh-ate, (and with) hauaurates, (the earth.) In simple English, the Head brought forth the Gods, with the heavens and with the earth. The "Head" must have meant the "living God," or Head God: Christ is our head. The term Elohim, plural of Elohah or ale, is used alike in the first chapter of Genesis, for the creation, and the quotation of Satan. In the second chapter, and fourth verse, we have this remarkable history: "These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth, when they were brought forth; in the day that the Lord of the Gods made earth and heavens." The Hebrew reads so. [^3]

Godheada-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PRESIDENCY OF THE TRINITY.—Truly Jesus Christ created the worlds, and is Lord of Lords, and, as the Psalmist said: "judgeth among the gods." (Psalm 82:1.) Then Moses might have said with propriety, he is the "living God," and Christ, speaking of the flesh could say: I am the son of man; and Peter, enlightened by the Holy Ghost: Thou art the son of the living God—meaning our Father in heaven, who is the Father of all spirits, and who, with Jesus Christ, his first begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, are one in power, one in dominion, and one in glory, constituting the first presidency of this system, and this eternity. But they are as much three distinct persons as the sun, moon, and earth are three different bodies.

THE NOBLE RACE IN THE HEAVENS.—Without going into the full investigation of the history and excellency of God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ . . . . let us reflect that Jesus Christ, as Lord of lords, and King of kings, must have a noble race in the heavens, or upon the earth, or else he can never be as great in power, dominion, might, and authority as the scriptures declare. But here, the mystery is solved. John says: "And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's name written in their foreheads." (Revelation 14:1.)

Their "Father's name," bless me! that is GOD! Well done for Mormonism; one hundred and forty four thousand GODS, among the tribes of Israel, and, two living Gods and the Holy Ghost, for this world! Such knowledge is too wonderful for men, unless they possess the spirit of Gods. It unravels the little mysteries, which, like a fog, hide the serene atmosphere of heaven, and looks from world to world, from system to system, from universe to universe, and from eternity to eternity, where, in each, and all, there is a presidency of Gods, and Gods many, and lords many; and from time to time, or from eternity to eternity, Jesus Christ shall bring in another world regulated and saved as this will be when he delivers it up to the Father; and God becomes all in all. As John the Revelator said: "And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him.

"And they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads." (Revelations 22:3, 4.)

"His name in their foreheads," undoubtedly means "Gods" on the front of their crowns; for, when all things are created new, in the celestial kingdom, the servants of God, the innumerable multitude, are crowned, and are perfect men and women in the Lord, one in glory, one in knowledge, and one in image: they are like Christ, and he is like God: then, O, then, they are all "living Gods," having passed from death unto life, and possessing the power of eternal lives!—TS, 6:806-807, February 15, 1845.

Eternal Progressiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE FATHERHOOD OF GOD.—God is our Father; we are his children. He has brought us into his convenant, and it is our privilege to go on from wisdom to wisdom, from intelligence to intelligence, from understanding of one principle to that of another, to go forward and progress in the development of truth until we can comprehend God, for we are his children; we are his sons and daughters; and he is our Father.—JD, 21:93, April 13, 1879.

God, Fatherhood ofa-Taylor, JohnTPNo matter what words are used, it is the principles we are after, and our religion interests and affects us in all the ramifications of life. It does not set up God as some austere being that we cannot approach, but it tells us he is our Father, and that we are his children, and that he cherishes in his bosom a paternal regard for us; and we have experienced something of the feelings that exist between father and son, mother and daughter, parents and children. But we could not apply that unto our God and consider that he was our Father before we embraced the gospel.—JD, 5:262, September 20, 1857.

God, Love ofa-Taylor, JohnTPThe object that God has in view is to benefit mankind as much as lies in His power. We talk sometimes about moving heaven and earth but God has moved heaven and earth for the accomplishment of that object. . . . God desires our welfare, and He has instituted laws for that purpose. He has introduced the everlasting Gospel for that purpose: and He has restored the Holy Priesthood that existed anciently, together with all the principles, blessings, powers, rites, ordinances, and privileges that have graced the earth from the commencement of time.—JD, 26:105-106, October 20, 1881.

THE JUSTICE OF GOD.—What would you think of the conduct of a God who would let the human family continue forever to transgress his law without interfering? You would think he was getting foolish and in his dotage—that he did not understand himself nor correct principles in allowing a lot of bad boys to rise up and increase around him, letting evil principles exist instead of righteous ones, and the wicked afflict and persecute the good with impunity.—JD, 6:25, November 1, 1857.

GOD LIVES.—We have learned this, that God lives; we have learned that when we call upon him he hears our prayers; we have learned that it is the height of human happiness to fear God and observe his laws and keep his commandments; we have learned that it is a duty devolving upon us to try and make all men happy and intelligent, which happiness and intelligence can only be obtained through obedience to the laws of God. It is in him that we trust. We are not so much concerned about the destiny of this kingdom [^4] as some people think we are. God is interested in it; the holy angels are interested in it; the ancient patriarchs and prophets and men of God who have lived in other ages are interested in it; and in the councils of heaven it was agreed that this Kingdom should be established; it is according to the word and will and eternal designs of Jehovah. And, as he called men in other days, he has called them in these days, and this priesthood administers in the earth and in the heavens.—JD, 22:292, October 9, 1881.

THE ANGELS

Angelsa-Taylor, JohnTPANGELS AS WATCHMEN AND MESSENGERS.—The angels are our watchmen, for Satan said to Jesus: "He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone." (Matthew 4:6.) It would seem from a careful perusal of the scriptures, that the angels, while God has saints upon the earth, stay in this lower world to ward off evil: for the prophet Isaiah has left this testimony on the subject:

I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses.

For he said, surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Saviour.

In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. (Isaiah 63:7-9.)

Angelsa-Taylor, JohnTPThe angels that have gone forth at sundry times to execute the decrees of God, fully substantiate this fact: Abraham, Hagar, Jacob, Balaam, Joshua, Gideon, together with the enemies of the Lord, are the witnesses who knew the power and offices of angels on earth.

But lest we take up too much time on the resurrected bodies, who go and come at the bidding of him who was, and is, and is to come, we will change the theme to the thoughts and witnesses of the heart.

Angelsa-Taylor, JohnTPThe action of the angels, or messengers of God, upon our minds, so that the heart can conceive things past, present, and to come, and revelations from the eternal world, is, among a majority of mankind, a greater mystery than all the secrets of philosophy, literature, superstition, and bigotry, put together. Though some men try to deny it, and some try to explain away the meaning, still there is so much testimony in the Bible, and among a respectable portion of the world, that one might as well undertake to throw the water out of this world into the moon with a teaspoon, as to do away with the supervision of angels upon the human mind. . . .

Angelsa-Taylor, JohnTPPOLICE OF HEAVEN.—But, without going into a particular detail of the offices and duties of the different grades of angels, let us close by saying that the angels gather the elect, and pluck out all that offends. They are the police of heaven and report whatever transpires on earth, and carry the petitions and supplications of men, women, and children to the mansions of remembrance, where they are kept as tokens of obedience by the sanctified, in "golden vials" labelled "the prayers of the saints."—TS,

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare I Corinthians 2:11.
[^2] Jesus himself makes the statement in response to questioning Pharisees. See John 8:58 and passim.
[^3] 3. Compare Genesis 2:4.
[^4] 4. See Book IV, "The Kingdom of God."
