John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER IV

REVELATION

COMMUNICATION BETWEEN GOD AND MAN

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPBELIEF IN REVELATION.—Very few men upon the face of the earth believe in revelation from God. They believe in their own theories and notions and ideas and principles, but they know nothing about "Thus saith the Lord," as men used to do when they had the gospel; and wherever the gospel exists, there exists with it a knowledge of God and of the laws of life.—JD, 22:291-292, October 9, 1881.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPThere is a feeling generally extant in the world that God is a great and august personage who is elevated so high above the world, and is so far separated from humanity that it is impossible to approach him. And although the Christian religion, under whatever form it may be practised, teaches mankind to pray unto God in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, yet it is very few who suppose that their prayers amount to anything, that God will listen to their supplications, or that they will prove of any special benefit. A feeling of this kind tends more or less to unbelief instead of faith in God, and hence we find very few men in our day who act as men of God did in former days, that is, seek unto him for guidance and direction in the affairs of life. If we examine what is termed the sacred history of the Bible, we shall find that in the various ages of the world, until soon after Christianity was introduced, there was a feeling among men to call upon God and to have their prayers answered—a feeling that if they would approach the Most High and call upon his name in faith, he would answer their supplications and give unto them wisdom, intelligence, and revelation for the guidance of their feet in the pathway of life; and it was not based as it is now, generally, upon some old theories, or upon communications made unto others. But if we trace the records of scripture through, we shall find that men generally sought for themselves guidance and direction and revelation adapted to the peculiar circumstances in which they were placed.—JD, 14:357, March 17, 1872.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE HOLY SPIRIT AND REVELATION.—Nothing but the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son can impart unto us that intelligence which is necessary to place the Church and kingdom of God upon a sure and firm basis.—JD, 11:23, December 11, 1864.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPWithout revelation from God the world is but a wilderness.—TS, 5:748, December 15, 1844.

NECESSITY OF MODERN REVELATION

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPREVELATION NEEDED TO AMELIORATE THE WORLD.—We are living in a world in which the spirits who have dwelt in the bosom of God are coming into and leaving this state of existence at the rate of about a thousand millions in every thirty-three years; and here are thousands of so-called ministers of religion with an inefficient gospel, that God never ordained, trying to ameliorate the condition of mankind, and sending what they call the gospel to the heathen, and they are continually calling for the pecuniary aid of their fellow Christians to assist them in this enterprise. But if they have not the truth themselves how can they impart it to others? How can blind leaders lead people in the way of life and salvation? Was it not necessary, in view of the ignorance and blindness of the people everywhere, in regard to the principles of salvation, that something should be done to ameliorate the condition of a fallen world? The Christian world, by their unbelief, have made the heavens as brass, and wherever they go to declare what they call the gospel they make confusion worse confounded. But who shall debar God from taking care of his own creation, and saving his creatures? Yet this is the position that many men have taken.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPTESTIMONY OF THE PROPHET'S REVELATIONS.—But notwithstanding the unbelief so prevalent throughout Christendom, God restored his ancient gospel to Joseph Smith, giving him revelation, opening the heavens to him, and making him acquainted with the plan of salvation and exaltation of the children of men. I was well acquainted with him, and have carefully examined the revelations given through him, and notwithstanding all the aspersions that have been cast upon him, I believe that, with the exception of Jesus Christ, there never was a greater prophet upon this wide earth than he. To the revelations he made known are we indebted for the glorious principles that God has communicated to the world in these last days. We were as much in the dark as other people were about the principles of salvation, and the relationship we hold to God and each other, until these things were made known to us by Joseph Smith. A great deal is said at the present time about the relation of husband and wife; but where is there a man outside of this church who understands anything about this relationship, as well as that of parents to children? There is not one, and the Latter-day Saints knew nothing about it until it was revealed by Joseph Smith, through the gospel. It is the gospel that teaches a woman that she has a claim upon a man, and a man that he has a claim upon a woman in the resurrection. It is the gospel that teaches them that, when they rise from the tombs in the resurrection, they will again clasp hands, be reunited, and again participate in that glory for which God designed them before the world was.—JD, 16:373-376, February 1, 1874.

NECESSITY FOR CONTINUOUS REVELATION

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SCRIPTURES ARE AN INSUFFICIENT GUIDE.—The Bible is good; and Paul told Timothy to study it, that he might be a workman that need not be ashamed, and that he might be able to conduct himself aright before the living church, the pillar and ground of truth. The church-mark, with Paul, was the foundation, the pillar, the ground of truth, the living church, not the dead letter. The Book of Mormon is good, and the Doctrine and Covenants, as land-marks. But a mariner who launches into the ocean requires a more certain criterion. He must be acquainted with heavenly bodies, and take his observations from them, in order to steer his barque aright. Those books are good for example, precedent, and investigation, and for developing certain laws and principles. But they do not, they cannot, touch every case required to be adjudicated and set in order.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPREVELATION NEEDED FOR TIME AND CIRCUMSTANCE.—We require a living tree—a living fountain—living intelligence, proceeding from the living priesthood in heaven, through the living priesthood on earth. . . . And from the time that Adam first received a communication from God, to the time that John, on the Isle of Patmos, received his communication, or Joseph Smith had the heavens opened to him, it always required new revelations, adapted to the peculiar circumstances in which the churches or individuals were placed. Adam's revelation did not instruct Noah to build his ark; nor did Noah's revelation tell Lot to forsake Sodom; nor did either of these speak of the departure of the children of Israel from Egypt. These all had revelations for themselves, and so had Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Jesus, Peter, Paul, John, and Joseph. And so must we, or we shall make a shipwreck.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPFAITH THE GUIDE.—Then, while we examine our books, and search them diligently, don't let us put those before the priesthood, but seek to support it in all its branches, that life, and health, and salvation may flow to us through the various branches or channels. I do not wish to be understood as despising those books, for they are good, and there are a great many useful revelations in them; and God will not deny himself, or contradict, without cause, his former revelations; and every principle of truth is eternal and cannot be changed. But I speak of them as I would of children's schoolbooks, which a child studies to learn to read; but when it has learned to read, if its memory is good, it can dispense with. But I would here remark, that we are most of us children as yet, and, therefore, require to study our books. If there are any, however, who think themselves men, let them show it, not by vain glory or empty boast, but by virtue, meekness, purity, faith, wisdom, intelligence, and knowledge, both of earthly and heavenly things.—MS, 9:323-324, November 1, 1847.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTP"PRESENT AND IMMEDIATE REVELATION."—We believe that it is necessary for man to be placed in communication with God; that he should have revelation from him, and that unless he is placed under the influences of the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, he can know nothing about the things of God. I do not care how learned a man may be, or how extensively he may have traveled. I do not care what his talent, intellect, or genius may be, at what college he may have studied, how comprehensive his views or what his judgment may be on other matters, he cannot understand certain things without the Spirit of God, and that necessarily introduces the principle I before referred to—the necessity of revelation. Not revelation in former times, but present and immediate revelation, which shall lead and guide those who possess it in all the paths of life here, and to eternal life hereafter. A good many people, and those professing Christians, will sneer a good deal at the idea of present revelation. Whoever heard of true religion without communication with God? To me the thing is the most absurd that the human mind could conceive. I do not wonder, when the people generally reject the principle of present revelation, that skepticism and infidelity prevail to such an alarming extent. I do not wonder that so many men treat religion with contempt, and regard it as something not worth the attention of intelligent beings, for without revelation religion is a mockery and a farce. If I can not have a religion that will lead me to God, and place me en rapport with him, and unfold to my mind the principles of immortality and eternal life, I want nothing to do with it.

The principle of present revelation, then, is the very foundation of our religion. The Christian world rejects that, and says the Bible is all-sufficient. I can remember in my younger days searching its contents very diligently. It is a glorious book to study, and I earnestly recommend it to the attention of our young men and young women, and of our old men and old women. "Search the scriptures," was the command of Jesus, "for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they that testify of me." (John 5:39.) I would not only search the scriptures that we now have, but I would search also every revelation that God has given, does give, or will give for the guidance and direction of his people, and then I would reverence the Giver, and those also whom he makes use of as his honored instruments to promulgate and make known those principles; and I would seek to be governed by the principles that are contained in that sacred word.—JD, 16:369-371, February 1, 1874.

THE REALITY OF REVELATION FROM GOD

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPOUR PRINCIPLES EMANATED FROM GOD.—As regards our religious principles, we are not indebted to any men who live upon the earth for them. These principles emanated from God. They were given by revelation, and if we have a First Presidency, if we have high priests, if we have seventies, if we have bishops, elders, priests, and teachers, if we have stake and other organizations, we have received them all from God. If we have temples, if we administer in them, it is because we have received instruction in relation thereto from the Lord. If we know anything pertaining to the future, it comes from him, and in fact we live in God, we move in God, and from him we derive our being. Men generally will not acknowledge this, but we as Latter-day Saints believe in these truths. . . .

Goda-Taylor, JohnTPIn the organization of man, in the organization of this earth, and in the organization of the heavens, there were certain things designed by the Almighty to be carried out, and that will be carried out according to the purposes of the Most High, which things were known to him from the beginning. There exists all manner of curious opinions about God, and many people think it impossible for him to take cognizance of all men, but that is very easily done. If I had time to enter into this subject alone, I could show you upon scientific principles that man himself is a self-registering machine, his eyes, his ears, his nose, the touch, the taste, and all the various senses of the body are so many media whereby man lays up for himself a record which perhaps nobody else is acquainted with but himself; and when the time comes for that record to be unfolded, all men that have eyes to see, and ears to hear, will be able to read all things as God himself reads them and comprehends them, and all things, we are told, are naked and open before him. . . . We are told in relation to these matters that the hairs of our heads are numbered; that even a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without our Heavenly Father's notice; and predicated upon some of these principles are some things taught by Jesus, where he tells men to ask and they shall receive. What! the millions that live upon the earth? Yes, the millions of people, no matter how many there are. Can he hear and answer all? Can he attend to all these things? Yes. "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you:

Goda-Taylor, JohnTP"For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." (Matthew 7:7, 8.)

Testimonya-Taylor, JohnTPIt is difficult for men to comprehend some of these things, and, as they cannot comprehend them, they begin to think they are all nonsense—that is, many do—and, hence, infidelity and skepticism prevail to a great extent. A great many strange notions are entertained in regard to God and his dealings with humanity. This is because men do not understand the things of God. I read in one of our papers a short time ago that there was some kind of commission going to meet—some two or three professors or scientists, men who are supposed to possess superior intelligence—to examine the manuscript of the Book of Mormon, to find out whether it was true or not. I suppose if these people—especially if they should be pious men, possessing a little learning and science—should come out and say the Book of Mormon was not true, we all of us should have to lay it aside, should we not? This to me is the veriest nonsense. It would not make one hair's difference with us whether such a commission should decide that the Book of Mormon is right or wrong. If they decide that it is true, it will not increase our faith in it. If they decide that it is not true, it will not decrease our faith in it. Yet these are ideas that men entertain.

AN INCIDENT IN EUROPE.—Speaking upon this point I am reminded of an incident that took place a number of years ago. Several prominent European scientists called upon me, and they talked a little upon our religious principles. Then they asked me if I was acquainted with the advanced ideas in regard to geology. I told them I knew a little about them from what I had read. "What do you think," said one of them to me, "of these views as compared with the scriptural account of the creation of the world?" "Well," said I, "the great difficulty is that men do not understand the scriptures." They could not see any difficulty on that ground, for they all had their eyes to see, and they had an understanding of words, languages, etc. "Well," said I, "we won't go through the whole Bible, for that is quite a large book; but I will take one or two of the first lines in the Bible. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Will you please tell me when the beginning was?"

"We don't know."

"When you find that out," said I, "then I will tell you when the world was created."

A good many other things transpired associated with this interview that I do not wish now to repeat. Suffice it to say that before they got through, one of them said: "I have read a good deal; I have studied a good deal; I find I have a good deal more to read and study yet." I thought so too. I thought if men could not understand the first two lines of the Bible, it would be quite a task to teach them the whole of it.

Ziona-Taylor, JohnTPREVELATION AND THE BUILDING OF ZION.—In regard to the work in which we are engaged, as I said before and as you have heard over and over again, it emanated from God, and all the principles pertaining to it came from him. We talk sometimes about this work we are engaged in is the work of God. If it is accomplished, it will be accomplished by the power of God, by the wisdom of God, by the intelligence of God, and by the priesthood that dwells with the Gods in the eternal worlds, together with that which he has conferred upon his people here upon the earth, and not by any other power or influence in existence. We talk of a Zion that is to be built up. If a Zion is ever built up on this earth, it will have to be under the guidance and direction of the Almighty.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPREVELATION AND THE CHURCH.—We talk about a Church that is to be built up and purified. If it is ever built up and purified. it will be under the influence of the gift of the Holy Ghost, the power of God manifested among his people, whereby iniquity will be rooted out, righteousness sustained, the principles of truth advanced, honor, integrity, truth, and virtue maintained, and hypocrisy, evil, crime, and corruption of every kind be rooted out. That will have to be done by the aid and under the guidance of the Almighty. There is no man living in and of himself, can guide the ship of Zion or regulate the affairs of the Church and kingdom of God unaided by the Spirit of God, and hence he has organized the Church as he has with all the various quorums and organizations as they exist today.—JD, 26:30-32, December 14, 1884.

Biblea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE BIBLE CAME BY REVELATION.—To whom are we indebted for this book called the Bible? We are told that holy men of old spake as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And whence did they receive that Holy Ghost? Not of man, nor by man, but by the revelations of God, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. . . .

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTPREVELATIONS OF THE HOLY GHOST.—By obedience to the gospel we have received the Holy Ghost, and that Spirit takes of the things of God, and shows them to us. We have received this and hence have been baptized into one baptism, and have all partaken of the selfsame Spirit, as Paul expressed it, "dividing to every man severally as he will." (I Corinthians 12:11.) The question arises, What is the object of this? It is that the world should be visited from time to time and communications made to the human family.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPBecause light cleaves to light, truth cleaves to truth, intelligence cleaves to intelligence; and as we are all made in the image of God, and as God is the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh, it is his right, it is his prerogative to communicate with the human family. We are told that there is a spirit in man and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth it understanding. God having made the earth, made the people to inhabit it, and made all things that exist therein, has a right to dictate, has a right to make known his will, has a right to communicate with whom he will and control matters as he sees proper: it belongs to him by right; and he has seen proper in these last days to restore his gospel to the earth, and, as I said before, intelligence cleaves to intelligence.—JD, 23:259-260, October 8, 1882.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPREVELATION AND REALITY.—I presume as we obtain more of the Spirit of God—as we receive faith and intelligence that flow from him and the revelations that he imparts and will continue to impart to those who are faithful, we shall begin to understand things in a very different light from what many of us at the present time understand them. Even in temporal things there is a great difference among men in regard to their judgment, capacities, reasoning powers, and their comprehension of justice, equity, the rights of man, the duties that we owe to each other, and the various responsibilities that devolve upon us. But when we come to contemplate the things of God, the end of our existence, our origin, the position that we occupy in relation to our families, to each other, and to the church and kingdom of God, it is very difficult sometimes for us to understand things correctly in relation to the position of the world, to the things that have been, to the things that are, and to the things that are to come—to the purposes of God in relation to the human family, and how these purposes will be best advanced. We shall find, in reflecting upon all these matters, that there is a very great difference between the reasoning of the human family upon these matters and the plan that God would adopt for the accomplishment of his purposes and for the bringing to pass the things that have been spoken of by the holy prophets since the world began.—JD, 6:105-106, December 6, 1857.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPAssociated as we are with the kingdom of God, we may reasonably expect, so long as we do our duty before the Lord, to have continual developments of light, truth, and intelligence that emanate from the great God, for the guidance, direction, salvation, and exaltation of this people, whether it relates to time or to eternity. For everything we have to do with is eternal; and when we speak of time and eternity, they are only relative terms which we attach to things that are present, and things that are to come, and things that are past. But in relation to ourselves as individuals, we are eternal begins, although we occupy a certain space of eternity called time. In relation to the gospel we preach, it is eternal. In relation to our covenants and obligations, they are eternal. In relation to our promises, prospects, and hopes, they are eternal. And while we are acting upon this stage of being, we are merely commencing a state of things that will exist while countless ages shall roll along; and if we have right views and right feelings, and entertain correct principles as eternal beings, all our thoughts, our actions, our prospects—all our energies and our lives, will be engaged in laying a foundation upon which to build a superstructure that will be permanent, lasting, and enduring as the throne of the great Jehovah. If anything is short of this, it is short of the mark of the high calling whereunto we may or ought to arrive; and many of the little incidents and occurrences of life that we have to pass through are transient in comparison to the things that are to come; and yet all these little things are so many links in the great chain of our existence, of our hopes and prospects.—JD, 1:366, April 19, 1854.

Revelationa-Taylor, JohnTPFOREKNOWLEDGE AND ITS USE.—The gospel reveals many things to us which others are unacquainted with. I knew of those terrible events which were coming upon this nation previous to the breaking out of our great fratricidal war, just as well as I now know that they transpired, and I have spoken of them to many. What of that? Do I not know that a nation like that in which we live, a nation which is blessed with the freest, the most enlightened and magnificent government in the world today, with privileges which would exalt people to heaven if lived up to—do I not know that if they do not live up to them, but violate them and trample them under their feet, and discard the sacred principles of liberty by which we ought to be governed—do I not know that their punishment will be commensurate with the enlightenment which they possess? I do. And I know—I cannot help knowing that there are a great many more afflictions yet awaiting this nation. But would I put forth my hand to help bring them on? God forbid! And you, you Latter-day Saints, would you exercise your influence to the accomplishment of an object of that kind? God forbid! But we cannot help knowing these things. But our foreknowledge of these matters does not make us the agents in bringing them to pass. We are told that the wicked will slay the wicked. We are told in sacred writ that, "Vengeance is mine; and I will repay, saith the Lord." (Romans 12:19.) And in speaking of ourselves we need not be under any apprehensions pertaining to the acts of men, for the Lord has said, "And it is my purpose to provide for my saint." (Doctrine & Covenants 104:15.) But it is our business to be saints. And to be worthy of that character it is our duty to live by the principles of virtue, truth, integrity, holiness, purity, and honor, that we may at all times secure the favor of Almighty God; that his blessings may be with us and dwell in our bosoms; that the peace of God may abide in our habitations; that our fields, our flocks, and our herds may be blessed of the Lord; and that we, as a people, may be under his divine protection.—JD, 22:141-142, July 3, 1881.

THE SPIRIT OF GOD AND THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST

ALL MEN HAVE CLAIMS ON GOD FOR GUIDANCE.—Now outside the gospel, outside of revelation, outside of any special communication from the Lord, all men, more or less, everywhere, have certain claims upon their Heavenly Father, who is said to be the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh. Then we are told, when Jesus spake to his disciples, they asked him how they were to pray. He said, say, Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Who? Our Father—the God and the Father of the spirits of all flesh. When you approach him, say, Our Father who art in heaven. Then, they belong to our Father, as well as we.

THE SPIRIT AVAILABLE TO ALL MEN.—In regard to the operation of the Spirit upon man, let me draw your attention to a fact that is generally understood by all reflecting men, and that is, no matter how wicked a man may be, how far he may have departed from the right, such a man will generally admire and respect a good man, an honorable man, and a virtuous man; and such a man will frequently say; "I wish I could do as that man does, but I cannot: I wish I could pursue a correct course, but I am overcome of evil." They cannot help respecting the good and the honorable, although they may not be governed by principles of honor and virtue themselves. This same spirit which is given to every man outside of the gospel has been manifested in the different ages of the world. When I say outside of it, the Latter-day Saints will understand me. When I speak of the gospel, I speak of the gospel revealed by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and which has existed at times through the different ages, and which, wherever it did exist brought men into close communion with the Lord; hence the gospel is called the everlasting gospel. The scriptures unequivocally state that our Savior brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, and wherever a knowledge of life and immortality existed, it was through the gospel; and whenever and wherever there was no knowledge of life and immortality, there was no gospel.

Righteousnessa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE HUMANE INFLUENCE.—But outside of that there have been many good influences abroad in the world. Many men in the different ages, who, in the midst of wickedness and corruption, have tried to stop the current of evil, have placed themselves in the catalogue of reformers. Some of those have been what are called heathen, others what are termed Christian, and others have been scientific and philanthropic—lovers and benefactors of the human race. The many reformers that existed in former ages have been men many of whom have been sincerely desirous to do the will of God, and to carry out his purposes, so far as they knew them. And then there are thousands and tens of thousands of honorable men living today in this nation, and other nations, who are honest and upright and virtuous, and who esteem correct principles and seek to be governed by them, so far as they know them.

Righteousnessa-Taylor, JohnTPDIFFERENCE BETWEEN UNIVERSAL GUIDANCE AND THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.—But there is a very great difference between this spirit and feeling that leads men to do right, which is emphatically denominated a portion of the Spirit of God, which is given to every man to profit withal, and what is termed in the scriptures the gift of the Holy Ghost. Men may be desirous to do right; they may be good, honorable, and conscientious; and then when we come to the judgment pertaining to these things, we are told that all men will be judged according to the deeds done in the body, and according to the light and intelligence which they possessed.

Righteousnessa-Taylor, JohnTPI will take, for instance, the position of the reformers, going no further back than Luther and Melancthon; and then you may come to Calvin, Knox, Whitfield, Wesley, Fletcher, and many others; men who have been desirous in their day to benefit their fellow men; who have proclaimed against vice, and advocated the practice of virtue, uprightness, and the fear of God. But we all, who have contemplated these subjects, know that those men never did restore the gospel as it was taught by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; neither did they see nor comprehend alike in biblical matters. They groped, as it were, in the dark, with a portion of the Spirit of God. They sought to benefit their fellow man; but not having that union with God that the gospel imparts, they were unable to arrive at just conclusions pertaining to those matters. Hence, one introduced and taught one principle, and another introduced and taught another; and they were split up and divided, and the spirit of antagonism was found at times among them; and with all their desires to do good, they did not and could not restore the gospel of the Son of God. None among them was able to say, Thus saith the Lord. And that is the condition of the religious world today. It is Babylon or confusion—confusion in ideas, confusion in regard to doctrine, confusion in regard to ordinances, etc. And what shall we say of such men? Shall we say that they were wicked? No. It is lawful to do good always, and anyone who seeks to promote the welfare of the human family is a benefactor of mankind and ought to be sustained.—JD, 23:370-372, February 11, 1883.

THE SPIRIT OF GOD AND THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.—There is and always has been a spirit abroad in the world which is really a portion of the Spirit of God, which leads mankind, in many instances, to discriminate between good and evil, and between right and wrong. They have a conscience that accuses or excuses them for their acts; and although the world of mankind is very wicked and very corrupt, yet it will be found that almost all men, though they may not do good themselves, appreciate good actions in others.

The scriptures say that God "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation.

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTP"That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us." (Acts 17:26-27.) The scripture further says, he has given unto them a portion of his spirit to profit withal. But there is quite a distinction between the position that these people occupy and the one which we occupy. We have something more than that portion of the Spirit of God which is given to every man, and it is called the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is received through obedience to the first principles of the gospel of Christ, by the laying on of hands of the servants of God. . . . It is this Spirit that brings us into relationship with God, and it differs very materially from the portion of Spirit that is given to all men to profit withal. The special gift of the Holy Ghost is obtained, as I have said, through obedience to the first principles of the gospel. Its province is to lead us into all truth, and to bring to our remembrance things past, present, and to come. It contemplates the future and unfolds things we had not thought of heretofore, and these things are very distinctly described in the Bible, in the Book of Mormon, and in the Doctrine and Covenants. Herein lies the difference between us and others, and it was so in former times.—JD, 23:320-321, November 23, 1882.

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTPJOSEPH SMITH'S ADVICE ON THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.—Joseph Smith, upwards of forty years ago, said to me: "Brother Taylor, you have received the Holy Ghost. Now follow the influence of that Spirit, and it will lead you into all truth, until by and by, it will become in you a principle of revelation." Then he told me never to arise in the morning without bowing before the Lord, and dedicating myself to him during that day.

Some people treat these things lightly. I do not, because I know that we derive our food, our raiment, and all earthly as well as spiritual blessings from the goodness of God our Heavenly Father. I know, furthermore, that as president of this church I should I desire people to yield to my ideas? I have no ideas only as God gives them to me; neither should you. Some people are very persistent in having their own way and carrying out their own peculiar theories. I have no thoughts of that kind, but I have a desire, when anything comes along, to learn the will of God, and then to do it, and to teach my brethren to do it, that we may all grow up unto Christ our living head, that we may be acquainted with correct principles and govern ourselves accordingly.—JD, 22:314, October 19, 1881.

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE COMFORTER.—This same Comforter has been given, in connection with the gospel in these days, for our enlightenment, for our instruction, for our guidance, that we may have a knowledge of things that are past, of the dealings of God with the human family, of the principles of truth that have been developed in the different ages, of the position of the world and its relationship to God in those different ages, of its position in years that are past and gone, and of its present status. It is also given for our enlightenment, that we may be enabled to conduct all things according to the mind and will of God, and in accordance with his eternal laws and those principles which exist in the heavens, and which have been provided by God for the salvation and exaltation of a fallen world; also for the manifestation of principles which have been and will be developed in the interest of man, not only pertaining to this world, but also to that which is to come, through which medium the Lord will make known his plans and designs to his priesthood and his people in his own due time.—JD, 25:178-179, May 18, 1884.

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NEED FOR WISDOM AND TRUST IN GOD.—There is not a position that we can occupy in life, either as fathers, mothers, children, masters, servants, or as elders of Israel holding the holy priesthood in all its ramifications, but what we need continually is wisdom flowing from the Lord and intelligence communicated by him, that we may know how to perform correctly the various duties and avocations of life, and to fulfil the various responsibilities that rest upon us. And hence the necessity all the day long, and every day and every week, month, and year, and under all circumstances, of men leaning upon the Lord and being guided by that Spirit that flows from him, that we may not fall into error—that we may neither do anything wrong, say anything wrong, nor think anything wrong, and all the time retain that Spirit, which can only be kept by observing purity, holiness, and virtue, and living continually in obedience to the laws and commandments of God.—JD, 6:106, December 6, 1857.

Prayera-Taylor, JohnTPThere is not a man upon the earth that has put his trust in God, I do not care what part of the world he has been in, but what can say that he delivered him. I know that has been the case with me, emphatically so. I have been satisfied, when in foreign lands and in strange countries, where I had no access but to the Almighty, that he was on my side, and I know that he has answered my prayers.—JD, 8:96, June 17, 1860.

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TESTIMONY OF THE SPIRIT.—When the light that is in heaven communicates with the light within us, when the Spirit that dwells in the bosom of the Almighty dwells in ours, and an intercourse is opened between heaven and us, we are then placed in a position to understand that which it would be impossible to comprehend upon any natural principle known to us, and hence it is written, "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (1 Corinthians 2:11.) In order that men may indeed become the children of God, he has introduced in the first principles of the gospel the means of their becoming possessed of his Spirit through baptism and laying on of hands by those having authority, being sent and ordained and authorized by him that they may receive the Holy Ghost. What can be a stronger evidence to any man than an evidence of this kind? It is not something that affects the outward ear alone; it is not something that affects simply his judgment, but it affects his inner man; it affects the spirit that dwells within him; it is a part of God imparted unto man, if you please, giving him an assurance that God lives. This is a thing of very great importance, more so, perhaps, than many people imagine. A man receives an assurance that God lives, and not only that God lives, but that he is a son of God, because he feels that he has partaken of his Spirit, the Spirit of adoption; and hence it was said concerning the saints of old, "For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTP"The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God." (Romans 8:15, 16).—JD, 11:22-23, December 11, 1864.

Holy Ghosta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SPIRIT OF UNDERSTANDING.—I do not know of any way whereby we can be taught, instructed, and be made to comprehend our true position, only by being under the influence of the Spirit of the living God. A man may speak by the Spirit of God, but it requires a portion of that Spirit also in those who hear, to enable them to comprehend correctly the importance of the things that are delivered to them, and hence the difficulty the Lord and his saints have always had in making the people comprehend the things that are especially for their interests. We all consider that if we could be taught of God it would be very well. I suppose the world generally would consider it to be a great blessing. Then the question arises in their minds, whether the teachings they receive come from God or not. How are they to know that? I know of no other way than that which is spoken in the scriptures, "But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8) And, again, we are told in the New Testament, that "No man knoweth the things of God but by the Spirit of God." [^1] Hence all the wisdom, all the intelligence, all the reasoning, all the philosophy and all the arguments that could be brought to bear on the human mind would be of no avail unless the mind of man is prepared to receive this teaching—prepared by the Spirit of the Lord, the same Spirit which conveys the intelligence.—JD, 10:145, April 6, 1863.

Prayera-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PRAYER OF FAITH.—Through some remarks already made I am reminded of my boyhood. At that early period of my life I learned to approach God. Many a time I have gone into the fields, and, concealing myself behind some bush, would bow before the Lord and call upon him to guide and direct me. And he heard my prayer. At times I would get other boys to accompany me. It would not hurt you, boys and girls, to call upon the Lord in your secret places, as I did. That was the spirit which I had when a little boy. And God has led me from one thing to another. But I did not have the privilege that you have. There was nobody to teach me, while you have access to good men at any time who can direct you in the way of life and salvation. But my spirit was drawn out after God then; and I feel the same yet.—JD, 22:314-315, October 19, 1881.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Mark I6:I6.
