John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER V

TRUTH

THE QUEST FOR TRUTH

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPTHE CONSTANT SEARCH.—We are after the truth. We commenced searching for it, and we are constantly in search of it, and so fast as we find any true principle revealed by any man, by God, or by holy angels, we embrace it and make it part of our religious creed.—JD, 14:341-342, March 3, 1872.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPOne great reason why men have stumbled so frequently in many of their researches after philosophical truth is that they have sought them with their own wisdom, and gloried in their own intelligence, and have not sought unto God for that wisdom that fills and governs the universe and regulates all things. That is one great difficulty with the philosophers of the world, as it now exists, that man claims to himself to be the inventor of everything he discovers. Any new law and principle which he happens to discover he claims to himself instead of giving glory to God.—JD, 11:74, February 5, 1865.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPTHE POWER OF TRUTH.—If the saints could understand things correctly; if they could see themselves as God sees them; if they could know and understand and appreciate the principles of eternal truth as they emanate from God, and as they dwell in his bosom; if they could know their high calling's glorious hope, and the future destiny that awaits them, inasmuch as they are faithful, there is not a saint of God, there is not one in these valleys of the mountains, but would prostrate himself before him. He would dedicate his heart, and his mind, and his soul, and his strength to God, and his body, and spirit, and property, and everything he possesses of earth, and esteem it one of the greatest privileges that could be conferred upon mortal man. If there are those who do not see these things aright, it is because they see in part and know in part. It is because their hearts are not devoted to God, as they ought to be. It is because their spirits are not entirely under the influence of the Spirit of the Most High. It is because they have not so lived up to their privileges, as to put themselves in possession of that light and truth that emanate from God to his people. It is because the god of this world [Satan] has blinded their minds that they cannot fully understand, that they cannot be made fully acquainted with the great and glorious principles of eternal truth.—JD, 1:367, April 19, 1854.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPTHE VALUE OF TRUTH.—There is nothing of more value to me than the principles of eternal truth; than the principles of eternal lives; eternal salvation, and eternal exaltations in the kingdom of God. But then it is for us to comprehend them, for if we do not comprehend them, no matter how great the truths, they cannot benefit us. We frequently think a little more of a nice span of horses, or a nice wagon, or a favorite cow, and such things, than we do of God's work, as our boys sometimes get attached to a few marbles thinking that they are everything. They do not like to leave their marbles to obey father or mother, and God finds us about the same. We get a few dollars, or a farm, and a little stock, and a few other things, and we cannot afford to neglect these. We cannot afford to take time to pray, nor to listen to the voice of Father, we are so busy playing marbles. And occasionally when we play marbles among the dollars, we try to cheat one another, as boys sometimes do at marbles, and try to take advantage one of another. I never like to see boys cheat and never like to see men cheat at their kind of marbles. Our feelings and affections get placed on wrong things.

We are here to build up Zion, and to establish the kingdom of God.—JD, 22:219-220, June 27, 1881.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ROLE OF TRUTH.—We are not satisfied, as many men are, with simple theories, because this, that or the other man or bodies of men have told us they are true. We are governed by no man's ipse dixit. We have not any particular dogmas to sustain, or any special theory to establish. Living in the world of mankind, surrounded by the works of Nature, walking, as it were, in the presence of the Great Elohim, we wish to comprehend and embrace all truth and seek for and obtain everything that is calculated to exalt, ennoble, and dignify the human family. And wherever we find truth, no matter where, or from what source it may come, it becomes part and parcel of our religious creed, or our moral creed, or our philosophy, as the case may be, or whatever you may please to term it.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTP"WE ARE OPEN FOR THE RECEPTION OF ALL TRUTH. . . . "—We are open for the reception of all truth, of whatever nature it may be, and are desirous to obtain and possess it, to search after it as we would for hidden treasures; and to use all the knowledge God gives to us to possess ourselves of all the intelligence that he has given to others; and to ask at his hands to reveal unto us his will, in regard to things that are the best calculated to promote the happiness and well-being of human society. If there are any good principles, any moral philosophy that we have not yet attained to, we are desirous to learn them. If there is anything in the scientific world that we do not yet comprehend, we desire to become acquainted with it. If there is any branch of philosophy calculated to promote the well-being of humanity, that we have not yet grasped, we wish to possess ourselves of it. If there is anything pertaining to the rule and government of nations, or politics, if you please, that we are not acquainted with, we desire to possess it. If there are any religious ideas, any theological truths, any principles pertaining to God, that we have not learned, we ask mankind, and we pray God, our Heavenly Father, to enlighten our minds that we may comprehend, realize, embrace, and live up to them as part of our religious faith. Thus our ideas and thoughts would extend as far as the wide world spreads, embracing everything pertaining to light, life, or existence pertaining to this world or the world that is to come. They would dig into the bowels of the earth, or go to the depth of hell, if you please. They would soar after the intelligence of the Gods that dwell in the eternal worlds. They would grasp everything that is good and noble and excellent and happifying and calculated to promote the well-being of the human family.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPThere is no man nor set of men who have pointed out the pathway for our feet to travel in, in relation to these matters. There are no dogmas nor theories extant in the world that we profess to listen to, unless they can be verified by the principles of eternal truth. We carefully scan, investigate, criticize, and examine everything that presents itself to our view, and so far as we are enabled to comprehend any truths in existence, we gladly hail them as part and portion of the system with which we are associated.—JD, 14:337-338, March 3, 1872.

TRUTH: THE LATTER-DAY SAINT ATTITUDE

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPTRUTH, ERROR, AND TOLERANCE.—I believe God has a great design in view, in the creation of the human family. I do not believe that an all-wise Being would ever make a beautiful earth like this, and people it with man, and a multiplicity of other kinds of beings designed to exist upon it, and all for no purpose. I do not believe that three-hundred-fifty millions of people that live in China in a state of heathen darkness are created to live in this state, and be damned because they have not the right religion. I do not believe that all the nations that worship various kinds of idols, in different parts of the earth, and know nothing about the true God, will be consigned to be burned in fire hereafter, because they know no better than worship as they do. I cannot receive any such ideas into my mind. Although I was going to say I am not a Universalist, but I am, and I am also a Presbyterian, and a Roman Catholic, and a Methodist.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPIn short, I believe in every true principle that is embodied in any person or sect, and reject the false. If there is any truth in heaven, earth, or hell, I want to embrace it, I care not what shape it comes in to me, who brings it, or who believes in it, whether it is popular or unpopular. Truth, eternal truth, I wish to float in and enjoy.

Church, Truthfulness ofa-Taylor, JohnTPNow I come to us, Mormons. We are the only true Church, so we say. We have the only true faith, so we say and believe. I believe we have many great and true principles revealed from the heavens. I will tell you how I feel about it, and what I have said many times when I have been abroad among the priests, people, and philosophers. If any man under the heavens can show me one principle of error that I have entertained, I will lay it aside forthwith, and be thankful for the information. On the other hand if any man has any principle of truth, whether moral, religious, philosophical, or of any other kind, that is calculated to benefit mankind, I promise him I will embrace it, but I will not partake of his errors along with it. If a man should say, I am in possession of one piece of truth, and, because I have got that, I must be right, am I to believe him? Certainly not. It does not follow that he has not many errors.

Church, Truthfulness ofa-Taylor, JohnTPThe Catholics have many pieces of truth. So have the Protestants, the Mohammedans, and heathens. And am I to embrace one of these systems because it has certain things that are right? No. Suppose a person should tell me that two multiplied by two makes four. Well, that is right. I believe it with all my heart. But suppose he believes and teaches also, that six and four make twenty, and exhorts me to believe it, saying—I was right in the other calculation, did I not prove the other to you? O yes, but you did not prove that six and four make twenty. I will take out the truth and leave the error. . . .

Church, Truthfulness ofa-Taylor, JohnTPOn the other hand, am I to think it is right, because I am right, to send everybody else to hell? No, I will leave them in the hands of God. He has told me to preach the gospel to every creature, saying, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." [^1] He has told me to do this. And how many millions of mankind are there who have never heard the gospel? And are they going to be damned for not believing in a thing they have not heard. and that never came within their range, and that they have not the slightest knowledge of? No. What is it we have to do? We must spread forth the light of the gospel. Why? Because God has communicated a system of religion which is calculated to ennoble and exalt the human family.—JD, 1:154-156, June 12, 1853.

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPTRUTH AND INTELLIGENT JUDGMENT.—The heavens and the earth are full of intelligence, and God rules over and directs the affairs of nations as well as those of individuals and people. Whatever may be our peculiar notions or ideas of other men and their profession, the time will come, and is not far distant when the secrets of all hearts will be revealed, and when all of us, Latter-day Saints and others, Jews and gentiles, peoples who now live, those that shall live and those who have lived, will be judged, not according to their peculiar theories, ideas, or notions, but according to the principles of eternal truth as it exists in the bosom of God, or is manifested by his eternal laws.—JD, 19:363, June 16, 1878.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare Job 32:8.
