John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER VI

MAN

THE NATURE OF MAN

Mana-Taylor, JohnTPMan stands at the head of creation. God gave unto him dominion over the fish of the sea, the fowls of the air, the beasts of the field, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the face of the earth. He is lord of all.—M, 2.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ORIGIN OF MAN.—If we take man, he is said to have been made in the image of God, for the simple reason that he is a son of God, and being his son, he is, of course, his offspring, an emanation from God, in whose likeness, we are told, he is made. He did not originate from a chaotic mass of matter, moving or inert, but came forth possessing, in an embryonic state, all the faculties and powers of a God. And when he shall be perfected, and have progressed to maturity, he will be like his Father—a God, being indeed his offspring. As the horse, the ox, the sheep, and every living creature, including man, propagates its own species and perpetuates its own kind, so does God perpetuate his.—MA, 164-165.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPA man, as a man, could arrive at all the dignity that a man was capable of obtaining or receiving; but it needed a God to raise him to the dignity of a God.—MA, 145.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPA GOD IN EMBRYO.—Man is a dual being, possessed of body and spirit, made in the image of God, and connected with him and with eternity. He is a God in embryo and will live and progress throughout the eternal ages, if obedient to the laws of the Godhead, as the Gods progress throughout the eternal ages.—JD, 23:65, April 9, 1882.

SOME POINTS OF VIEW.—"What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?" (Psalm 8:4.)

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPIn one point of view, man appears very poor, weak, and imbecile, and very insignificant: in another point of view, he appears wise, intelligent, strong, honorable, and exalted. It is just in the way that you look at a man that you are led to form your opinions concerning him. In one respect, he appears, as it were, as the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven. He is changeable in his opinions, in his thoughts, reflections, and actions. He is idle, vain, and visionary, without being governed by any correct principle. He comes into existence, as it were, like a butterfly, flutters around for a little while, dies, and is no more. In another point of view, we look at him as emanating from the Gods—as a God in embryo—as an eternal being who had an existence before he came here, and who will exist after his mortal remains are mingled and associated with dust, from whence he came, and from whence he will be resurrected and partake of that happiness for which he is destined, or receive the reward of his evil deeds, according to circumstances.

Mana-Taylor, JohnTPIf we look at the position of man as he has been and as he is, what is he, whether we regard the most powerful and mighty, or the most humble—whether as emperors, warriors, statesmen, philosophers, as rich or poor, we find he has passed away, and to us is sleeping in oblivion. Where are some of those great and mighty men that made the earth tremble—at whose nod and beck, and at the crook of whose finger nations quaked with fear? They have returned to dust and ashes, and worms prey upon their systems. They have waned away, and many of the great and honorable are as much despised since they died as they were honored while they lived and were in the possession of their earthly glory. What is man?

Mortalitya-Taylor, JohnTPIn some points of view, the human race are feeble indeed. They are feeble in their bodies, minds, and spirits, and need some sustaining influence to uphold them both in body and mind before they can occupy their true position in society, whether in relation to this world or in relation to the world which is to come. For instance, a man may study for years, and perhaps some faint affliction of his body will overturn his intellect; he loses his senses, his reason is fled, and he becomes a raving maniac. We are indeed poor creatures. Think what a number of infirmities the human system is subject to, until finally death closes its mortal career, and it is laid among the silent dead. . . .

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPMEN IN SOCIETY.—Look at him in a social capacity. Are we much better off now socially than the people were several thousand years ago, with all the teachings of our philosophers and moralists, and with all the essays there have been written, combined with all the influence of the priesthood of the present day? Men are paid in our age for doing a great deal, and they ought to accomplish, at least, something. . . . When we contemplate all these things, how weak and inefficient and poor and feeble and contemptible man appears!—how little he has accomplished for the benefit of his fellow man, or for succeeding generations!

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTP"What is man, that thou art mindful of him?" (Psalm 8:4.)

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPMAN AS AN ETERNAL BEING.—What is he? Let us look again and view him in another aspect. Why, he is an eternal being, and possesses within him a principle that is destined to exist "while life and thought and being last, or immortality endures." What is he? He had his being in the eternal worlds; he existed before he came here. He is not only the son of man, but he is the son of God also. He is a God in embryo, and possesses within him a spark of that eternal flame which was struck from the blaze of God's eternal fire in the eternal world, and is placed here upon the earth that he may possess true intelligence, true light, true knowledge,—that he may know himself—that he may know God—that he may know something about what he was before he came here—that he may know something about what he is destined to enjoy in the eternal worlds—that he may be fully acquainted with his origin, with his present existence, and with his future destiny—that he may know something about the strength and weakness of human nature—that he may understand the divine law, and learn to conquer his passions, and bring into subjection every principle that is at variance with the law of God—that he may understand his true relationship to God; and finally, that he may learn how to subdue, to conquer, subject all wrong, seek after, obtain, and possess every true, holy, virtuous, and heavenly principle; and, as he is only a sojourner, that he may fulfil the measure of his creation, help himself and family, be a benefit to the present and future generations, and go back to God, having accomplished the work he came here to perform. . . .

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPMAN'S PURPOSE AND DESTINY.—What is man? He is an immortal being. He is a part of the Deity. . . . and he has come here to work out his salvation and accomplish the thing he came into existence for. We have come here to build up the kingdom of God, to establish correct principles, to teach the world righteousness, and to make millions of the human family happy—even all who will listen to the principles of eternal truth. We are here to introduce correct doctrine, to introduce correct morals, to introduce correct philosophy, to introduce correct government, and to teach men how to live and how to die—how to be happy in this world and in the world which is to come, and to lay the foundation for eternal lives in the eternal worlds.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPMAN, A SON OF GOD.—What is man? A God, even the son of God, possessing noble aspirations, holy feelings, that may be governed by virtuous principles, possessing elevated ideas, wishing to realize everything that God has destined to submit to all his laws, to endure every kind of privation and affliction and suffering, as seeing him that is invisible, looking for a city that hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God—feeling to live for that purpose, and that alone.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPThis is what man is, if he lives the religion of heaven, and performs faithfully those things God has appointed him to do, that he may increase from intelligence to intelligence, and go on with that eternal progression, not only in this world, but in worlds without end.—JD, 8:1-2, 3-4, 5, February 19, 1860.

THE MIND OF MAN

Mana-Taylor, JohnTPThere is something peculiar in the organization of man, particularly in regard to his mind. We can think, we can reflect, we can conceive of things, we can form our judgment of events that are transpiring around, but it is difficult for us to perceive or to comprehend how those things are accomplished, and by what process they are brought about. A man, for instance, can store up in his memory thousands and tens of thousands of things. A good linguist, for example, can retain in his memory thousands of words in his own language, and thousands and tens of thousands in other languages, and he can draw upon these when he pleases, and remember their significations. I can remember the time, some years ago, when no person could tell me a passage in the Bible but what I could turn to it. I could not remember every passage, but I knew their connections and could tell others where they could find them.

BRIGHAM YOUNG'S MIND.—President Young's memory is remarkable in regard to names and persons. I have traveled with him throughout the length and breadth of this Territory, and I do not know that I have ever yet seen him come in contact with a man whose name he did not remember and the circumstances connected with him. There is something remarkable in this.

Mana-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MIND'S STOREHOUSE.—Again, on theological subjects, a man will remember not only all the doctrines which he himself believes, but also the doctrines of various systems of religion that exist in the world, and be enabled to separate, to describe, or define them. Now, the question is, where are all these things stowed away? What book are they written in; where are they recorded? A man may travel over the earth, he may visit towns, cities, and villages, and gaze upon oceans, seas, rivers, streams, mountains, valleys, and plains; upon landscapes and different kinds of scenery, and make himself acquainted with all the vegetable world, and these pictures and this intelligence are carefully laid away somewhere. He may study chemistry, botany, geology, astronomy, geography, natural history, mechanics, the arts and sciences, and everything in creation which man is capacitated to receive, and store it away in his memory from the time of his youth up to old age.

Mana-Taylor, JohnTPThere is something very remarkable in that. And then the question arises, how do we judge of those things? If a man sees a thing, how does he see it? There is something very remarkable in the construction of the human eye; it is something like these photographic instruments that receive impressions, only he gazes upon them and his eye takes them in, and the scene he gazes upon is actually imprinted upon what is called the retina of the eye; and one thing after another is recorded, until thousands, and tens of thousands, and millions of things are laid away through that medium, and he is enabled to see any of these things whenever he pleases; his will can call them forth, and they pass in panoramic form before his vision from some source, where they are deposited and registered; all those things that he has gazed upon, that he has handled with his hands, or felt by the sense of touch, he can call up at his pleasure. There is something remarkable in this when we reflect upon it. Men talk about this registry being in the brain, but men's heads do not get any larger. When men get what is called the "big head," it is because there is nothing in their heads. The heart gets no bigger, the body no larger, and yet all these records are laid away somewhere.

Spirit Elementa-Taylor, JohnTPUNDERSTANDING.—Let us examine the scriptures in relation to some things, and see what they say concerning man. "But there is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." [^1] We learn from this that there is a spirit in man in addition to this outward frame, to these hands, these eyes, this body, with all its powers, and appliances, and members; there is a spirit, an essence—a principle of the Almighty, if you please—a peculiar essence that dwells in this body, that seems to be inseparably connected therewith. . . .

Man, Physical Creation ofa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE IMAGE OF GOD.—We are made in the image of God, we were designed by the intelligence of God, and the organs we have are the same kind of organs that the Gods themselves possess. I consider that the body and the spirit are connected together in some inscrutable, indefinable, and intelligent manner; that, if we comprehended, would be a greater wonder and mystery to us than anything that we have already referred to.—JD, 11:74-77, February 5, 1865.

MAN AS MAN

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPTHE OPPORTUNITIES AND POSSIBILITIES.—Man, as man, can only make use of the powers which are possessed by man. Made, indeed, as represented in the scriptures in the image of God, as monarch of the universe, he stands erect on the earth in the likeness of his great Creator; beautifully constructed in all his parts, with a body possessing all the functions necessary for the wants of humanity; standing, not only by right, but by adaptability, beauty, symmetry and glory, at the head of all creation; possessing also mental powers and the capacity of reflecting upon the past, with capabilities to reason upon cause and effect, and by the inductive powers of his mind, through the inspiration of the Almighty, to comprehend the magnificent laws of nature as exhibited in the works of creation; with the capacity also of using the elements and forces of nature, and of adapting them to his own special benefit; and by his powers penetrating into the deep, ascending into the heavens, rushing with mighty velocity across the earth, making use of the separate or combined forces of nature with which he is surrounded and subjugating them to his will; as, likewise, by his intelligence, he has dominion over the fishes of the sea, over the fowls of the air, and over the cattle. He can girdle the earth with the electric fluid and convey his thoughts to any land or zone; by the same subtle influence he can talk with his fellows, and be heard when hundreds of miles apart. He can apply the forces of earth, air, fire and water to make them subservient to his will, and stands proudly erect as the head of all creation and the representative of God upon the earth. But while he occupies this exalted position, and is in the image of God, yet he possesses simply, as a man, only the powers which belong to man; and is subject to weakness, infirmity, disease and death. And when he dies, without some superior aid pertaining to the future, that noble structure lies silent and helpless, its organs, that heretofore were active, lively and energetic, are now dormant, inactive and powerless. And what of the mind, that before went back into eternity and reached forward into eternity? And what of its powers? Or what of that spirit, which, with its Godlike energies, its prescience and power, could grasp infinity? What of it, and where is it? . . . .

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPIf . . . . there is a spirit in man which reaches into futurity, that would grasp eternal progress, eternal enjoyments, and eternal exaltations; then those glories, those exaltations, those capabilities and those powers must be the gift of some superior being, power, or authority to that which exists in man; for the foregoing is a brief exhibition of the powers and capabilities of humanity. It is of this gift that we now speak. . . . It is for the exaltation of man to this state of superior intelligence and Godhood that the mediation and atonement of Jesus Christ is instituted; and that noble being, man, made in the image of God, is rendered capable not only of being a son of man, but also a son of God, through adoption, and is rendered capable of becoming a God, possessing the power, the majesty, the exaltation and the position of a God. . . .

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPCHRIST'S SERVICE PLACES GODHOOD WITHIN MAN'S REACH.—As a man through the powers of his body he could attain to the dignity and completeness of manhood, but could go no further. As a man he is born, as a man he lives, and as a man he dies. But through the essence and power of the Godhead, which is in him, which descended to him as the gift of God from his Heavenly Father, he is capable of rising from the contracted limits of manhood to the dignity of a God, and thus through the atonement of Jesus Christ and the adoption he is capable of eternal exaltation, eternal lives, and eternal progression.—MA, 139-141.

THE PROBATION AND DESTINY OF MAN

Mortalitya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PROBLEM AND THE OUTLOOK.—Now, this earth was formed for a certain purpose, and man was also formed for a certain purpose. And there are certain principles laid down—you will find them in the Bible, in the Book of Mormon, in the Doctrine and Covenants, and in the various revelations that God has made through his servants. There are certain principles laid down indicating that there are different grades of men possessing varied powers and privileges, and that these men have to pass through a certain ordeal, called by man a probation. That is, we are here in a probationary state, in a state of trial. As men live and act according to the intelligence they are in possession of—the privileges which they enjoy, and the deeds that they perform, whether for good or evil—there will be a time of judgment, and there will be a separation of these various peoples according to the way in which they have lived and acted upon the earth. Hence Paul tells that there are bodies celestial and bodies terrestrial, that there is one glory of the sun, another of the moon, and another of the stars, and as one star differeth from another star in glory, so shall it also be in the resurrection. [^2] Joseph Smith, in speaking on the same subject, [^3] tells us that there are bodies celestial, bodies terrestrial, and bodies telestial, which agrees precisely with the remarks made by Paul, only in other language. Thus there are many curious things associated with our existence here upon the earth, which the natural man does not and cannot comprehend. No man can know the things of God, but by the Spirit of God.—JD, 26:33-34, December 14, 1884.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPON BECOMING LIKE GOD.—We talk of becoming like God. What does he do? He governs this and other worlds, regulates all the systems, and gives them their motions and revolutions. He preserves them in their various orbits, and governs them by unerring, unchangeable laws, as they traverse the immensity of space. In our world he gives day and night, summer and winter, seedtime and harvest. He adapts man, the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea to their various climates and elements. He takes care of and provides for, not only the hundreds of millions of the human family, but the myriads of beasts, fowls, and fishes. He feeds and provides for them day by day, giving them their breakfast, dinner and supper. He takes care of the reptiles and other creeping things, and feeds the myriads of animalculae, which crowd earth, air, and water. His hand is over all and his providence sustains all. The hairs of our head are numbered, and a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without our Heavenly Father's notice; he clothes the lilies of the valleys and feeds the ravens when they cry.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPHis wisdom's vast and knows no bound, A deep where all our thoughts are drowned.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPWe would be like him! Be kings and priests unto God and rule with him, and yet we are obliged to have guardians placed over us to teach us how to take care of a bushel of wheat. We are far behind, but we have time for improvement; and I think we shall have to make some important changes for the better in our proceedings, before we become like our Father who dwells in the heavens.—JD, 10:260, October 10, 1863.

FREE WILL

AN ETERNAL PRINCIPLE.—We talk sometimes about free will. Is that a correct principle? Yes. And it is a principle that has always existed, and proceeded from God, our Heavenly Father. When God revealed himself to Joseph Smith, it was optional whether he obeyed his counsel or not. I suppose, however, looking at things as they exist, and as they are in truth, God understood that he would do it, he having been selected for that purpose a long, long time ago. And [I suppose] that the Lord knew that he would adhere to those principles and would carry out the designs of heaven as they should be communicated unto and required of him.

Agencya-Taylor, JohnTPNO COERCION IN THE GOSPEL PLAN.—We received the gospel. Was any one forced to obey it? Was there any coercion in any psible way manifested toward us? Not that I know of. Was Oliver Cowdery, who was the second elder in the church, obliged to receive this gospel? No, he was not. Was Hyrum Smith obliged to received it? No, he was not. Were any of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon—the Whitmers and others? No. And after they did identify themselves with this church, were they compelled to stay in it? No. Have any of the members of the quorum of the twelve, the seventies, the high priests, or the members of the high councils, or the presidents of the seventies, or any class of men in this church, been compelled to occupy the position to which they have been called? I do not know of any, do you? I know there was no coercion used with me further than the force of truth recommending itself to my mind; neither was there with you, further than the power of truth operating upon your minds. And after you received the gospel, were you compelled to leave your homes to come here? No, you were not. In fact, it was your desire to come here, and you could not be kept back from coming because you were impelled by the spirit which the Latter-day gospel inspires to come to the land of Zion. If this is called compulsion, it is not the compulsion of man, but the operation of the Spirit of God which you received through obedience to the gospel.

THE FREEDOM OF FAITH.—We may here ask, in acting under the dominion or control of the priesthood are any of you forced to do anything you do not want to? If you think you are in any possible way, I absolve you from it today, every one of you. These are my ideas about the rights of men. It is "all free grace and all free will," as the poet has it. We have not been coerced to come into the church; we are not coerced to remain in it. But we have taken upon ourselves a profession of faith in God, and as Latter-day Saints we believe that God has spoken, that the heavens have been opened, that the everlasting gospel has been restored to man, and we believe that God has organized his church by revelation, through his servant Joseph Smith in the form that we now have it. This is our faith. We cannot help that faith. I cannot help my faith, neither can you help yours. There was from the first, scriptural evidence adduced and a certain kind of reasoning used to enlighten our minds. We believed, after hearing the preaching of the gospel, that it was our duty to be baptized in the name of Jesus for the remission of our sins, and to have hands laid upon our heads for the reception of the Holy Ghost. And when we received that Holy Ghost, which takes of things of God, it showed them unto us. And then we were placed upon another footing from what we were before. And that Spirit has enlightened our minds in regard to those things of which I have spoken, as well as in regard to many others. If God has revealed unto us certain things, can we help our faith in them, and can we help knowing this to be the church and kingdom of God? No. Can I? No. Can you? No. What would men have to do to deprive me of this faith? They would have to cut off my head, or in some other way to kill me and then they could not change my faith. That would be impossible. If a man knows a thing, he knows it, and he cannot un-know it. There is one way whereby we can un-know these things, and that is by giving way to evil influences, to the powers of darkness, and by departing from the light of God; and then the light within us becomes darkness, and then "how great is that darkness."

Faitha-Taylor, JohnTPA MAN'S FAITH CAN NOT BE CONTROLLED.—But when you talk about controlling a man's faith, it cannot be done; and I would say to people who are bent upon having me change my faith, all you have to do is to cut off my head, and even that would not do it, because I would still be myself, entertaining the same faith in the next world. And therefore, all that men could do toward accomplishing this object would be to destroy the body. But that principle which God has implanted in our hearts, it would be impossible to destroy. Hence says Jesus, "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." [^4]—JD, 22:7-9, January 9, 1881.

HUMAN NATURE AND HUMAN ENJOYMENT

Natural Mana-Taylor, JohnTPASSOCIATION OF THE SEXES.—We have a great many principles innate in our natures that are correct, but they want sanctifying. God said to man, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." (Genesis 1:28.) Well, he has planted, in accordance with this, a natural desire in woman towards man, and in man towards woman and a feeling of affection, regard, and sympathy exists between the sexes. We bring it into the world with us, but that, like everything else, has to be sanctified. An unlawful gratification of these feelings and sympathies is wrong in the sight of God, and leads down to death, while a proper exercise of our functions leads to life, happiness, and exaltation in this world and the world to come. And so it is in regard to a thousand other things.

Joya-Taylor, JohnTPNURTURE, DO NOT PERVERT, THE EMOTIONS.—We like enjoyment here. That is right. God designs that we should enjoy ourselves. I do not believe in a religion that makes people gloomy, melancholy, miserable, and ascetic. I would not want to spend my life in a nunnery if I were a woman, or in a monastery if I were a man; and I would not think it very exalting to be a hermit and to live by myself in a poor miserable way. I should not think there was anything great or good associated with that. . . . While everything else enjoyed life, why should not we? But we want to do it correctly and not pervert any of these principles that God has planted in the human family.

Musica-Taylor, JohnTPMUSIC AND THE THEATER.—Why, there are some people who think that the fiddle, for instance, is an instrument of the devil and it is quite wrong to use it. I do not think so, I think it is a splendid thing to dance by. But some folks think that we should not dance. Yes, we should enjoy life in any way we can. Some people object to music. Why, music prevails in the heavens, and among the birds! God has filled them with it. There is nothing more pleasing and delightful than it is to go into the woods or among the bushes early in the morning and listen to the warbling and rich melody of the birds, and it is strictly in accordance with the sympathies of our nature. We have no idea of the excellence of the music we shall have in heaven. It may be said of that, as the apostle Paul has said in relation to something else—"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (I Corinthians 2:9.) We have no idea of the excellency, beauty, harmony and symphony of the music in the heavens.

Musica-Taylor, JohnTPOur object is to get and to cleave to everything that is good, and to reject everything that is bad. One reason why religious people in the world are opposed to music and theaters is because of the corruption that is mixed up with them. Wicked and corrupt men associate themselves with these things, and degrade them; but is this any reason that the saints should not enjoy the gifts of God? Is that a correct principle? Certainly not. It is for them to grasp at everything that is good, and calculated to promote the happiness of the human family.

SOCIAL STANDARDS.—I remember the time very well, and many of you do, when we used to commence our theatrical amusements here by prayer. We do not do so much of it now. This practice is put to one side. I suppose one was right and the other is right. I merely speak of these things. All our acts should be sanctified to God. You know that we are in the habit of having parties occasionally. I will give you my ideas about some of them. I have attended one or two lately, and I think we are running rather wild, and we do not act as much like gentlemen and ladies as we should, nor quite as much like saints as we ought to do. I think there is a great deal of impudence and pert- ness, a great amount of interfering with other people's rights in these places, and I think that we need correcting, that is, in our ward. I do not know how it is here in yours. Perhaps you do better here. I am speaking of things as I see them. I think we ought to elevate everything of this kind to its proper standard. We ought not to intrude upon or take advantage of anybody, even in amusements. When this is not observed, I will tell you what it leads to; it leads to a separation in society, inducing men and women who desire to be polite, refined, and courteous, to keep out of the company of those who do not take this course, and produces, if you please, something like an aristocracy, which is very repugnant to the wishes of good-feeling men and women. But they have either to do this or to be run over in many instances.—JD, 15:270-272, January 5, 1873.

Immortalitya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NATURE OF HUMAN NATURE.—The principles of justice, righteousness, and truth, which have an endless duration, can alone satisfy the capacious desires of the immortal soul. We may amuse ourselves like children do at play, or engage in the frivolities of the dance. We may take our little enjoyments in our social assemblies. But when the man comes to reflect, when the saint of God considers, and the visions of eternity are open to his view and the unalterable purposes of God are developed to his mind—when he contemplates his true position before God, angels, and men, then he soars above the things of time and sense and bursts the cords that bind him to earthly objects. He contemplates God and his own destiny in the economy of heaven and rejoices in a blooming hope of an immortal glory.—JD, 1:221, April 8, 1853.

THE BROTHERHOOD OF THE HUMAN RACE

God, Fatherhood ofa-Taylor, JohnTPALL ARE GOD'S CHILDREN.—How does God feel towards the human family? He feels that they are his children. What, all? Yes, the white, the black, the red, the Jew, the gentile, the heathen, the Christian, and all classes and grades of men. He feels interested in all. He has done so from the beginning and will continue to do so to the end. He will do all that lies in his power for the benefit, blessing, and exaltation of the human family, both in time and eternity, consonant with those laws and those eternal principals that I have referred to, from which he himself cannot deviate.—JD, 21:16, February 8, 1880.

A MORMON ETHIC.—Because one man is more talented than another, he should not use that talent to take advantage of his brother and then expect that God will approve of his actions, for he will not do it. He never did, nor ever will. We should operate for one another's interest, having sympathetic feelings for each other. We are supposed to be brethren in the church and kingdom of God, knit together by the indissoluble ties of the everlasting gospel, not for time only but for eternity. Hence all our operations should be for that end, founded on the principles of righteousness and friendship.—JD, 18:284, November 5, 1876.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Doctrine & Covenants 121:41-42.
[^2] Compare Genesis 49:6.
[^3] See the chapter on The United Order and Cooperation.
[^4] See Matthew 10:28
