John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER VII

THE NATURE OF THE UNIVERSE

GOD AND NATURE

EARTH, PLANETS, SEASONS.—The earth, and all the planetary systems, are governed by the Lord; they are upheld by his power, and are sustained, directed, and controlled by his will. . . .

Eartha-Taylor, JohnTPIf the planets move beautifully and harmoniously in their several spheres, that beauty and harmony are the result of the intelligence and wisdom that exist in his mind. If on this earth we have day and night, summer and winter, seedtime and harvest, with the various changes of the seasons, this regularity, beauty, order, and harmony, are the effects of the wisdom of God.—GG, 1, 1852.

Eartha-Taylor, JohnTPThe power that causes this earth to roll on its axis, and regulates the planets in their diurnal and annual motions, is beyond man's control. Their revolutions and spheres are fixed by Nature's God, and they are so beautifully arranged, and nicely balanced, that an astronomer can calculate the return of a planet scores of years beforehand, with the greatest precision and accuracy. And who can contemplate, without admiration, those stupendous worlds, rolling through the immensity of space at such an amazing velocity, moving regularly in their given spheres without coming into collision, and reflect that they have done so for thousands of years.—GG, 3-4, 1852.

THE PRINCIPLE OF LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE

Intelligencea-Taylor, JohnTPINTELLIGENT ORGANIZATION.—We see men who are considered very talented, whose names are handed down to posterity as great sculptors or painters. Their works are among the ancient ruins, and are exhibited as specimens of artistic skill, that men may see how intelligent their forefathers were. And what is it which they had wisdom to make? Something like a man, or a beast. But break off an arm or a leg, and you discover that it is but a lifeless piece of matter, though the outlines may be true to nature; and in this alone consist the beauty and skill of the artist. But there is no life in them, and they fall far short of perfection, beauty, and symmetry, as it is seen in the human system, or that of any other animal. Look upon a man, he is a perfect being; he is perfect inside and outside. If you remove the skin, the perfect covering of the human form, the nerves, muscles, arteries, veins, and everything necessary for this peculiar system, are there found in perfect harmony, and in every way adapted to make complete a living, moving machine. Not only so, but he is an intelligent being, capable of reflecting and acting. We profess to know a great deal, but what of our philosophy? Who is there can tell me by what power I lift my right arm? If that cannot be told, what do we know? How far short, then, are we of that intelligence that governs the universe and regulates all the works of nature. I look at the bones of the mammoth, and they tell me of something that was. I can gaze upon an elephant as it now is, a mighty, ponderous, moving machine, with strength and energy. Who planned and contrived these mighty beings? I look again at the animalcula, a thousand of which can float in a drop of water, and I see, by means of a powerful glass, the veins, muscles, and everything that is perfect to constitute a living, moving creature, invisible to the naked eye. He who organized the one, regulates the other. Man is an intelligent being, but how far does his intelligence fall short of that which regulates the world! He cannot even govern himself; he never was able to do it, and never will be able until he receives that wisdom and intelligence of that kind, and from that source, which governs the world, and keeps in order all the planetary systems, and adapts every fish, fowl, and insect to its own peculiar position in the world, and supplies all its wants. If he can receive it from God, as his instructor, he is then able to govern himself, possessing intelligence which he now knows nothing about, an intelligence which indeed is worthy of God and man. If I cannot have a portion of that intelligence and that wisdom, if the great Elohim cannot impart a portion of that spirit to me, and teach me the same lessons that he understands, I want nothing to do with a system of theology at all.—JD, 1:153, June 12, 1853.

THE VITALITY OF NATURE.—There is a principle of life associated with the gospel—life temporal, life spiritual, and life eternal. Hence men are called to be fathers of lives, and women are called to be mothers of lives. We are fathers and mothers of lives. And there is something different associated with the order of God from any order of men that exists upon the earth.

God As Creatora-Taylor, JohnTPWhen God created the earth and placed man upon it, and the fishes of the sea and the fowls of the air, and the grasses and plants and trees, etc., he placed in them the principle of life, or, in other words, the power of propagating their own species. And if it were not for that, what would you farmers do? Men can accomplish a great many things. They can build houses, railroads, and steamboats, and can do a great many clever things whereby they can command, to a certain extent, the forces of Nature; but they cannot give vitality to any of them. They cannot even furnish material to make a grain of sand, the wisest of them. But God has ordained that this principle of vitality exists within themselves. You take a single grain of wheat, for instance, and put it into the earth and you will see the principle of life begin to manifest itself; it is very small apparently, but contains within itself the power of increase. The same is also true with regard to the grasses, shrubs, plants, and flowers, and the various things that exist in creation. They spread, they extend, and they have spread over the face of the earth as man has spread, and the rain descends and the sun shines and Nature, as we term it, operates; but I would call it the power of God which operates according to eternal laws and principles that he has ordained. He gives vitality to all creation and sets life into motion and controls it, in the heavens as well as in the earth; not only among men, but among the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the fishes of the sea, and all the grasses, plants and flowers and herbs etc., everything possessing the principle of life within itself. . . .

God As Creatora-Taylor, JohnTPThis principle of life is the origin of our world, not only of this world, but of others; and this propagating and multiplying is ordained of the Almighty for the peopling of these worlds. And this production of life that I have briefly alluded to is another principle that exists to supply the want of another kind of life that exists here upon the earth. And without this there could be no world; all would be chaos, all would be darkness, all would be death, and the works of God would amount to nothing if it were not for this life and vitality.—JD, 21:112-113, November 28, 1879.

A UNIVERSE OF LAW

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPLAWS PLACED IN ORDER BY THE ALMIGHTY.—All things are under the influence, control and government of law, just as much as the planetary system with which we are connected is governed by law. It makes no difference what a few of us may do, or how the world may act, the sun rises and sets regularly, the earth revolves upon its axis, and so it is with all the planetary systems. There is no confusion, no disorder in any of the movements of the heavenly bodies. They are governed by a science and intelligence that is beyond the reach of men in mortality. Yet they move strictly according to certain laws by which all of them have been, are, and will be governed. And these laws are under the surveillance and control of the great Law-giver, who manages, controls, and directs all these worlds. If it were not the case, they would move through space in wild confusion, and system would rush against system, and worlds upon worlds would be destroyed, together with their inhabitants. But they are governed by a superhuman Power, by a Spirit and Intelligence that dwells in the bosom of the Gods, about which mankind knows but very little. It is so with regard to all the forces of Nature—the earth on which we stand, the elements of which it is composed, the air we breathe, the water we drink, and everything in Nature is governed strictly according to immutable, eternal, unchangeable laws, practical, philosophical, and strictly scientific, if these terms are preferred; but they are, nevertheless, placed there by the Almighty.—JD, 20:111-112, January 6, 1879.

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPThe laws of matter and of mechanism are unchangeable, and so are the laws pertaining to life, and also the medium of communication between God and man.—JD, 19:366, June 16, 1878.

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPETERNAL LAW CHANGES ACCORDING TO LAW.—There are eternal, unchangeable laws associated with God, and with all his plans, his works and ways, the requirements of which must be met. Nor can they be evaded or changed, except on certain principles provided for and contained in the laws themselves. When man had transgressed, an atonement had to be made commensurate with the act, and fully adequate to meet the inexorable demands of justice; so that, as stated, justice might be satisfied, which, if it had not been, the law pertaining to this matter could not have been carried out, and must necessarily have been violated.—MA, 163.

APPARENT DEVIATIONS FROM GENERAL LAW.—There are some apparent deviations from general laws. But these apparent deviations are merely appendages to the great general law, in order that creation may be perfect in all its parts. For instance, there is a general law of what is termed gravitation which causes bodies to fall to the earth from a given height. . . . But there are other local laws which disturb the normal conditions, so far as they extend, of what may be termed the general law. As, for example, the magnet in its limited sphere is more powerful than the general law of gravity, it attracting certain matter to itself in opposition to the general law, while the magnet itself is subject to the general law. . . . Take away these local agencies and everything resumes its normal condition. A bird, through the use of its wings, possesses the power of locomotion through the air; let that bird, however, lose its mechanism and power by being maimed or killed, and it is governed by the same law of gravitation and drops to the earth. Balloons will ascend and carry a specified weight with them to great altitudes, but this is owing to a modification of one part of the law of gravitation which causes denser bodies to cling with greater tenacity to the earth, and the gas that enters the balloons is more rarified than the atmosphere immediately contiguous to the earth, which dense atmosphere forces the lighter gases to their proper place, causing them to bound upwards. This being done and the equilibrium obtained, if the gas is permitted to escape, the materials of which the balloon is composed, together with its occupants, are precipitated, according to the general laws of gravitation, to the earth.

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPGod is unchangeable, so are also his laws, in all their forms, and in all their applications, and being himself the essence of law, the giver of law, the sustainer of law, all of those laws are eternal in all their operations, in all bodies and matter, and throughout all space. It would be impossible for him to violate law, because in so doing he would strike at his own dignity, power, principles, glory, exaltation and existence.—MA, 167-168.

APPLICATIONS OF THE CONCEPT OF UNIVERSAL LAW

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPAPPLIED SCIENCES.—Today we can talk of railroads and steamboats. I remember the time, and many of you old people also remember, when there were no such things in existence. Well, but did not steam possess the same properties five thousand years ago as it does today? Yes, it did. The properties were precisely the same, but we did not understand it, that's all. The principles were the same, and there is an eternal law by which all these things are governed. The same thing applies to electricity. You remember very well when it took several months to send a message to Washington and receive an answer. Now we can do it in as many minutes. But did not that principle always exist? Yes; but man did not know how to avail himself of it. I remember the time too, very well, when there was no such thing as gas, when whale oil was used which produced a light that just about made darkness visible. We knew nothing about kerosene, or gasoline, or gas or any of these superior artificial lights. But the principles existed then as they do now, but we did not understand them. We did not comprehend the position of things and it is only quite recently that some of these discoveries have been brought into operation. The art of photography has not been long known. When I was a boy people would have laughed at you if you had talked of taking a man's likeness in a minute's time; yet it is done. Did not light always possess the same properties? Yes, but man did not understand it. The same thing applies to the mineral world, the vegetable kingdom, the animal creation, and all the works of God. They are all governed by certain laws. The vegetables which you grow here, how were they organized? God organized them and placed them upon the earth, and gave them power to propagate their species. So also with regard to the animal creation, as well as birds, fishes, insects, etc.

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPUNITY OF MAN WITH NATURE.—We talk sometimes about our temporal things. If we could understand things as God does, we should not be much troubled about them. If for a moment we reflect upon all creation that live upon this little globe—those that move in the air, the waters, and on the land, we find there is a wisdom, an intelligence that provides for all. There is a prescient and an omnipotent power that governs, controls and shapes the affairs of this world according to the counsel of his will, and especially so in all matters pertaining to the human family. As one nation rises up and another falls, it is by his power that it is done. Nations and peoples may be in prosperity for a short time, but one touch of the finger of the Almighty and they wither, crumble, and decay. Change succeeds change in human affairs, but the laws of God in everything are correct and true, in every stage and phase of nature, everything on the earth, in the waters and in the atmosphere is governed by unchangeable, eternal laws. There are some bodies that will unite. There are others that will not unite. You cannot, for instance, mix oil and water. You may shake them up together, but soon each one adheres to its own element. The sisters sometimes say they have good or bad luck, as the case may be, in the making of soap. But in reality there is no luck about it, for you would find that if you have the same properties equal in strength and quantity, using the same process, that the same results would be reached ninety-nine times out of every hundred, and you would find that you could afford to throw the other one in too—the conditions being the same. And so it is with the various minerals in all their organizations and conditions. They assume certain forms and they are known by geologists by their shapes, etc., and they are always true to them. And so it is with all the elements with which we are surrounded in the atmosphere, in the earth, and in the water. We think we have learned a great deal, but if we did but know it we are only at the foot of the hill. When we are able to comprehend things as God does, we shall comprehend a great many principles that have never entered into our hearts to conceive of, although we are surrounded with those materials and are even treading them under our feet.

Children of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPMORMON "SOCIAL SCIENCE": THE BASIS FOR A HAPPY HUMAN SOCIETY.—What next? Are we mortal? Yes. Are we immortal? Yes. Have we to do with time? Yes. We have also to do with eternity. We are the offspring of God, and God in these last days has seen fit to place us in communication with himself. He has, through the revelations of himself and of his Son Jesus Christ, by the ministry of holy angels and by the restoration of the holy priesthood which emanates from God, and by which he himself is governed, placed us in a position whereby we can fulfil the object of our creation. . . .

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPThere are certain eternal laws that have existed from before the foundation of the world. There has been a priesthood also in existence always, and hence it is called the everlasting priesthood, and it administers in time and in eternity. That priesthood has been conferred upon man together with the right of the gospel. And we are told how man can get into possession of the Holy Spirit of God, and how he can be placed in communication with God, just the same as you would place one town in communication with another by means of the electric wire. . . . What for? For the building up of something that is called Zion or the pure in heart. What for? For my aggrandizement? For yours? For my individual interests or for yours? No. But in the interest of God and of Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, of Adam and of all the ancient patriarchs and apostles and men of God who have lived before, both on the Asiatic and American continent. . . .

APPLICATION OF THE MORMON "SOCIAL SCIENCE" IN SOCIETY.—And what next? Can we make them believe? No. Can we make them obey the gospel? No. We would not if we could, because if there was any force made use of for the accomplishment of that object, it would only result in evil instead of good. We are told by Joseph Smith that "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness and pure knowledge." [^1] They are not to be exercised by force. This is the way I look at these things, and I take the same view of our temporal affairs. . . . Should I wish to control any man? No, I would show him the right way. . . .

Ziona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE FRUITS OF THE MORMON "SOCIAL SCIENCE."—Well, now, a little further in relation to these things. Shall we benefit? Yes, we will do all the good we can. But if men lie and become fraudulent, and delight in abominations and are void of principle, then we will say, with him of old, "my soul, enter thou not into their secret, and mine honor with him be not thou united. . . . " [^2] We are gathered here for the express purpose of carrying out the purposes of God. The world, however, do not understand it. But I tell you what they will do, by and by. You will see them flocking to Zion by thousands and tens of thousands. And they will say, "We don't know anything about your religion, we don't care much about religious matters, but you are honest and honorable, and upright and just, and you have a good, just and secure government, and we want to put ourselves under your protection, for we cannot feel safe anywhere else."

Ziona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TASK OF THE SAINTS.—There is a scripture which says, the time will come when he that will not take up his sword to fight against his neighbor, must needs flee to Zion for safety. And they will come. But we must prepare ourselves. We have got to have the invigorating influence of the Spirit of God to permeate all of our organizations, all feeling that we are under the guidance and protection of the Almighty, every man in his place, and every man according to the order of the priesthood in which God has placed him. . . . This is the kind of feeling we should have and be governed by. As for these other matters of a temporal nature before referred to, [^3] if we cannot co-operate together and do it honestly and in good faith, as this is one of the very best things that can be required of us, it is very little that we can do. We should cultivate the Spirit of God ourselves; we ought to drink freely of that water which the Savior told the woman of Samaria that he was able to give to her, even that water that would "be in her as a well springing up to everlasting life." We have drunk already at that well. It remains now for us to permit it to bubble and burst forth, to flow and spread its revivifying influence all around. We ought to have a heaven upon earth—to be really the Zion of our God, the pure in heart, each one seeking another's welfare. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thyself." We have hardly got to that yet. But supposing Paul were to come along and say a little further—each one preferring his neighbor. That part of it we will let alone awhile. But if we could feel we are the children of God, all animated by that same Holy Spirit, producing peace and joy, and all welded together in one common brotherhood, in the bonds of the everlasting gospel, all operating with God and the holy priesthood who have lived in other ages, we could carry out his purposes upon the earth and establish his kingdom, never more to be thrown down. If we could feel like this, we should drop our individuality and self-esteem a little, we should seek to do not our own will, but the will of him who sent us.—JD, 20:130-137, December 1, 1878.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare Luke 10:20.
[^2] Compare Genesis 49:6.
[^3] See the chapter on The United Order and Cooperation.
