John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER VIII

PHILOSOPHY, SCIENCE, AND RELIGION

THE SEARCH FOR KNOWLEDGE

God, Knowledge abouta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LIMITATIONS OF SECULAR HYPOTHESES.—Man, by philosophy and the exercise of his natural intelligence, may gain an understanding, to some extent, of the laws of Nature. But to comprehend God, heavenly wisdom and intelligence are necessary. Earthly and heavenly philosophy are two different things, and it is folly for men to base their arguments upon earthly philosophy in trying to unravel the mysteries of the kingdom of God.—JD, 14:191, March 20, 1870.

God, Knowledge abouta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LIMITATIONS OF DEDUCTION.—There are men, it is true, who profess from the little knowledge they have of earthly things, by a series of deductions, to be able to find out heavenly things. But there is a very material difference between the two. There is a philosophy of the earth and a philosophy of the heavens. The latter can unravel all mysteries pertaining to earth. But the philosophy of the earth cannot enter into the mysteries of the kingdom of God, or the purposes of the Most High. But because of the advancement to which I have alluded, men set themselves up as teachers of things pertaining to spiritual matters, of which they know nothing. But the moment they do that, they exhibit their folly, vanity, imbecility, and shortsightedness, for, as I have stated, they never did comprehend the things of God without the Spirit of God, and they never will . . . . . Who can draw aside the veil and tell how or why we came here, and what awaits us when we lay aside this mortal coil? None can do this, unless God reveals it. There never was a man, neither is there a man now, nor ever will be, that can comprehend these things upon the principle of natural or human philosophy, and nothing short of the philosophy of heaven—the intelligence that flows from God, can unravel these mysteries.—JD, May 6, 1870.

FACT, THEORY, AND INFERENCE.—We have a great many ignorant, learned fools. But when you meet sensible, intelligent men . . . . . they will acknowledge principle when it is presented to them. But many men have not the understanding to do it. Talking about saving themselves, who among the philosophers can save themselves? . . . . What do they do when they have to grapple with the sting of death, and when it stares them in the face? Why, they take a leap in the dark. And this darkness is the end of all their philosophy and all their science. And the little they do know in divining the laws of God is only with regard to some very few of the fundamental principles of those laws that God has planted everywhere throughout the universe, and I do not therefore have that reverence for their theories, notions, and vagaries, nor do I attach that importance to their intelligence that some people do . . . . .

If we have to submit to their theories, we should really be in a sorry condition.—JD, 20:119-120, January 6, 1879.

Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RELIGIOUS NATURE OF MANKIND.—There is and always has been a feeling of reverence existing among the human family for a Divine Being of some kind and of some form, even amongst the most low and debased people of the earth.—JD, 21:155, December 7, 1879.

PHILOSOPHY, SCIENCE, AND RELIGION

God, Knowledge abouta-Taylor, JohnTPAPPROACH TO DEITY.—We think we are very superior in intelligence and in religion. Men, everywhere, are egotistical; they always think they are the smartest and most intelligent that ever lived; and it must be confessed that in many respects the generation in which we live are very far in advance of many others in regard to the arts and sciences, and certain branches of literature and mechanism. But how vague and uncertain are the ideas entertained by men in general, about the Deity! Are we intellectual in this? I think not. We have our bodies of divinity, our schools of theology, our religious seminaries, and places where ministers are manufactured and prepared to perform certain work which they call preaching the gospel, and these ministers, as well as the people, have different ideas about the Deity and the proper modes of worshiping him. Does the incongruity of this state of things ever strike the minds of reflecting men, men of science, who are accustomed to weigh the force of an argument and to solve knotty problems? . . . .

God, Knowledge abouta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ABSURDITY OF SOME RELIGIOUS NOTIONS.—Now, what can God think of a people, placed here on the earth, the most intelligent of his creations, possessed of reasoning faculties, who, in many instances, have investigated and understand the laws of Nature, I say, what can he think of men who set up every form, notion, and theory, every species of absurdity that can be imagined, and call it the worship of God? Suppose we were to put ourselves in his place for a little while, we should think there was something a little strange in relation to these matters. He might reasonably say, these men exhibit wisdom and intelligence in many respects. So far as discovering the operations of Nature, and examining and testing the laws thereof, they all agree; but in religious matters they exhibit imbecility and weakness, in that there is no union . . . . .

THE NECESSITY OF SUBJECTING BELIEF TO TESTS AND CRITICISM.—In regard to Nature and its laws, the world and the elements with which we are surrounded, and the laws operating in the world with which we are acquainted, all men arrive at the same conclusions and there is no difference, unless we come to theorizing, and then there is always difficulty. Well, in regard to all these things we all think alike, because our thoughts are based on correct principles. But when we come to religious matters, we discover that, though men are naturally intelligent, they act like fools. They do not use their common judgment, reason, or intelligence. "Well," say they, "you know we are governed by the Bible." Now that is exactly what we do not know, and therefore I doubt it. "But our divines tell us we are." Oh, do they? Well, suppose somebody was to tell you the result of some scientific analysis; you would be very likely to say—"I believe you in part, but I would like to test it for myself. When I have done that I shall know it. Yet strange as it is, you are willing to take anybody's ipse dixit in relation to things of the most vital importance. In things pertaining to the immortal part of man, we act like the veriest babies or consummate fools, while in regard to the affairs of this life we act intelligently.

Is there a way of arriving at a knowledge of the things which pertain to man's eternal welfare? Why, yes, we are inclined to think there is . . . . .

CHRISTIANITY WILL BEAR HONEST INVESTIGATION.—We call ourselves Christians, that is, we Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Episcopalians and Mormons, we all call ourselves Christians. Well, perhaps we are, and then, perhaps we are not. It is a matter that would bear investigation, I think. And then I think . . . . we should be honest with ourselves about all things, and especially in religion and the service and worship of God. "Well, but my father was a Methodist, and I am one." "My father was a Presbyterian, and I am one." "My father was a 'jumper,' and I am one." "My father was a Mohammedan, and I am one." "My father was a worshipper of Buddha, and I am one." And among us Christians we are Episcopalians, Wesleyans, Presbyterians, and members of the various professional phases descended from that remarkable man, Martin Luther, or Catholics or Greeks. Let us examine these things for a little while; or, at least, try to go to the foundation. Believing in the Bible, we will not go at once into these outside systems, but examine our own for a little while, and see how it stands, and how we stand in relation to it.

THE PRINCIPLES OF JESUS.—Jesus, we are told, "brought life and immortality to light by the gospel." (II Timothy 1: 10.) There was something peculiar about it—it gave men who lived up to and honored its principles in their lives and actions, a knowledge of life and immortality. They were not dependent upon the sayings or doings of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Lot, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Malachi, or any of the prophets. But the gospel brought a knowledge of life and immortality to all who obeyed it and lived according to its precepts. It informed all such that they were immortal beings; that they would exist after they had got through with time; if they died they should live again; if they were buried they should burst the barriers of the tomb and come forth to immortality.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPSeeing that man is both a mortal and an immortal being, having to do with eternity as well as time, it is proper that he should become acquainted with those principles that are so nearly concerned with his happiness and well-being in time and in eternity. We will let John Wesley, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Henry the Eighth, and any other organizer of religion go, and we will come to the scriptures of truth and see what they say about it. Christ, we are told, brought life and immortality to light, and he did it through the medium of the gospel. And what course did he pursue in doing this? The scriptures inform us that when Jesus commenced to preach the gospel he called men from the various vocations of life, among others from the occupation of fishing; he called twelve men, whom he ordained apostles. He inspired these men with the gift of revelation and with a knowledge of God. He placed them in communication with God, so that they had revelation from him and were enabled to teach the laws of life. He breathed upon them and said—"Receive ye the Holy Ghost"; and they received it, and that Holy Ghost took of the things of God and showed them unto them, it drew aside the curtains of futurity, whereby they were enabled to penetrate into the invisible world and comprehend the things of God. This was the position they occupied and the kind of gospel they had.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TESTING OF JESUS' TEACHINGS.—Well, how did they operate with it? Jesus told them to go out and preach it; and he called seventy men and inspired them, too; and told them to go out and heal the sick, cast out devils, and preach the gospel. They were furthermore to go without purse and scrip, he saying unto them—"freely ye have received, freely give." (Matthew 10: 8.) They went out in this kind of way, without purse and scrip, to preach the gospel. By and by a number of them returned, and he asked them how they had fared. They told him they had been preaching, and healing the sick, and even devils were subject to them in his name. Said he—"Rejoice, not that devils are subject to you; but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven," [^1] that you are the Lord's, that God is your friend. Rejoice that you have been brought into communication with God, and that you have received the everlasting gospel, which brings life and immortality to light. This was their position, and they listened to the teachings of Jesus, and we all—that is all of these various parties of which I have spoken,—believe that Jesus was the Son of God . . . . .

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPI sometimes reflect and wonder whether the same effects would follow if we had that religion today, or whether truth has turned into fiction, or has falsehood turned into truth. How is it, if that was the gospel then, and God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and, as they say in the Church of England—"As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, worlds without end, amen?"—if that is true, then we ought to expect the same things today as they had then, that is, if we profess the same gospel. This is the way I reason, I cannot get at it any other way; I cannot arrive at any other conclusion. It is reasonable, rational and philosophical. It agrees with every principle of science, with every principle of intelligence that God has communicated to man.—JD, 16:303-309, November 16, 1873.

THE MYTH OF MODERNITY

Knowledgea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE WORLD ORGANIZED ON ETERNAL PRINCIPLES.—Some men will stultify themselves with the idea that in ages gone and past the human race was in a semi-civilized or barbarous condition, and that any kind of religion would do for the people in those days; but with the progress of intelligence, the march of intellect, the development of the arts and sciences and the expansion of the human mind, it is necessary that we should have something more elevated, refined, and intellectual than that which existed then. To me such notions are perfect foolishness. If I read my Bible aright and believe in it, known unto God were all things from before the foundation of the world . . . . . Yet men will boast that they know things independent of God whereas unless they had been aided by the Spirit of the Lord, and unless the principles had existed, they never could have been found out, for no man could have originated them himself. All that man has ever done, with all his boasted intelligence, has been simply to develop or find out a few of the common principles of nature that always have existed, and always will exist, for these things and every principle of nature are eternal. The gospel is also eternal.—JD, 13:223-225, May 6, 1870.

INTELLIGENCE AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE WORLD

Speaking of philosophy . . . . . I was almost buried up in it while I was in Paris. I was walking about one day in the Jardindes Plantes—a splendid garden. There they had a sort of exceedingly light cake. It was so thin and light that you could blow it away, and you could eat all day of it, and never be satisfied. Somebody asked me what the name of that was. I said, I don't know the proper name, but in the absence of one, I can give it a name—I will call it philosophy, or fried froth, whichever you like. It is so light you can blow it away, eat it all day, and at night be as far from being satisfied as when you began . . . . .

I will risk our elders among the world, if they will only brush up their ideas a little. I will take any of you rough-looking fellows, put you in a tailor's shop a little, and start you out like gentlemen, as large as life. I tell you there is great difference between our people and others. Many others have a nice little finish on them; they may be compared to scrimped-up dandies. But everything is on the outside, and nothing in the inside.

Our folks who are operating round here in the canyons, and on the land, are listening to the servants of God and studying principles of eternal truth. They are like young rough colts, with plenty of bone, sinew, and nerve in them. All they want is rubbing down a little, and they will come out first-rate. I believe in the polish, and a little of everything else . . . . .

Knowledgea-Taylor, JohnTPINTELLIGENCE GAINED BY FAITH AND STUDY.—I have found that all intelligence is good, and there is a good deal in the world, mixed up with all their follies. It is good for the elders to become acquainted with the languages, for they may have to go abroad, and should be able to talk to the people, and not look like fools. I care not how much intelligence you have, if you cannot exhibit it, you look like an ignoramus. Suppose a Frenchman should come upon this stand to deliver a lecture upon botany, astronomy, or any other science, and could not speak a word of English, how much wiser would you be? You may say, I thought the Lord would give us the gift of tongues. He won't if we are too indolent to study them. I never ask the Lord to do a thing I could do for myself. We should be acquainted with all things, should obtain intelligence both by faith and by study. We are instructed to gather it out of the best books, and become acquainted with governments, nations, and laws. The elders of this church have need to study these things, that when they go to the nations, they may not wish to return home before they have accomplished a good work.—JD, 1: 27, August 22, 1852.

SOME MORMON PHILOSOPHY

IF ALL NATURE IS UNDER LAW, WHY NOT MAN.—According to the eternal laws of God and the eternal fitness of things as they exist with him in the eternal worlds and as they exist here upon the earth, all of us are . . . . as much obligated to listen to his law and be governed by his counsels and advice . . . . [as] we would be in making a grain of wheat to grow . . . . . Being the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh, and having made a world for all flesh to inhabit, and having made provision for the sustenance of that flesh, for their food, clothing, comfort, convenience and happiness, and having given them intelligence and told them to go forth and manipulate the abundance of nature to their use, has he not a right to lead and direct us, to ask obedience to his law? Would not that be a legitimate right, when we reflect upon it? The world says. No, he has no right; I am my own master, etc. Some of the Latter-day Saints almost say the same thing; not quite, but they would like to get near it. "I am a free man; I will be damned if I don't do as I please," etc. Well, I will tell you another part of that story. You will be damned if you do act as you please unless you please to do and to keep the laws of God. We cannot violate his laws with impunity nor trample under foot these eternal principles which exist in all Nature. If all Nature is compelled to be governed by law or suffer loss, why not man?

God, Purposes ofa-Taylor, JohnTPNow, then, he has revealed unto us the gospel. He has gathered us together from among the nations of the earth for the accomplishment of his purposes. For this he has used higher measures and more exalted principles than are associated with some of the lower orders of nature . . . . . It is for us to learn this lesson and to find out that there is a God who rules in heaven, and that he manages, directs and controls the affairs of the human family. We are not our own rulers. We are all the children of God. He is our Father and has a right to direct us, not only us, but has a perfect right to direct and control the affairs of all the human family that exist upon the face of the earth for they are all his offspring. Now, he feels kindly towards them and knows what kind of people they are, and also what we are, and he would do everything he could for them even if in his almighty wisdom he has to kill them off in order to save them. He destroyed the antediluvian world on that account, because they were not filling the measure of their creation. They had corrupted themselves to such an extent that it would have been an injustice to the spirits in the eternal worlds if they had to come through such a corrupt lineage to be subject to all the trouble incident thereunto. And therefore God destroyed them. He cut off the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah in consequence of their corruptions, and by and by he will shake all the inhabitants of the earth, he will shake thrones and will overturn empires and desolate the land and lay millions of the human family in the dust. Plagues and pestilence will stalk through the earth because of the iniquities of men, because of some of these corruptions . . . . namely, the perversion of the laws of nature between the sexes, and the damnable murders that exist among men.—JD, 21:113-116, November 28, 1879.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare Luke 10:20.
