John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

BOOK TWO

The Gospel Message

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTP"The gospel is calculated to lead us on from truth to truth, and from intelligence to intelligence, until that scripture will be fulfilled which declares that we shall see as we are seen and know as we are known, until one will not have to say to another, know ye the Lord, but all shall know him from the least unto the greatest, until the light and intelligence of God shall beam forth upon all, and all shall bask in the sunlight of eternal truth."

—John Taylor,

JD, 11:217,

April 7, 1866.

CHAPTER IX

THE MEANING OF THE GOSPEL

THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPA COMPREHENSIVE SUBJECT.—The gospel of Jesus Christ is perhaps one of the most comprehensive subjects that mankind can reflect upon. It not only embraces things as they now exist, associated with the human family, but it takes us back to days that are past and gone, to the organization of this world and of other worlds, and by the principle of revelation it develops, unfolds, and makes manifest unto the human family the great purposes of God as they shall transpire throughout every succeeding age. There are thousands of details or minutiae mixed up with these great projects, purposes, and designs; some of them we comprehend correctly, or think we do; others are not so clear and comprehensible to our minds.—JD, 10:123, March 1, 1863.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPWithout the gospel it would be impossible for men to have any knowledge of God, or of Jesus Christ whom he hath sent.—JD, 11:161-162, October 7, 1865.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPNEED OF THE GOSPEL.—There is no adhesive principle sufficiently powerful to unite the people of any portion of the earth, similar to the one that has sprung forth in our day and right among this people; if there is anything of that sort abroad in the world, I am not acquainted with it. Then it follows, as a natural consequence, that if there is nothing to unite the people together they are deficient in some principle, doctrine, faith or practice. Philosophy has not united the people together; politics has never done it; no social principles have ever accomplished it.—JD, 10:124-125, March 1, 1863.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPSIGNIFICANCE OF THE GOSPEL.—We, under the inspiration of the Almighty, will introduce the laws of God that exist in the heavens and upon the earth, and form a nucleus of truth, of virtue and intelligence, of law and order, of principles pertaining to morals, to philosophy, to politics, to religion, and to everything that is pure, exalting, and ennobling, and the kingdom will be the Lord's. And we will operate together, we will try to frustrate the works of darkness and the powers of the adversary, to save the living and redeem the dead, having our hearts turned towards our fathers who have lived before us who have been ignorant of the principles of life and salvation which God has been pleased to confer upon us, while the brethren behind the veil are feeling after us who are their children. The Lord will turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers through Elias who was to come, which if not accomplished, it is written, "the earth would be smitten with a curse." [^1]—JD, 21:97, April 13, 1879.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LEAVEN OF THE GOSPEL.—The gospel is like a little leaven put into a certain portion of meal, and it is working and operating, and the ultimate result will be that the whole lump will be leavened. Not that everybody that is in the world will obey the gospel; but the Lord will have his own way in manipulating his affairs, and great tribulation will overtake the inhabitants of the earth. As you have heard, many of the wicked will slay the wicked. But after these things have taken place the good, the honorable, the virtuous, the pure, those that are desirous to serve God, will all have their position, and that thing will be fulfilled which was spoken of by Jesus—"Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth."—JD, 24:124, April 8, 1883.?

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPDIVINITY OF THE GOSPEL.—We have embraced the gospel of the Son of God, and God has taught us how to organize his church. Had he not taught us we should not have known anything about its organization. Joseph Smith knew nothing about it; Brigham Young knew nothing about it; I could not have known anything about it, nor any of the twelve, nor any man living on the earth, until God introduced it and taught us in all these things.—JD, 25:265, August 17, 1884.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GOSPEL IS TANGIBLE.—In relation to the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is something that is full of importance and information, and is associated with our present and eternal welfare, it enters into all the ramifications of life where we can understand it. It is not a sing-song sort of a thing, such as we hear taught among the sectarians; but there is something tangible about it. It consists of eternal principles, unfolding light and intelligence, and is adapted to the nature of man as a mortal and immortal being—principles that affect us in time and in eternity, in life, in health, in sickness, in death, and which lead to life everlasting.—JD, 5:259, September 20, 1857.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE EVERLASTING GOSPEL: REVEALED FROM THE HEAVENS.—The everlasting gospel, or the everlasting priesthood, was not known till the Lord revealed it from the heavens by the voice of his angel, and when we receive these principles and they abide in us, we shall then have the principles of eternal life.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPIt was small when it first began, but you see the spirit of God has caused it to grow and become a mighty tree, and its branches cover the whole earth. Without the principle of eternal life, the principle of eternal knowledge never could be imparted as a blessing to the human family; and when once the key was turned, when the door was unlocked, and the seed once sown, truth began to grow, and the communication opened between the heavens and the earth, which placed men in a situation to converse with beings that surround the throne of God. The Melchizedek priesthood holds the keys that unfold the purposes of Jehovah, and drag into daylight the secret of God, the mystery of godliness, as well as the secret abominations of the wicked. Yes, "life and immortality are brought to light through the gospel."—MS, July 6, 1845.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GOSPEL AND REALITY.—When men obey the gospel with pure hearts—when they are baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and have hands laid upon them for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and have received that Spirit and live in obedience to the dictates of that Spirit, it will bring things past and present to their remembrance, lead them into all truth, and show them things to come. This is part and parcel of our belief.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPWhat is the reason we do not always comprehend things right? Because, in many instances, we give way to temptation. We let our old prepossessions, feelings, and influences, by which we have been governed heretofore, predominate over the Spirit of God, and we fall into error and darkness; and "If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!" (Matthew 6:23.) It is not enough, then, that we are baptized and have hands laid upon us for the gift of the Holy Ghost. It is not enough even that we go further than this, and receive our washing and our anointings, but that we daily and hourly and all the time live up to our religion, cultivate the Spirit of God, and have it continually within us "as a well of water springing up unto everlasting life," unfolding, developing, making manifest the purposes and designs of God unto us, that we may be enabled to walk worthy of the high avocation whereunto we are called, as sons and daughters of God to whom he has committed the principles of eternal truth and the oracles of God in these last days.—JD, 6:106-107, December 6, 1857.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPEFFECT OF THE GOSPEL.—The principles of the gospel, to the unbeliever, have neither worth nor efficacy. But with us, who believe them, they comprehend everything pertaining to the well-being of man in time and eternity. With us the gospel is the alpha and omega, the beginning and the end. It is interwoven with all our interests, happiness, and enjoyment, whether in this life or that which is to come. We consider that, when we enter into this church and embrace the new and everlasting covenant, it is a lifelong service and affects us in all the relationships of time and eternity. And as we progress, these ideas which, at first, were a little dim and obscure, become more vivid, real, life-like, tangible and clear to our comprehensions, and we realize that we stand upon the earth as the sons and daughters of God, the representatives of heaven. We feel that God has revealed to us an everlasting gospel, and that associated with that are everlasting covenants and relationships. The gospel, in the incipient stages of its operations, begins, as the prophet said it should, to "turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers." We no longer have to ask, as in former times, "Who am I?" "Where did I come from?" "What am I doing here?" or "What is the object of my existence?" for we have a certainty in relation to these things. It is made plain to us by the fruits of the gospel—by the truths which God has revealed through the medium of revelation by the inspiration of the Almighty, that we are "saviors on Mount Zion and that the kingdom is the Lord's." . . . . It is the knowledge of these things and of many more of a similar nature that leads us to pursue the course that we do. It is this which prevents us from bowing to the notions, caprices, ideas and follies of men. Having been enlightened by the spirit of eternal truth, having partaken of the Holy Ghost, and our hope having entered within the veil, wither Christ, our forerunner, has gone, and knowing that we are the children of God and that we are acting in all things with reference to eternity, we pursue the even tenor of our way independent of the smiles and careless of the frowns of men.—JD, 14:186-187, March 20, 1870.

THE NATURE OF THE GOSPEL

IS THE LORD CHANGEABLE?—To those who have not reflected seriously upon the dealings of God and his laws, the Lord appears to be changeable in his way of saving the human family. In the different dispensations from Adam until Christ, they suppose that he has adopted as many different ways of salvation.

God, Eternal Nature ofa-Taylor, JohnTPWe are told by Christian divines of the dispensation that existed before the flood; we are informed of the Patriarchal dispensation, the Mosaic dispensation, and finally of the Christian dispensation; and it is a prevailing idea among the uninformed that each of these dispensations presented a different system of salvation adopted by the Almighty in teaching the human family, in enlightening their minds, and in giving unto them correct information in regard to God and eternity. Hence I have often heard eminent divines refer to the dispensation before the flood as a day of almost utter darkness; then to the Patriarchal dispensation as one in which a faint glimmer of light began to be made manifest; of the Mosaic dispensation as a time in which the sun began to rise a little above the horizon; and of the Christian dispensation, as it now exists in the world, as being the fulness of light and intelligence, or the full blaze of gospel day. These views of the different dispensations generally obtain among professors of Christianity.

God, Eternal Nature ofa-Taylor, JohnTPI entertain a very different opinion of the Almighty. God, like his Son, Jesus Christ, is "the same yesterday, today, and for ever,"—the same in intelligence, the same in purity, the same in his projects, plans, and designs. He is, in short, unchangeable. And I apprehend, if the saints who had communication with him in ancient days were to appear on this earth at the present time, they would find the same medium of communication, the same way of imparting intelligence, and the same unchangeable Being that existed one thousand eight hundred, four thousand, or six thousand years ago.

God, Eternal Nature ofa-Taylor, JohnTPIt is true mankind have not at all times been susceptible of receiving and appreciating the same degree of light, truth, and intelligence that they have at other times. God has in certain instances withdrawn the light of his countenance—his Holy Spirit—the light and intelligence that proceeds from him, in a certain degree, from the human family; but his laws are immutable, and he is the same eternal, unchangeable Being. . . . .

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GOSPEL IS ETERNAL.—As the gospel is a principle that emanates from God, like its author, it is "the same yesterday, today, and for ever,"—eternal and unchangeable. God ordained it before the morning stars sang together for joy, or ere this world rolled into existence, for the salvation of the human race. It has been in the mind of God, and as often as developed it has been manifested as an eternal, unchangeable, undeviating plan by which to save, bless, exalt, and dignify man, and to accomplish this end by one certain, unalterable method of salvation, according to its degree or manifestation.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPI speak of the gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness and of the blessings associated therewith. It is perfect folly to entertain the idea that the gospel has only existed about one thousand eight hundred years, and yet this foolish idea is strongly entertained and almost universally believed throughout Christendom. This mistake is for want of calm reflection and correct information upon that subject. . . . .

MORE THAN THE NEW TESTAMENT.—We are told the gospel is the New Testament. I do not find any such declaration even in the New Testament itself. There are certain records in the New Testament giving an account of the birth, life, suffering, and death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It contains also an account of the doctrines he taught, the discourses he delivered, and the moral sentiments he inculcated. It gives us an account of the organization of his church, and of the teachings of his apostles, and the manner of their administration, etc. But this is not the gospel.

The gospel is a certain living, abiding, eternal principle. That which is written in the New Testament is like a chart of a country, if you please; but the gospel is the country itself. A man having the map of the United States in his possession would be considered foolish if he supposed he possessed the United States; and because a man may have the Old and New Testament in his possession, it does not follow that he has the gospel. But is it not written in some of our good Bibles, "The Gospel according to St. John," "The Gospel according to St. Matthew," etc.? Certainly But what has that to do with it? The gospels according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John describe certain teachings and instructions which Jesus gave, and among the rest the officers constituting his church are named. "And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues." (1 Corinthians 12:28.) These are the living substance of which they write an account.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPWell, but the gospel is contained in the Old and New Testament. It is not, nor in the Book of Mormon, nor in the revelations we have received. These are simply records, histories, commandments, etc. The gospel is a living, abiding, eternal, and unchangeable principle that has existed co-equal with God, and always will exist, while time and eternity endure, wherever it is developed and made manifest.—JD, 7:360-362, January 15, 1860.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NATURE OF THE GOSPEL.—And what is the nature of the gospel? It is the same as that taught on the day of Pentecost by the apostles, when they cried out to the multitude, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38.) That was the testimony which they bore to the people. That is the testimony which the elders of this church bear. There is something about this that is reasonable, that is intelligent, and that is susceptible of proof. It was a very fair proposition for the apostle to make, promising the people who would obey the requirements which the gospel imposes upon its adherents, that they should receive the Holy Ghost. And what should this do for them? It was to cause their old men to dream dreams and their young men to see visions, daughters prophesy; it was to bring things past to their remembrance, to lead them into all truth, and to show them things to come. . . . .

THE GOSPEL AND EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE.—Now here is a principle of the gospel that will admit of as strong evidence as anything in nature. What is it? "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." Or in other words, sow wheat and you reap wheat; plant corn and you gather corn. It was a bold position to take. I remember that on these points I questioned the elder who brought the gospel to me. I asked, What do you mean by this Holy Ghost?

. . . . Will it give you the permeating influence of the Spirit of the living God, and give you a certain knowledge of the principles that you believe in?

"Yes," he answered, "and if it will not, then I am an impostor." Said I, "That is a very fair proposition." Finding the doctrine to be correct, I obeyed, and I received that Spirit through obedience to the gospel which gave me a knowledge of those principles which I simply believed before, because they were scriptural, reasonable and intelligent, according to that scripture which saith, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."—JD, 23:50-51, 52, April 9, 1882.

Faith and Worksa-Taylor, JohnTPFAITH AND ACTION NEEDED.—The Zion of God must consist of men that are pure in heart and pure in life and spotless before God. At least that is what we have got to arrive at. We are not there yet, but we must get there before we shall be prepared to inherit glory and exaltation. Therefore a form of godliness will amount to but little with any of us, for he that knoweth the master's will and doeth it not shall be beaten with many stripes. It is "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father, which is in heaven." (Matthew 7:21.) These are doctrines of the gospel as I understand them. And it is not enough for us to embrace the gospel and to be gathered. here to the land of Zion, and be associated with the people of God, attend our meetings and partake of the sacrament of the Lord's supper, and endeavor to move along without much blame of any kind attached to us. For notwithstanding all this, if our hearts are not right, if we are not pure in heart before God, if we have not pure hearts and pure consciences, fearing God and keeping his commandments, we shall not unless we repent, participate in these blessings about which I have spoken and of which the prophets bear testimony.—JD, 26:92, February 12, 1882.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Taylor, JohnTPETERNAL NATURE OF THE GOSPEL.—There is not a principle associated with the gospel of the Son of God but what is eternal in its nature and consequences, and we cannot with impunity trample upon any principle that is correct without having to suffer the penalty thereof before God and the holy angels, and in many instances before men. The principles of the gospel being eternal, they were framed and originated with the Almighty in eternity before the world was according to certain eternal laws, and hence the gospel is called the everlasting gospel.—JD, 21:112, November 28, 1879.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPJOSEPH SMITH'S MISSION.—Joseph Smith's mission was to restore this same gospel in its fulness. He brought back the same gospel that Jesus taught, the same faith and repentance, the same baptism for the remission of sins, and the same laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the same Holy Ghost with all its powers and blessings. This is the doctrine and these the principles we profess to believe in. We do not profess to have received our authority from the Church of England or any other sect: it came directly from God by the ministration of holy angels. The gospel that we preach is the everlasting gospel; it reaches back into the eternities that are past; it exists in time and it stretches forward into the eternities to come, and everything connected with it is eternal. . . . .—JD, 13:17-19, March 14, 1869.

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPCONSEQUENCES OF THE PROPHET'S MISSION.—Why is it that the world rage? Why is it that the priests of the day are angry—that politicians are mad? It is because the Lord has set forth his hand to accomplish his purposes and bring to pass the things spoken of in the holy prophets.

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPAs one of old has said:

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPWhy do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPThe kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying,

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPLet us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPHe that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision.

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPThen shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure." (Psalm 2:1-5.)

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPThe Lord will bring to pass his strange purpose, and accomplish the thing he has designed. It is for us to live our religion, to fully appreciate the gospel we possess, and fully obey its requirements, submit to its laws, and yield to its dictations, following the direction of the holy priesthood, which holds the keys of the mysteries of the revelations of God, magnifying our callings, and honoring our God, that we may be prepared to fulfil our destiny upon the earth, and be enabled to be a blessing to those around us, and to pour blessings upon our posterity, and spread forth the great principles of eternity, which are calculated to bless, enlighten, ennoble, and exalt all who will yield obedience to their dictates.—JD, 7:370, January 15, 1860.

PRIESTHOOD AND THE GOSPEL

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPCO-ETERNITY OF THE GOSPEL, PRIESTHOOD, REVELATION.—Wherever the gospel existed, there existed also the power of God and the revelations of God, and therein men had a knowledge of God, and "therein was revealed the righteousness of God from faith to faith." But let me make another remark here concerning the priesthood. We are told it holds the mysteries of the revelations of God. These are sayings we have a right to look into and investigate, to find out upon what principle they are based.

Adama-Taylor, JohnTPADAM'S KNOWLEDGE.—How did Adam get his information of the things of God? He got it through the gospel of Jesus Christ, and through this same priesthood of which we have been speaking. God came to him in the garden and talked with him. We are told that no man can see the face of God and live. How was it that he obtained his knowledge of God? Through the gospel; and he was the first man upon this earth that had the gospel and the holy priesthood; and if he had it not, he could not have known anything about God or his revelations. But God revealed himself to him and told him what he might do and what he might not do, what course he was to pursue and what course not to pursue; and when he transgressed the laws which the Lord gave to him, he was driven from the face of God, and left in a measure to grope in the dark.

Enocha-Taylor, JohnTPENOCH.—Let us pass on to Enoch's day. The Bible only gives a very short account of Enoch. We are told that he "walked with God: and was not; for God took him." (Genesis 5:24.) Then he had the gospel, for it is through the gospel that "the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith." It is that which holds the keys of the mysteries of the revelations of God. It is that which imparts a knowledge of the priesthood, and it is by the gospel that mankind can commune with God: it is that which is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. Enoch had this through the gospel. Being in possession of this, he was enabled to communicate with God—had revelations from him. And further revelations which have been given in these last days go to show us that Enoch built a city, and that he taught the citizens of that city the great principles of eternal truth as they emanated from God; that God communed with them—taught them correct principles; and that, by-and-by, when the people waxed full of iniquity and the earth became ripe for destruction, Enoch and his city were caught up into heaven. . . . .

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GOSPEL KEY.—The great principle I wish to keep before your minds is, that men in those different ages of the world did have a knowledge of God, and they obtained it through revelation and a knowledge of the gospel.—JD, 7:363-364, January 15, 1860.

THE HOLY GHOST: DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SECTS AND THE GOSPEL

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPWhat difference is there between the gospel and the beliefs of other sects and creeds? The gospel always did and always will "bring life and immortality to light." That is the difference. While others are groping in the dark, though their intentions in many instances are to do good and work righteousness, so far as they know, yet they cannot come to a knowledge of God, nor become acquainted with eternal things without the gospel; without the gift of the Holy Ghost, the spirit of revelation which proceeds from God. And who are to have this? All who obey. "But I thought," say some, "that that was confined to some one or two, or to half a dozen or a dozen, as the case may be,and that the whole people had nothing to do with it." This is a very great mistake, and I will now show you the difference between . . . . the position that we occupy and the position that the world occupy.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPThe world, as I have told you, unaided by the gift of the Holy Ghost, unaided by the gospel and the light of revelation, are left to grope a good deal in the dark. But not so with the saints of God; no matter in what age of the world they may have lived, they have been placed under other circumstances; they have had the light of truth to guide them, and revelation direct from the Lord. And here is the difference between one and the other. When Nicodemus came to Jesus, he went to him by night. He was much like some men are in this our day, with respect to their private feelings for the Mormons. They respect the Mormons, they cannot help doing so. But they do not want it known for the Latter-day Saints, like the former-day saints, are not popular. In fact, we are considered by many as they were, to be of disreputable character, a people with whom it would not be considered proper to associate. This was the character that the Savior bore among the self-righteous but hypocritical religionists of his day. Yet we call him the Son of God. And we find Nicodemus, a prominent man, a man of discernment and ability, creeping around the back door, not wishing it to be known that he had called upon the Mormons—oh, no!—Jesus of Nazareth; yet he wished to find out something respecting him, for he believed that no man could do the things that he did except God were with him. Jesus in explaining the gospel to him, told him that he, in order to understand his teachings and his works, would have to be born again. Nicodemus could not appreciate this saying. He knew not what the Savior meant, thinking the saying referred to a man's natural birth. The Savior then told him, that unless a man was born of the water and of the Spirit, he could not enter the kingdom of God; that he could not comprehend it; that he could not even see it; that he could not understand the relationship that existed between God and man without the gift of the Holy Ghost.—JD, 23:372-373, February 11, 1883.

THE SCOPE OF THE GOSPEL

Trutha-Taylor, JohnTPCOMPREHENSIVE CHARACTER.—In regard to our religion, I will say that it embraces every principle of truth and intelligence pertaining to us as moral, intellectual, mortal and immortal beings, pertaining to this world and the world that is to come. We are open to truth of every kind, no matter whence it comes, where it originates, or who believes in it. Truth, when preceded by the little word "all," comprises everything that has ever existed or that ever will exist and be known by and among men in time and through the endless ages of eternity. And it is the duty of all intelligent beings who are responsible and amenable to God for their acts, to search after truth, and to permit it to influence them and their acts and general course in life, independent of all bias or preconceived notions, however specious and plausible they may be.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPWe, as Latter-day Saints, believe, first, in the gospel, and that is a great deal to say, for the gospel embraces principles that dive deeper, spread wider, and extend further than anything else that we can conceive. The gospel teaches us in regard to the being and attributes of God. It also teaches us our relationship to that God and the various responsibilities we are under to him as his offspring. It teaches us the various duties and responsibilities that we are under to our families and friends, to the community, to the living and the dead. It unfolds to us principles pertaining to futurity. In fact, according to the saying of one of the old disciples, it "brings life and immortality to light," brings us into relationship with God, and prepares us for an exaltation in the eternal world. There is something grand, profound, and intellectual associated with the principles of the gospel as it stands connected with the salvation and exaltation of man.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPA man in search of truth has no peculiar system to sustain, no peculiar dogma to defend or theory to uphold. He embraces all truth, and that truth, like the sun in the firmament, shines forth and spreads its effulgent rays over all creation. If men will divest themselves of bias and prejudice, and prayerfully and conscientiously search after truth, they will find it wherever they turn their attention. But in regard to the leading principles of the gospel, there are some distinctive features connected therewith, which, like all the laws of nature and of nature's God, require implicit obedience and compliance therewith in order to insure a realization of the results which flow therefrom. The earth on which we live, the matter of which it is composed, the elements with which we are surrounded, as well as the planetary system, have certain inscrutable, eternal, unchangeable laws connected with them that can not be departed from.—JD, 16:369, February 1, 1874.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See also the following chapter, for detail.
