John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER X

THE DISPENSATIONS OF THE GOSPEL

THE PURPOSE AND THE PLAN

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPThere were certain great principles involved in the organization of this earth, and one was that there might be a place provided whereon the children of our Heavenly Father could live and propagate their species, and have bodies formed for the spirits to inhabit who were the children of God; for we are told that he is the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh. It was requisite, therefore, that an earth should be organized. It was requisite that man should be placed upon it. It was requisite that bodies should be prepared for those spirits to inhabit, in order that the purposes of God pertaining to his progeny might be accomplished, and that those spirits might be enabled, through the medium of the everlasting gospel, to return unto the presence of their Heavenly Father, as Gods among the Gods.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPGOOD AND EVIL IN THE WORLD'S HISTORY.—There have been different agencies at work throughout this world's history. Lucifer has been and is one of these agencies. There was a garden planted, and Adam and Eve were placed in it, and there they had communion with God. There was another being whose name was Lucifer, who is called in some places, "the son of the morning." Job speaks of a time at the creation of this earth when "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy." (Job 38:7.) As it was necessary that there should be a God, a man, an earth and a heaven, it was also necessary that there should be a devil, that man might be tried, and by trial be instructed. Indeed, in the economy of God, it was not only necessary that man, but the Savior also should be perfected by suffering. It is written: "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings." (Hebrews 2:10.) It was further necessary that there should be a Redeemer according to the plan which was devised from before the foundation of the world, and also that man might be a free agent to act and operate for himself, to receive the good and reject the evil, or reject the good and be governed by the evil. And there were certain rewards promised to those who would obey the laws of God, and keep his commandments, and certain punishments inflicted upon those who would not. Satan has made very great ravages among the human family in trying to accomplish his purposes; for he has been the enemy of God, and the enemy of man, and in ages past he wrought upon mankind, until after a certain period he had contrived to get the great majority of them on his side. Nevertheless, they had the priesthood among them in those early days as we have among us today. . . .

And in these latter days God has introduced these same principles with the same object in view. He has revealed the same principles of heaven, and as heretofore, in the interest of humanity.—JD, 25: 303-305, October 6 and 7, 1884.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LAW OF TESTING.—In the economy of God and the plan proposed by the Almighty, it was provided that man was to be placed under a law apparently simple in itself, yet the test of that law was fraught with the gravest consequences. The observance of that law would secure eternal life, and the penalty for the violation of that law was death. . . .

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPMen could not have been tested without a law. The penalty for the violation of that law was death. If the law had not been broken, man would have lived; but would man thus living have been capable of perpetuating his species, and of thus fulfilling the designs of God in preparing tabernacles for the spirits which had been created in the spirit world? And further, could they have had the need of a mediator, who was to act as a propitiation for the violation of this law, which it would appear from the circumstances was destined to be broken or could the eternal increase and perpetuity of man have been continued, and his high exaltation to the Godhead been accomplished, without the propitiatory atonement and sacrifice of the Son of God?—MA, 128-129.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPADAM AND EVE AND THE LAW.—Adam and Eve both considered that they had gained, instead of suffered loss, through their disobedience to that law; for they made the statement, that if it had not been for their transgression they never would "have known good and evil." And again, they would have been incapable of increase; and without that increase the designs of God in relation to the formation of the earth and man could not have been accomplished; for one great object of the creation of the world was the propagation of the human species, that bodies might be prepared for those spirits who already existed, and who, when they saw the earth formed, shouted for joy.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPSecondly. By pursuing the course they did, through the atonement, they would see God as they had done before; and furthermore, they would be capable of exaltation, which was made possible only through their fall, and the atonement of Jesus Christ; and also, they might have the comforting influence of the Spirit of God, and his guidance and direction here, as well as eternal lives and exaltations in the world to come.—MA, 130.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LAW AND THE ATONEMENT.—Was it known that man would fall? Yes. We are clearly told that it was understood that man should fall, and it was understood that the penalty of departing from the law would be death, death temporal. And there was a provision made for that. Man was not able to make that provision himself, and hence we are told that it needed the atonement of a God to accomplish this purpose; and the Son of God presented himself to carry out that object. And when he presented himself for this position he was accepted by his Father, just the same as any man who owes a debt, if he is not able to pay that obligation, and somebody steps forward and says, I will go security for him. If the persons to whom he is indebted are willing to take him as security, they will receive the security's note or obligation to meet the debt. So Jesus offered himself. Now, man could not have done that. Man could do all that he is capable of doing. But there was an eternal law of God violated and it needed an eternal, infinite sacrifice to atone therefor; and Jesus offered himself as that sacrifice to atone for the sins of the world; and hence it is written, he was the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PRINCIPLE OF SACRIFICE.—Now, to carry out this view of indebtedness a little further. We will suppose that a man has given his note to pay a certain amount in a certain given time, and in order to keep that note good, he agrees to pay interest on it. Now, when Jesus gave himself up as security for the sins of mankind, and God accepted of his security, what was done then? Why, sacrifices were introduced as types of the sacrifice of the Son of God, to show that the ancient servants of God recognized this principle which had existed in the heavens, and many of them understood the principle with great clearness. We find that Adam offered sacrifices, and when he did this, he said in answer to a question put to him by an holy angel, I do not know why I do it, only the Father has commanded it. And then the angel commenced to explain to him that this rite was a type of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father who should come in the meridian of time to offer himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world; and said he, "Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 5: 8.) When Adam and Eve ate of the forbidden fruit, the mercy of God was extended to them, and they perceived as Eve expressed it, that if there had been no fall, they would have had no posterity, and that they would have been deprived of many joys and blessings relating both to this life and the life to come. And so Adam and Eve rejoiced in their hearts that God had provided the plan, and although they were fallen, yet in this life, through the atonement, they would have joy, and by and by they would return to their Father, and there rejoice exceedingly in the abundant mercy of God, and in the redemption wrought out for them by the Son of God.

Plan of SalvationOppositiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE POWERS STRIVING WITH MEN.—We find that from that time Satan began to operate and to use his influence against God, seeking to introduce rebellion on the earth as he had done in heaven. He succeeded but too well in his operations. And when Cain and Abel offered up their sacrifice, Cain would not have done it if the devil had not urged him; but we are told that Cain loved Satan better than he loved God, and that he departed from the laws of God. Satan requested Cain to offer up a sacrifice, which he did, and the Lord rejected it, but he accepted his brother Abel's. Why did the Lord refuse one and accept the other? Because the Lord knew that Cain had departed from him, and that he was not sincere in his offering, as we sometimes are not sincere in our offerings and in our worship, and therefore he rejected it. Then Satan came again and whispered to Cain, "I could have told you all about it before; God is an unrighteous God; he gathers where he has not strewn; he reaps where he has not sown. He was unjust to me in heaven, and therefore I rebelled against him; and I advise you to do so also." And Cain listened to the advice of Satan, and as the devil was a murderer and a liar from the beginning, so he induced Cain to become the same, and he instigated him to kill his brother Abel. Here were the two powers represented in the two men, that of God in Abel, and that of Satan in Cain; and thus the warfare commenced, and the opposition was inaugurated, for we are told it was necessary there should be an opposition in all things. And furthermore, we are told that it became him of whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through suffering.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPNow, these things spread and grew. It was necessary and proper that there should be good and evil, light and darkness, sin and righteousness, one principle of right opposed to another of wrong, that man might have his free agency to receive the good and reject the evil, and by receiving the good (through the atonement of Jesus Christ and the principles of the gospel, which he introduced, and which were advocated long before he himself appeared on the earth), they might be saved and exalted to the eternal Godhead, and go back to their Father and God, while the disobedient would have to meet the consequences of their own acts.

Flood of NoahPlan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DESTRUCTION OF THE WICKED: THE OPERATION OF JUSTICE.—This warfare continued; and as men began to increase upon the earth, so wickedness increased, until it was decided that they should be destroyed, that they might be deprived of the privilege of perpetuating their species. Why? Let us go back to the time when Satan rebelled against the Almighty and drew away one-third of the hosts of heaven. We find that there were pure spirits that stood that test and who had given to them the promise of bodies on this earth. Let us suppose that you and I were there as spirits, awaiting the privilege of taking bodies, and that we could see the wickedness and corruption that was going on upon the earth, and that we could see prophets going about teaching the principles of righteousness and warning the people of judgments that should come, of the flood that should overwhelm them, and of the prisons prepared in which the ungodly should be cast. And we say, "Father, you see the people on the earth that they are wicked and depraved, fallen and corrupt! Yes. Is it right and just that we who have done no wrong should have to enter into such corrupt bodies and partake of the influences with which they are surrounded?" "No," says the Father, "it is not just, and I will cut them off; I will cause the floods to come upon them to destroy them, and I will send those wicked and disobedient spirits into prison," which he did.

Here was an act of justice. Some men who profess to be very wise, think God was unjust in thus destroying so many of his creatures. They know nothing about it because they do not comprehend the law of God and the purposes of God. It was an act of justice and righteousness according to the eternal justice that dwells in the bosom of the Father.—JD, 22: 300-302, August 28, 1881.

THE ROLE AND REALITY OF SATAN

Satana-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SATANIC EFFORT.—Satan has tried from the beginning of the world to overturn the works of God and in some instances he has apparently succeeded admirably. He was the cause at one time of all the people of the earth being destroyed except a little seed which was saved to propagate the human species. Probably the devil would laugh pretty heartily over that, thinking that he had accomplished his purposes. However, that was not the end. It is true that the judgments of God overtook them. It is true they were destroyed by a flood in the flesh, and were shut up in prison in the spirit. But it is also true that the same Savior who is our Savior, when he was put to death in the flesh, was quickened by the spirit, and that he visited those spirits in prison opening up the door of salvation to them that they might be redeemed and come forth and accomplish certain purposes which God had designed. And hence we find the Savior operating among all that body of people that the devil thought were destroyed, but through this visitation were placed within the reach of deliverance. But has Satan prevailed to a great extent? He has. Has darkness spread itself over the earth? Yes. Have people wandered away from God and forsaken him and his laws? They have. But then the Lord will be merciful towards them, they not having received the light that we have, hence he feels towards them as a father feels towards his children, being desirous to promote their happiness as far as it lies in his power; and if he could not save them while in the flesh, he understands certain eternal laws and principles whereby they may hereafter be redeemed. The judge of all the earth will do right. And while the priesthood behind the veil are operating and preaching to the spirits that are in prison that have been there from the different ages, he calls upon us to build temples that we may administer for the bodies of these people that have died without the gospel, that they may be judged according to men in the flesh and live after God in the spirit.—JD, 21: 96, April 13, 1879.

Satana-Taylor, JohnTPREBELLION AGAINST GOD.—Satan, we are told, rebelled against God; and he wanted to introduce something that was contrary to the law of God and to the counsel of God; as much as to say, "O, you do not know much about it; I will go and save all; wherefore give me thy glory." Some of our folks nowadays feel and say sometimes they have a portion of the priesthood, and they think they are almighty personages. They think they know better than anybody else, better than the bishop, better than the twelve, better than the presidency of the church. They are puffed up and filled with their vain imaginations. Say they, "Let me have my say; and then, I want you to give me your honor to help me to carry it out." Or, in other words, "I want to fight against the work of God and against the priesthood of God, and I want you to give me power and influence to accomplish it." They do not tell you that in so many words; but those are the facts.

Satana-Taylor, JohnTPNow, we are told that Satan rebelled against God. He could not rebel against a law if that law had not been given. He could not have violated a commandment if that commandment did not exist. And we are told that he sought to take away the agency of man, to make man a poor miserable serf; and then to take his own course in regard to the destiny of the human family. But God would not have it so. . . . He cast Lucifer out of heaven and with him one-third of the hosts of heaven, because of their departure from God and his laws, and because they sought to pervert the counsel of God and violate those principles which he had introduced for the salvation of the world which was to be, and upon which we now dwell.—JD, 22: 299-300, August 28, 1881.

Satana-Taylor, JohnTPIt was not for drunkenness, theft nor any other act of immorality that Satan was hurled from heaven, but for resisting authority, and trying to subvert the order of God.—TS, 5: 662, 1844.

Satana-Taylor, JohnTPLUCIFER'S INFLUENCE.—When man was placed upon the earth, Lucifer, or Satan, still manifested the same animus and spirit; and through his influence he operated upon Cain, for Cain listened to his wiles, and being controlled by him, he also rebelled against his father and his God. Thus the rebellion in the heavens was transmitted to a rebellion on the earth, and all who became subject to this influence placed themselves in a state of enmity and antagonism to God, and one of the first results exhibited was covetousness and murder, even the murder by Cain of his brother Abel.—MA, 68.

Satana-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DEVIL.—God has had a certain design to accomplish, associated with the human family; and I suppose that everything which has taken place has been just. I am not going to find fault with God or the devil. I suppose the devil is as necessary as any other being, or he would not have been.—JD, 6: 23, November 1, 1857.

WILL THE DEVIL BE SAVED?—Some people will ask if we think the devil will be saved. You must ask him, for I have nothing to say about it. I have gone far enough in my remarks. I believe God will accomplish all his purposes, and Satan will not have power to frustrate his designs in any way whatever; for if he did, he would be more powerful than God.—JD, 1: 159, June 12, 1853.

THE DISPENSATIONS OF THE GOSPEL

Dispensations of the Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPOUTLINE OF THE DISPENSATIONS.—We have had in the different ages various dispensations; for instance what may be called the Adamic dispensation, the dispensation of Noah, the dispensation of Abraham, the dispensation of Moses and of the prophets who were associated with that dispensation; the dispensation of Jesus Christ, when he came to take away the sins of the world by the sacrifice of himself, and in and through those various dispensations, certain principles, powers, privileges and priesthoods have been developed. But in the dispensation of the fulness of times a combination or a fulness, a completeness of all those dispensations was to be introduced among the human family. If there was anything pertaining to the Adamic, (or what we may term more particularly the Patriarchal) dispensation, it would be made manifest in the last days. If there was anything associated with Enoch and his city, and the gathering together of his people, or of the translation of his city, it would be manifested in the last days. If there was anything associated with the Melchizedek priesthood in all its forms, powers, privileges and blessings at any time or in any part of the earth, it would be restored in the last days. If there was anything connected with the Aaronic priesthood, that also would be developed in the last times. If there was anything associated with the apostleship and presidency that existed on this continent, it would be developed in the last times, for this is the dispensation of the fulness of times, embracing all other times, all principles, all powers, all manifestations, all priesthoods and the powers thereof that have existed in any age, in any part of the world. For, "those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times." (D. & C. 128: 18.)

ROLE OF THE FATHER AND THE SON.—And who was to originate this? It originated with God the Father, and it was sustained by Jesus, the Mediator of the new covenant, and it was sanctioned by all the prophets, patriarchs, apostles and men of God who held the priesthood in former ages. And finally, when all the preparations were made and everything was ready, or the time had fully come, the Father and the Son appeared to the youth Joseph Smith to introduce the great work of the latter days.—JD, 22: 298-299, August 28, 1881.

Dispensation of Adama-Taylor, JohnTPINSIGHTS INTO THE ADAMIC PERIOD.—. . . . The offering of sacrifices . . . . was a usual ceremony, and as it belonged to the priesthood and to the promised seed to offer sacrifices, it would be reasonable to suppose that Adam did . . . . officiate in that rite. Indeed, it was stated by the Prophet Joseph Smith, in our hearing, while standing on an elevated piece of ground or plateau near Adam-ondi-Ahman (Daviess County, Missouri), where there were a number of rocks piled together, that the valley before us was the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman; or in other words, the valley where God talked with Adam, and where he gathered his righteous posterity, as recorded in the above revelation, and that this pile of stones was an altar built by him when he offered up sacrifices, as we understand, on that occasion. If Adam then offered up sacrifices in the presence of these prominent men, he being the president of these high prists, he would officiate for them as well as for himself; while it is quite reasonable to believe that they assisted in the offerings made upon that altar.—MA, 69-70.

Dispensation of Enocha-Taylor, JohnTPTHE CITY OF ENOCH.—It would appear that the translated residents of Enoch's city are under the direction of Jesus, who is the Creator of worlds; and that he, holding the keys of the government of other worlds, could, in his administrations to them, select the translated people of Enoch's Zion, if he thought proper, to perform a mission to these various planets, and as death had not passed upon them, they could be prepared by him and made use of through the medium of the holy priesthood to act as ambassadors, teachers, or messengers to those worlds over which Jesus holds the authority.—MA, 76.

Each kingdom, or planet, and the inhabitants thereof, were blessed with the visits and presence of their Creator, in their several times and seasons.

Dispensation of Enocha-Taylor, JohnTPIt is recorded that to Jesus has been given all power in heaven and in earth, and . . . . he evidently had power which he used to commission the citizens of the Zion of Enoch to go to other worlds on missions.—MA, 77.

Dispensation of Noaha-Taylor, JohnTPNOAH AND THE ANTEDILUVIANS.—The flood came and destroyed the unrighteous, and their spirits were confined in prisons, as they are termed. And I think I hear the devil laughing, as some of them did when we were driven away from our homes, thinking that Mormonism had gone to perdition. But we live yet; and they were mistaken; and so was the devil. For although they were destroyed in the body, yet when Jesus came and was put to death in the flesh, yet quickened by the spirit, he went and preached to the spirits in prison that were disobedient in the days of Noah. And then the devil put on a long face and said, I imagined I had got rid of these fellows; but they are going to have a chance yet that I did not think of. And after the flood we are told that the curse that had been pronounced upon Cain was continued through Ham's wife, as he had married a wife of that seed. And why did it pass through the flood? Because it was necessary that the devil should have a representation upon the earth as well as God; and that man should be a free agent to act for himself; and that all men might have the opportunity of receiving or rejecting the truth and be governed by it or not, according to their wishes, and abide the result; and that those who would be able to maintain correct principles under all circumstances might be able to associate with the Gods in the eternal worlds. It is the same eternal program. God knew it, and Adam knew it.

Dispensation of Noaha-Taylor, JohnTPNow, with regard to Noah and his day. God made arrangements beforehand and told Methuselah that when the people should be destroyed, that a remnant of his seed should occupy the earth and stand foremost upon it. And Methuselah was so anxious to have it done that he ordained Noah to the priesthood when he was ten years of age. Noah then stood in his day as the representative of God; and after him Abraham was selected to take the lead in relation to these matters pertaining to man's salvation.—JD, 22: 303-304, August 28, 1881.

Dispensation of Noaha-Taylor, JohnTPNOAH RECOGNIZED THE ATONEMENT.—The first act after the destruction of the world by a flood was a recognition of the great expiatory principle of the atonement, which was to be made by the Only Begotten Son of God, as revealed by the angel to Adam. And as God recognized Adam's and Abel's offerings, so he also recognized that of Noah; and as a result, the patriarch obtained great promises, in which the people of all ages, then to come, would be interested.—MA, 82.

Dispensation of Abrahama-Taylor, JohnTPABRAHAM.—We were informed that Abraham was a man that followed after righteousness, and that he sought to obtain more righteousness; that he searched the records of his fathers as they had come down to him, and traced them back until the days of Adam, and even before the world was. Before the world was? Yes. God, we are told, talked with him, and told him of certain noble spirits who stood in his presence in the beginning, whom he had determined to make his rulers; "and thou, Abraham," said he, "art one of them." He was not only a prince on the earth in his time to accomplish the things given him to do. And he found by tracing his genealogy that he had a right to the priesthood, and when he ascertained that, he prayed to the Lord, and demanded an ordination. And he was ordained (as we are told by Joseph Smith) under the hands of Melchizedek to the holy priesthood. (Doctrine & Covenants 84:14.) And afterwards, we are informed, he came in possession of the Urim and Thummin by which he could obtain a knowledge of God and of his laws, and all things pertaining to the earth and the heavens. And God revealed himself unto him; and he told him that in blessing, he would bless him; and in multiplying, he would multiply him, and that in him and in his seed all the families of the earth should be blessed. And has this been so? Yes; from that time forth, by that lineage the blessings of heaven have flowed to the children of men.

Dispensation of Abrahama-Taylor, JohnTPABRAHAM'S POSTERITY.—Let us examine a few things. Who were Isaac and Jacob? Heirs of the same promises as himself. Who was Joseph, who was sold into Egypt? A descendant of Abraham. Who was Moses, who delivered the people from Egyptian bondage? A descendant of Abraham. Who was Aaron, who was associated with the Aaronic priesthood, and who presided over it? A descendant of Abraham. Who were the prophets that we read of in this Bible? They were descendants of Abraham. Who was Jesus, who as the Son of God, taketh away the sins of the world? A descendant of Abraham according to the flesh. Who were the twelve apostles, commissioned to preach the gospel to all nations? Descendants of Abraham. And who were the twelve apostles that lived upon this continent? Descendants of Abraham. Who was Joseph Smith, to whom the gospel was revealed in these last days? A descendant of Abraham. And it had been predicted of him that his name should be Joseph, and that his father's name should also be Joseph, and that he should be a descendant of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt. And who are the present twelve? Just the same kind of people. And who are we gathering to Zion? A remnant of that seed, with a considerable mixture of grizzly, gray, and all kinds. But Jesus said, My sheep hear my voice, and they know me, and a stranger they will not follow, because they know not the voice of a stranger. And why do not the millions of the inhabitants of the earth embrace the gospel? Because they are not sheep; that is all. And if the goats kick up and cut a few antics, you need not be astonished. It is the nature of goats, is it not?—JD, 22:304-305, August 28, 1881.

Dispensation of Abrahama-Taylor, JohnTPABRAHAM AND THE PRIESTHOOD.—In examining the records, tracing them back through the flood, clear away back unto Adam's day, Abraham . . . . found he had a right to the priesthood. I need not stop to tell you what that is, you Latter-day Saints. You understand it is the rule and government of God, whether in the heavens or on the earth, and when we talk of the kingdom of God, we talk of something that pertains to rule, government, authority, and dominion; and that priesthood is the ruling principle that exists in the heavens or on the earth, associated with the affairs of God.. . . .

Dispensation of Abrahama-Taylor, JohnTPIt was this priesthood, that would be the means of introducing him into the presence of God, that Abraham found that he was a rightful inheritor of.. . . . And what then? The next that we read of is that he had the Urim and Thummim, and thus he sought unto God for himself, and while searching unto him, God revealed himself unto Abraham and said: "And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed." (Genesis 12:3.) There is something very remarkable about this when we reflect upon it, and when we examine the position that he occupied, and that his seed occupied, we can see the fulfilment of these things. Afterwards, the Lord revealed himself to him from time to time, communicated his will to him, and he was made acquainted with the designs of the Almighty. The Lord showed unto him the order of the creation of this earth on which we stand, and revealed unto him some of the greatest and most sublime truths that ever were made known to man. He got these through revelation from God and through the medium of the gospel of the Son of God.—JD, 21:159-160, December 7, 1879.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LAW OF MOSES AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICES OF THE NEPHITES.—First, the law of Moses, with all its rites, ordinances and sacrifices, was strictly observed by the faithful Nephites from the time of their arrival on the promised land, until it was fulfilled in Christ, and by his command ceased to be observed.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPSecond, that when the Nephites brought any of the Lamanites to the knowledge and worship of the true God, they taught them to observe this law.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPThird, that those who apostatized from the Nephites, as a general thing, ceased to observe this law.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPFourth, that the true import of the law of Moses, and of its ceremonies and sacrifices, as typical of the atonement yet to be made by our Lord and Savior, was thoroughly taught by the priesthood among that people, and very generally understood by them.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPFifth, that associated with the observance of this law, there were continued admonitions given that salvation was in Christ and not in the law, which was but the shadow and type of that of which he was the prototype and reality.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPSixth, that temples were erected of the same pattern as that of Solomon at Jerusalem, evidently for the reason that they were to be used for the same purposes.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPSeventh, that the gospel was preached in connection with the law, and churches were established and organized according to the gospel requirements, and that the higher priesthood, although not fully organized in all its parts, ministered to the Nephites as well as the lesser.

Dispensation of the NephitesLaw of Mosesa-Taylor, JohnTPEighth, it appears indubitable from the two records, the Bible and the Book of Mormon, that the intent and true meaning of the law of Moses, of its sacrifices, etc., were far better understood and comprehended by the Nephites than by the Jews. But in this connection it must not be forgotten that a great many most plain and precious things, as the Book of Mormon states, have been taken from the Bible, through the ignorance of uninspired translators or the design and cunning of wicked men.—MA, 109-110.

THE CHRISTIAN DISPENSATION. [^1]—Jesus came here according to the foreordained plan and purpose of God, pertaining to the human family, as the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. He came to offer himself a sacrifice, the just for the unjust; to meet the requirements of a broken law which the human family were incapable of meeting.. . . .—JD, 22:140, July 3, 1881.

Dispensation of the Fullness of Timesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DISPENSATION OF THE FULNESS OF TIMES.—We are living in peculiar times. We are operating in an eventful era. We are associated with a peculiar dispensation, and we have a labor to perform which in many respects differs from that of all other ages or times. The dispensation that we are connected with is called in scripture the dispensation of the fulness of times in which, it is recorded, God will gather together all things in one, whether they be things on the earth or things in the heavens. There are ideas associated with this dispensation that are in many respects distinct and dissimilar from those that have been enunciated and proclaimed in former ages and dispensations; and inasmuch as the present dispensation is to embrace everything that has been connected with all past dispensations, all the prominent features as well as the minor ones that characterized the church and kingdom of God in former days, that were essentially necessary to its growth and development, must reappear in connection with the work of God in this our day. If the manifestations and developments of other dispensations have been made known to us, we have had revealed to us doctrines, theories, organizations, and systems that have existed among the whole of them, because it is emphatically the dispensation of the fulness of times. If they had anything that was peculiarly characteristic in the days of the ancient patriarchs, we have the same revealed to us. If they had anything prominent and important in the dispensation of Noah, we have it; and if Noah was called upon to preach the gospel to the world in his day, before its destruction, so are we.

Dispensation of the Fullness of Timesa-Taylor, JohnTPIf in the Abrahamic or Mosaic dispensations, God revealed important principles, we have a clear knowledge of those things made known to us, and the reasons, the whys and wherefores, pertaining to them. If they had anything among the ancient prophets and men of God, we have the same principles developed. If in the days of Jesus they had manifestations, revelations, doctrines, or organizations, those things are made known to us. Or if the people upon this continent, to whom God revealed his will—either the people that came from the Tower of Babel, or those who came from Jerusalem during the reign of Zedekiah—if anything was revealed to them, we have had it revealed unto us.—JD, 23:28-29, March 5, 1882.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE FINAL SALVATION OF MAN.—It would appear that, when everything shall have been accomplished pertaining or relating to the sacrifice and atonement of the Son of God, in the time of the restitution of all things the sons of Levi will offer up an acceptable offering unto the Lord. What this offering will be does not distinctly appear. There are many things associated with the final salvation of man, and the working out and accomplishment of the purposes of God in relation to the human family, which lie yet in the future: the peculiar position which the children will occupy, also the position of the heathen who have died without law, and of those who have been translated, and who it would appear have a specified labor to perform associated with their mission to the terrestrial worlds; the letting loose of Satan after the thousand years, and many other things which it is not permitted for us at the present time to comprehend in full. These will all be revealed in the due time of the Lord.—MA, 119-120.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See also the following chapter, for detail.
