John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XI

THE MEDIATION AND ATONEMENT OF CHRIST

FOUNDATIONS OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH

THE MEMORIAL OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER.—It would seem that the coming of the Savior to the world, his suffering, death, resurrection, and ascension to the position he occupies in the eternal world before his Heavenly Father has a great deal to do with our interests and happiness; and hence this continued memorial that we partake of every Sabbath. This sacrament is the fulfilment of the request of Jesus Christ to his disciples. "For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come." (1 Corinthians 11:26.) Faith in this ordinance would necessarily imply that we have faith in Jesus Christ, that he is the Only Begotten of the Father, that he came from the heavens to the earth to accomplish a certain purpose which God had designed—even to secure the salvation and exaltation of the human family. All this has a great deal to do with our welfare and happiness here and hereafter. The death of Jesus Christ would not have taken place had it not been necessary. That this ceremony should be instituted to keep that circumstance before the minds of his people, bespeaks its importance as embracing certain unexplained purposes and mysterious designs of God. They are explained in part, but they are not fully comprehended why it was necessary that Jesus Christ should leave the heavens, his Father's abode and presence, and come upon the earth to offer himself up a sacrifice; that he should, according to the scripture saying, Take away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Why this should be, why it was necessary that his blood should be shed, is an apparent mystery. It is true that we are told that without the shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. But why this? Why should such a law exist? It is left with us as a matter of faith, that it was necessary he should come and, being necessary, he shrank not from the task, but came to take away sin by offering up himself.—JD, 10:114, February 22, 1863.

Jesus Christ As Saviora-Taylor, JohnTPJesus Christ is spoken of in the scriptures as "The Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1:29.) What sins of the world did he take away? We are told that it is the sin which Adam committed. We do not know much about Adam nor what he did. But we know that this sacrifice took place and that we are in the position we now occupy, and we are ready to believe from the testimonies we have received in relation to this sacrifice that it was the will of God he should thus offer himself up and that he came here for that purpose. He was "the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." (John 1:14.) He suffered his body to be broken and his blood to be spilled, doing not his own will but the will of him that sent him, not to accomplish his own purpose particularly but the purpose of him that sent him, and hence we are told to observe this rite (the sacrament) until he comes again.

THE SECOND ADVENT.—There is something also to be looked to in the future. The Son of God has again to figure in the grand drama of the world. He has been here once and in his humiliation his judgment was taken away. It would seem that his ancient disciples upon this continent or upon the continent of Asia actually looked forward to the time when Jesus would come again and hence he is frequently spoken of in the scriptures having a reference to his second advent, that to those who look for him he would appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Again, Isaiah, in speaking of him, says:

All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgressions of my people was he stricken.. . . . (Isaiah 53:6-8.)

Again, the same prophet spoke of him as coming in power, glory and dominion, and as having his wrath and indignation kindled against the nations of the earth.

Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.

Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?

I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. (Isaiah 63:1-4.)

Jesus Christ, Second Coming ofa-Taylor, JohnTPJesus accomplished what he was sent to do, and feeling satisfied of this, when he was about to leave the earth he said he had finished the work his Father gave him to do. But there was another work, another event that was to transpire in the latter days, when he should not be led as a lamb to the slaughter or be like a sheep before the shearers; when he would not act in that state of humiliation and quiescence, but when he will go forth as a man of war and tread down the people in his anger and trample them in his fury, when blood should be on his garments and the day of vengeance in his heart, when he would rule the nations with an iron rod and break them to pieces like a potter's vessel.

a-Taylor, JohnPlan of SalvationTPREASONS FOR CHRISTIAN MEMORIAL CAME BY REVELATION.—There must be some reason why he was allowed to suffer and to endure; why it was necessary that he should give up his life a sacrifice for the sins of the world, and there must be a reason why he should come forth in judgment to execute vengeance, indignation, and wrath upon the ungodly. In these reasons we and all the world are intimately concerned; there is something of great importance in all this to us. The whys and wherefores of these great events are pregnant with importance to us all. When he comes again, he comes to take vengeance on the ungodly and to bring deliverance unto his Saints. "For the day of vengeance," it is written, "is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come." (Isaiah 63:4.) It behooves us to be made well aware which class we belong to, that if we are not already among the redeemed, we may immediately join that society, that when the Son of God shall come the second time with all the holy angels with him, arrayed in power and great glory to take vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the gospel, or when he shall come in flaming fire, we shall be among that number who shall be ready to meet him with gladness in our hearts and hail him as our great deliverer and friend. In relation to all events that have transpired and to the designs of God connected with the earth and all grades of men upon it, and to the events that transpired before we came into this existence, if there is anything we cannot clearly comprehend, we can leave it for the future to reveal. True, it is the privilege of a certain class of people to have the Holy Ghost that Jesus said should bring things past, present, and to come to their remembrance and lead them into all truth. We can have a portion of that Spirit by which we can draw back the veil of eternity and comprehend the designs of God that have been hidden up for generations past and gone. We can go back to our former existence and contemplate the designs of God in the formation of this earth and all things that pertain to it; unravel its destiny and the designs of God in relation to our past, present, and future existence.. . . .

KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST TO COME BY REVELATION.—No matter what ability and talent a man may possess, all must come under this rule if they wish to know the Father and the Son. If knowledge of them is not obtained through revelation it cannot be obtained at all.. . . . This principle alone can give the knowledge of God which is life eternal and the only power by which a man can stand unscathed in the trying hour. Those who possess this principle are one with Jesus Christ and one with the Father, as says Jesus, "That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they may be one in us: . . . . that they may be one, even as we are one." (John 17:21-22.) They are baptized with the same baptism, they are baptized with the same Spirit; they are in possession of the same knowledge; and they knew God, whom to know is life everlasting. When built upon this rock the storms may blow, the rains may descend and beat upon the house, but it cannot fall because it is founded upon a rock. These are some of my reflections in relation to this ordinance of the sacrament of the Lord's supper.—JD, 10:115-117, February 22, 1863.

God, Purposes ofa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE WORK OF GOD.—The work of God and the glory of God is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, as it is written: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 1:39.) The creation of man and the multiplication of man was one thing; the immortality and eternal life of man and his exaltation is another thing; and in the organization of the world, and in the calculations of the Almighty pertaining to this immortality and eternal life, it would seem that it was decreed that the Only Begotten Son was provided for the purpose of accomplishing this object; and hence Christ was the Lamb slain, according to the eternal purposes of God, before the foundation of the world.—MA, 88-89.

THE DIFFUSION OF THE CHRISTIAN IDEA

The ideas of a general atonement and redemption, entertained by ancient heathen nations, were derived originally from the teachings of earlier servants of God.—MA, 190.

Christianitya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TESTIMONY OF MYTH AND TRADITION.—We gather that men who have written in relation to the various gods or virgins who have, each in her turn, conceived and borne a god or a messiah, would argue that the accounts of the birth, ministry, death, resurrection, etc., of the Savior, were simply a backing up and resuscitating of some of the old legends of heathen mythology which had been in existence in ages long antecedent to his advent, and that, therefore, the account of the life and works of the Redeemer was simply an act of priestcraft, to introduce another messiah and another establishment of religion in the interests of the projectors, and that Christianity was simply a copy of the old paganisms that had exhibited themselves in the forms above referred to. Whereas the reverse is clearly demonstrated. . . . The fact is clearly proved, instead of Christianity deriving its existence and facts from the ideas and practices of heathen mythologists, and from the various false systems that had been introduced by apostacy, unrecognized pretensions and fraud, that those very systems themselves were obtained from the true priesthood and founded on its teachings from the earliest ages to the advent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; that those holy principles were taught to Adam, and by him to his posterity; that Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and the various prophets had all borne testimony of this grand and important event, wherein the interest and happiness of the whole world were concerned, pertaining to time and to eternity. The gospel is a system, great, grand, and comprehensive, commencing in eternity, extending through all time, and then reaching into the eternities to come. And the ideas with regard to these disjointed materials, that are gathered together from the turbid waters of heathen mythology, are so much claptrap and nonsense, calculated only to deceive the unwary, superstitious, and ignorant, and are as far below those great and eternal principles of heavenly truth which permeate through all time, penetrate into the heavens, and are interwoven with all the interests, happiness, and exaltation of man, as the earth is below the heavens above. The object of placing this statement before our brethren, is to prove and demonstrate . . . . that these truths should grow together unto the confounding of false doctrines, and laying down of contentions.—MA, 204-205.

MODERN REVELATION AND KNOWLEDGE OF THE ATONEMENT.—Modern revelation has restored another most important key to unlock the mystery of the almost universal knowledge of the Redeemer and of the plan of the atonement. It is found in the statement that Jesus, after his resurrection, visited at least the inhabitants of two distinct portions of the earth who could not have been reached through the ministry of his Jewish apostles. These two peoples were the Nephites on this land, and the ten tribes in their distant northern home. The knowledge that the Mexicans and other aboriginal races of America had, at the time of their discovery by the Spaniards, of the life of the Savior was so exact that the Catholics suggested two theories (both incorrect, however) to solve the mystery. One was that the devil had invented an imitation gospel to delude the Indians; the other, that the Apostle Thomas had visited America and taught its people the plan of salvation.—MA, 200-201.

THE POSITION OF CHRIST

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPHOLDS ALL POWER BY VIRTUE OF THE ATONEMENT.—From the facts in the case and the testimony presented in the scriptures it becomes evident that through the great atonement, the expiratory sacrifice of the Son of God, it is made possible that man can be redeemed, restored, resurrected, and exalted to the elevated position designed for him in the creation as a Son of God.. . . .

Jesus Christ As Saviora-Taylor, JohnTPThe Savior thus becomes master of the situation—the debt is paid, the redemption made, the covenant fulfilled, justice satisfied, the will of God done, and all power is now given into the hands of the Son of God—the power of the resurrection, the power of the redemption, the power of salvation, the power to enact laws for the carrying out and accomplishment of this design. Hence life and immortality are brought to light, the gospel is introduced, and he becomes the author of eternal life and exaltation. He is the Redeemer, the Resurrector, the Savior of man and the world; and he has appointed the law of the gospel as the medium which must be complied with in this world or the next, as he complied with his Father's law; hence "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:16.)

Jesus Christ As Saviora-Taylor, JohnTPThe plan, the arrangement, the agreement, the covenant was made, entered into, and accepted before the foundation of the world; it was prefigured by sacrifices, and was carried out and consummated on the cross.

Jesus Christ As Mediatora-Taylor, JohnTPHence being the mediator between God and man, he becomes by right the dictator and director on earth and in heaven for the living and for the dead, for the past, the present, and the future, pertaining to man as associated with this earth or the heavens, in time or eternity, the captain of our salvation, the apostle and high priest of our profession, the Lord and giver of life.—MA, 170, 171.

DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN THE POSITION OF CHRIST AND HIS FOLLOWERS.—It may here be asked, what difference is there between the Son of God, as the Son of God, the Redeemer, and those who believe in him and partake of the blessings of the gospel?

One thing, as we read, is that the Father gave him power to have life in himself: "For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself." (John 5:26.) And further, he had power, when all mankind had lost their life, to restore life to them again; and hence he is the resurrection and the life, which power no other man possesses.

Another distinction is, that having this life in himself, he had power, as he said, to lay down his life and to take it up again, which power was also given him by the Father. This is also a power which no other being associated with this earth possesses.

Again, he is the brightness of his Father's glory and the express image of his person. Also, he doeth what he seeth the Father do, while we only do that which we are permitted and empowered to do by him.

He is the elect, the chosen, and one of the presidency in the heavens, and in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, which could not be said of us in any of these particulars.

Another thing is, that all power is given to him in heaven and upon earth, which no earthly being could say.

It is also stated that Lucifer was before Adam; so was Jesus. And Adam, as well as all other believers, was commanded to do all that he did in the name of the Son, and to call upon God in his name for ever more; which honor was not applicable to any earthly being.

Jesus Christ As Son of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPHe, in the nearness of his relationship to the Father, seems to occupy a position that no other person occupies. He is spoken of as his well beloved Son, as the only begotten of the Father—does not this mean the only begotten after the flesh? If he was the firstborn and obedient to the laws of his Father, did he not inherit the position by right to be the representative of God, the Savior and Redeemer of the world? And was it not his peculiar right and privilege as the firstborn, the legitimate heir of God, the Eternal Father, to step forth, accomplish, and carry out the designs of his Heavenly Father pertaining to the redemption, salvation, and exaltation of man? And being himself without sin (which no other mortal was), he took the position of Savior and Redeemer, which by right belonged to him as the firstborn. And does it not seem that in having a body specially prepared, and being the offspring of God, both in body and spirit, he stood preeminently in the position of the Son of God, or in the place of God, and was God, and was thus the fit and only personage capable of making an infinite atonement?—MA, 135-137.

THE ACT OF THE ATONEMENT

Jesus Christ, Prophecies Abouta-Taylor, JohnTPOF CENTRAL IMPORTANCE.—In reality, this act of the atonement was the fulfilment of the sacrifices, of the prophesying, of the Passover, and of all the leading, prominent acts of the patriarchs and prophets relating thereto; and having performed this, the past and the future both centered in him. Did these worthies offer sacrifices? They prefigured his appearing and atonement. Did they prophecy? It was of him, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. Did they keep the Passover? He himself was the great expiatory offering. Were the people called upon afterwards to commemorate this event? They did it in remembrance of him, as a great memorial among all of his disciples in all nations, throughout all time; of the sacrifice of his broken body and spilt blood; the antitype of the sacrificial lamb slain at the time of the Passover; of him; as being the Mediator, the Messiah, the Christ, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End: the Son of the living God.—MA, 126.

Sacrifice, Animala-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SHEDDING OF BLOOD.—Again, there is another phase of this subject that must not be forgotten. From the commencement of the offering of sacrifices the inferior creature had to suffer for the superior. Although it had taken no part in the act of disobedience, yet was its blood shed and its life sacrificed, thus prefiguring the atonement of the Son of God, which should eventually take place. The creature indeed was made subject to vanity not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope. Millions of such offerings were made, and hecatombs of these expiatory sacrifices were offered in view of the great event that would be consummated when Jesus should offer up himself. With man this was simply the obedience to a command and a given law, and with him might be considered simply a pecuniary sacrifice. With the animals it was a sacrifice of life.

Sacrifice, Animala-Taylor, JohnTPBut what is the reason for all this suffering and bloodshed, and sacrifice? We are told that without shedding of blood is no remission of sins. This is beyond our comprehension. Jesus had to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself, the just for the unjust, but, previous to this grand sacrifice, these animals had to have their blood shed as types, until the great antitype should offer up himself once for all. And as he in his own person bore the sins of all, and atoned for them by the sacrifice of himself, so there came upon him the weight and agony of ages and generations, the indescribable agony consequent upon this great sacrificial atonement wherein he bore the sins of the world, and suffered in his own person the consequences of an eternal law of God broken by man. Hence his profound grief, his indescribable anguish, his overpowering torture, all experienced in the submission to the eternal fiat of Jehovah and the requirements of an inexorable law.—MA, 149-150.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SUFFERING OF CHRIST.—The suffering of the Son of God was not simply the suffering of personal death; for in assuming the position that he did in making an atonement for the sins of the world he bore the weight, the responsibility, and the burden of the sins of all men, which, to us, is incomprehensible.—MA, 150.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd again, not only did his agony affect the mind and body of Jesus, causing him to sweat great drops of blood, but by reason of some principle, to us unfathomable, his suffering affected universal nature.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPWorld upon world, eternal things, Hang on thy anguish, King of kings.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPWhen he gave up the ghost, the solid rocks were riven; the foundations of the earth trembled; earthquakes shook the continents and rent the isles of the sea; a deep darkness overspread the sky; the mighty waters overflowed their accustomed bounds; huge mountains sank and valleys rose; the handiwork of feeble men was overthrown; their cities were engulfed or consumed by the vivid shafts of lightning; and all material things were convulsed with the throes of seeming dissolution. . . .

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPThus, such was the torturing pressure of this intense, this indescribable agony, that it burst forth abroad beyond the confines of his body, convulsed all nature, and spread throughout all space.—MA, 151-152.

Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures,

And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:

And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

And ye are witnesses of these things. (Luke 24:45-48.)

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPWHY THIS SUFFERING?—One great and very striking statement is here made by the Lord himself, to the effect that it behooved Christ to suffer, and the question at once presents itself before us, why did it behoove him? Or why was it necessary that he should suffer? For it would seem from his language, through his sufferings, death, atonement, and resurrection, "that repentance and remission of sins" could be preached among all nations, and that consequently if he had not atoned for the sins of the world, repentance and remission of sins could not have been preached to the nations. A very important principle is here enunciated, one in which the interests of the whole human family throughout all the world are involved. That principle is the offering up of the Son of God as a sacrifice, an atonement, and a propitiation for our sins.—MA, 8-9.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPGiving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light:

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPWho hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son:

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPIn whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins:

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPWho is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:. . . .

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPFor it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell;

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd, having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. (Colossians 1:12-15, 18-20.)

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPFrom the above passage (Colossians 1:12-15, 18-20) we learn that our redemption is obtained through the blood of Jesus; that he is in the image of God; again, that he is "the firstborn of every creature;" also that he is "the firstborn from the dead"; and furthermore, that he stands preeminent as the representative of God in the interests of humanity pertaining to this world, or the world which is to come, and that he is the head of the church, the grand medium through which all blessings flow to the human family.—MA, 31.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE POWER AND EFFECTS OF THE ATONEMENT.—If it were not for the atonement of Jesus Christ, the sacrifice he made, all the human family would have to lie in the grave throughout eternity without any hope. But God having provided, through the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, the medium whereby we can be restored to the bosom and presence of the Father, to participate with him among the Gods in the eternal worlds—he having provided for that, has also provided for the resurrection. He proclaimed himself the resurrection and the life. Said he, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live." (John 11:25.) By and by the tombs will be opened and the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and they shall come forth, they who have done good to the resurrection of the just, and they who have done evil to the resurrection of the unjust.—JD, 22:356, January 29, 1882.

Atonementa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RESURRECTION.—The great prerequisites having been fulfilled, it now becomes our duty to enquire what next had to be done to consummate the great object obtainable through the fulfilment of this law, or what was accomplished by the atonement.

First, the resurrection. The penalty of the broken law in Adam's day was death; and death is passed upon all. The word of the Lord was, ". . . . in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." (Genesis 2:17.) The atonement made by Jesus Christ brought about the resurrection from the dead, and restored life. And hence Jesus said: "I am the resurrection, and the life; he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live;" (John 11:25.) and Jesus himself became the first fruits of those who slept.

The next question that arises is, how far does this principle extend and to whom is it applicable? It extends to all the human family; to all men of every nation.—MA, 177-178.

Jesus Christ As Saviora-Taylor, JohnTPPROGRESS TOWARD GODHOOD MADE POSSIBLE.—The next question for us to examine is, how, and in what manner are men benefited by the atonement and by the resurrection? In this, that the atonement, having restored man to his former position before the Lord, has placed him in a position and made it possible for him to obtain that exaltation and glory which it would have been impossible for him to have received without it; even to become a son of God by adoption; and being a son, then an heir of God, and a joint heir with Jesus Christ; and that, as Christ overcame, he has made it possible, and has placed it within the power of believers in him also to overcome; and as he is authorized to inherit his Father's glory which he had with him before the world was, with his resurrected body, so through the adoption may we overcome and sit down with him upon his throne, as he has overcome and has sat down upon his Father's throne.—MA, 179.

FOR THE BENEFIT OF ALL THE WORLD.—That the world might be benefited through the redemption brought about by Jesus Christ, he called and ordained twelve apostles, and commanded them to go forth into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.—MA, 180.

Jesus Christ As Saviora-Taylor, JohnTPThus it would seem that the redeemed of the Lord from all nations and peoples are indebted to the Lord Jesus Christ, through his atonement, for the position that they will occupy in the state of exaltation here referred to. And if they are exalted to be kings and priests unto God, it is through the ordinances which he has appointed for the accomplishment of this object, as the wise will understand.—MA, 35.

Fall of Adam and Evea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ATONEMENT AND LITTLE CHILDREN.—Without Adam's transgression those children could not have existed. Through the atonement they are placed in a state of salvation without any act of their own. These would embrace, according to the opinion of statisticians, more than one-half of the human family who can attribute their salvation only to the mediation and atonement of the Savior. Thus, as stated elsewhere, in some mysterious, incomprehensible way, Jesus assumed the responsibility which naturally would have devolved upon Adam; but which could only be accomplished through the mediation of himself, and by taking upon himself their sorrows, assuming their responsibilities, and bearing their transgressions or sins.—MA, 148.

THE ATONEMENT AND THE CHRISTIAN'S LIFE

Jesus Christ, Testimony ofa-Taylor, JohnTPALL THINGS TO BE DONE IN THE NAME OF THE SON.—To Adam it was said, "Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest, in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 5:8.) The same principle continued both on the Asiatic and on this continent, and was recognized by all men of God holding the Melchizedek priesthood, and will be recognized throughout all time until the final consummation of all things, when every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, to the glory of God, the Father.—MA, 33.

Jesus Christ, Testimony ofa-Taylor, JohnTPThese scriptures evidently show that the testimony of Jesus was the very principle, essence, and power of the spirit of prophecy whereby the ancient prophets were inspired.—MA, 12.

Jesus Christ, Condescension ofa-Taylor, JohnTPMEDIATION AND THE SCHOOL OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE.—It is necessary, then, that we pass through the school of suffering, trial, affliction, and privation, to know ourselves, to know others, and to know our God. Therefore it was necessary, when the Savior was upon the earth, that he should be tempted in all points, like unto us, and "be touched with the feeling of our infirmities," to comprehend the weaknesses and strength, the perfections and imperfections of poor fallen human nature. And having accomplished the thing he came into the world to do; having had to grapple with the hypocrisy, corruption, weakness, and imbecility of man; having met with temptation and trial in all its various forms, and overcome; he has become a "faithful high priest" to intercede for us in the everlasting kingdom of his Father. He knows how to estimate and put a proper value upon human nature, for he, having been placed in the same position as we are, knows how to bear with our weaknesses and infirmities, and can fully comprehend the depth, power, and strength of the afflictions and trials that men have to cope with in this world. And thus understandingly and by experience, he can bear with them as a father and an elder brother.—JD, 1:148, June 12, 1853.
