John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XII

THE GOSPEL RESTORED

THE RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL AND KEYS OF THE PRIESTHOOD

Joseph Smith, Foreordination ofa-Taylor, JohnTPJOSEPH SMITH.—We all look upon Joseph Smith as being a prophet of God. God called him to occupy the position that he did. How long ago? Thousands of years ago before this world was formed. The prophets prophesied about his coming, that a man should arise whose name should be Joseph, and that his father's name should be Joseph, and also that he should be a descendant of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt. This prophecy you will find recorded in the Book of Mormon. He had very great and precious promises made to him by the Lord. I have heard him say on certain occasions, "You do not know who I am." The world did not like him. The world did not like either the Savior or the prophets; they have never liked revealed truth; and it is as much as a bargain for the Saints even to bear the truth.

REFERRED TO THE SON.—In the commencement of the work, the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith. And when they appeared to him, the Father, pointing to the Son, said, "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:17.) As much as to say, "I have not come to teach and instruct you; but I refer you to my Only Begotten, who is the Mediator of the New Covenant, the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world; I refer you to him as your Redeemer, your High Priest and Teacher. Hear him."

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPPRINCIPLES AND PRIESTHOOD.—What next? Then came men who had held the priesthood before. Who were they? Moroni, an ancient prophet who had lived upon this continent and who had charge of the records from which the Book of Mormon was translated—a fitting person to introduce the same principles again. Afterwards it was necessary that the priesthood should be conferred; and John the Baptist came and laid his hands upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, saying, "Upon you, my fellow servants, I lay my hands, and confer upon you the Aaronic Priesthood, which shall never be taken from the earth again until the sons of Levi offer an acceptable offering before me." [^1] That was the lesser priesthood—the Aaronic—appertaining to the bishopric. And why was John the Baptist chosen to confer this priesthood? Because he was the last that held this holy priesthood upon the earth. And why did he come? Because the priesthood administers in time and eternity; both the Aaronic and Melchizedek. And he, holding the keys of that priesthood, came and conferred it upon Joseph Smith. When he had conferred this priesthood upon Joseph Smith, other things had to be conferred; that is, what is called the Melchizedek priesthood. But you understand but, very little about that; as the Indian would say, about so much (meaning the point of the finger.) If you did, you would think and act differently from what you do. Who held the keys of that priesthood? Peter, James, and John, who were three presiding apostles. Did they confer this priesthood upon Joseph Smith? Yes. . . .

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPKEYS OF THE GATHERING.—What next? They built a temple by and by, as we are doing now, in Kirtland, Ohio. And in that temple the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to them again, the account of which you may read for yourselves in the Doctrine and Covenants. Jesus appeared there, and Moses appeared there, and Moses conferred upon Joseph the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four quarters of the earth, and also the ten tribes. And you are here because that priesthood was conferred upon the elders who came to you with the gospel; and when they laid their hands upon your heads, among other things you received the Holy Ghost and the spirit of the gathering. But you did not know what it was that was working in you, like yeast sometimes under certain conditions, producing an influence causing you to come to Zion. Yet you could not help it. If you had wanted to help it, you could not while you were living your religion and were governed thereby. For that spirit brought that influence and power along with it, and it carries it with it wherever it goes. And as men received the Holy Ghost so they received the spirit of the gathering, which was conferred by Moses upon Joseph Smith, and by him upon others, and which created that anxiety you all felt to gather to Zion.—JD, 26:106-7, October 20, 1881.

The people that are independent, who think they can get along without religion or without God, will find that in time or eternity they will have to come to the priesthood of God.—JD, 26:109, October 20, 1881.

THE PURPOSE OF THE RESTORATION

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPTO GATHER AN UPRIGHT PEOPLE.—God has introduced the system of things that we have been speaking of for the purpose of gathering together a people who would listen to his voice, and they are the only people on the earth today who will listen thereto, and then it is as much as the bargain for many of us to do it. God expects to have a people who will be men of clean hands and pure hearts, who withhold their hands from the receiving of bribes, who will swear to their own hurt and change not, who will be men of truth and integrity, of honor and virtue, and who will pursue a course that will be approved by the Gods in the eternal worlds, and by all honorable and upright men that ever did live or that now live, and having taken upon us the profession of sainthood, he expects us to be Saints, not in name, not in theory, but in reality.—JD, 23:26, December 11, 1881.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPTO BRING "LIFE AND IMMORTALITY TO LIGHT."—God has restored the gospel for the purpose of bringing life and immortality to light; and without the knowledge of the gospel there is no knowledge of life and immortality; for men cannot comprehend these principles only as they are made known unto them, and they cannot be revealed only through the medium of the gospel, and through obedience to the laws of salvation associated therewith. . . . Hence when the heavens were opened and the Father and Son appeared and revealed unto Joseph the principles of the gospel, and when the holy priesthood was restored and the Church and kingdom of God established upon the earth, there were the greatest blessings bestowed upon this generation which it was possible for man to receive. If they could comprehend it, it was the greatest blessing which God could confer upon humanity. Then he sent his servants forth to proclaim this gospel to the nations of the earth, and he is now sending them forth to preach the gospel of the Son of God, to deliver the testimony that he has given unto us. And, speaking for the priesthood, have we done it? We have, and we have done it in the name of Israel's God; and he has been with us and I know it.—JD, 22:218, June 27, 1881.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPTO MAKE MEN FREE.—God has committed to us the gospel and the high priesthood, which is not intended, as some suppose, to bring men into bondage or to tyrannize over the consciences of men, but to make all men free as God is free; that they may drink of the streams "whereof shall make glad the city of God"; that they may be elevated and not debased; that they may be purified and not corrupted; that they may learn the laws of life and walk in them, and not walk in the ways of corruption and go down to death.—JD, 22:292, October 9, 1881.

TO INTRODUCE THE RULE AND GOVERNMENT OF GOD ON EARTH.—Now, it is the rule of God which is desired to be introduced upon the earth, and this is the reason why the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith, why John the Baptist conferred the Aaronic priesthood, why Peter, James, and John conferred the Melchizedek priesthood, why Moses came to bestow the dispensation of the gathering, and why other manifestations have been given unto us as a people, his elect, whom he has chosen from among the nations. This is an honorable position for us to occupy. We are called to fill various duties that God requires at our hands. And our position is not a nominal thing; it is a reality. . . .

We are here to do the will of God, to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish the Zion of God.—JD, 23:323, 324, November 23, 1882.

JOSEPH SMITH AS A RESTORER [^2]

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPJOSEPH'S OWN STORY.—Joseph Smith came forward telling us that an angel had administered to him and had revealed unto him the principles of the gospel as they existed in former days, and that God was going to set his hand to work in these last days to accomplish his purposes and build up his kingdom, to introduce correct principles, to overturn error, evil, and corruption, and to establish his Church and kingdom upon the earth. I have heard him talk about these things myself. I have heard him tell over and over again, to myself and others, the circumstances pertaining to these visions and the various ministrations of angels, and the development of the purposes of God towards the human family. And what does he do? Bring us something different? Yes, in many respects, but not different in regard to our connection with God. Different as regards the age in which we live and the circumstances with which he was surrounded, but not different as it regards bringing men to a knowledge of God. He taught precisely the same principles and doctrine and ordinances that were taught by Jesus and his disciples in their day.—JD, 14:365, March 17, 1872.

JOSEPH'S TESTIMONY TO JOHN TAYLOR.—Now, we will come to other events, of later date; events with which we are associated—I refer now to the time that Joseph Smith came among men. What was his position and how was he situated? I can tell you what he told me about it. He said that he was very ignorant of the ways, designs, and purposes of God, and knew nothing about them; he was a youth unacquainted with religious matters or the systems and theories of the day. He went to the Lord, having read James' statement, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and up- braideth not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) He believed that statement and went to the Lord and asked him, and the Lord revealed himself to him together with his Son Jesus, and pointing to the latter, said: "This is My beloved Son, Hear Him!" He then asked in regard to the various religions with which he was surrounded. He inquired which of them was right, for he wanted to know the right way and to walk in it. He was told that none of them was right, that they had all departed from the right way, that they had forsaken God the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that could hold no water.

Afterwards the Angel Moroni came to him and revealed to him the Book of Mormon, with the history of which you are generally familiar, and also with the statements that I am now making pertaining to these things.—JD, 21:161, December 7, 1879.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPNEED FOR THE RESTORATION.—Now, what condition was the world in before the gospel we now preach was introduced? Many of you older men here . . . . lived when the gospel was not upon the earth. I did, and many others did. Where could we find anything resembling that which was taught by Jesus? Nowhere on the face of the wide earth. Apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, etc., were nowhere to be found. Do I know this? I do know it, for I lived in the world at that time! I knew what was going on. I was mixed up with their teachers and was well acquainted with the different societies and organizations. Did they have the gospel as laid down in the scriptures? No. I remember reading with very great interest the remarks of one of the Wesleys—I do not remember now whether it was Charles or John—in some poetry of his:

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPFrom chosen Abraham's seed the new apostles choose O'er isles and continents to spread the soul reviving news.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPHe knew very well that they did not have apostles, nor those officers that used to exist in the Church, and he felt it keenly, as did many others. I, myself, mixed up with a society of gentlemen before I heard the fulness of the gospel, who were searching the scriptures to find out the true way, for we did not find any men who professed to be inspired. We were told that all inspiration had ceased, and yet there were men professing to be called of God to preach the gospel. Now, that is a very singular thing. How can a man be called of God, if God has ceased to speak? If a man is called of God, he must be called either by the voice or Spirit of God, or by somebody who is authorized of God, and knows something about his ways. If he does not receive his calling in this way, how is he going to get it? There is one other way—that is, if God has had a regular priesthood upon the earth, unbroken, uncorrupted, and uncontaminated, then it might come down from one to another through the different ages. The Church of Rome professes to trace its authority down from the days of the apostles until the present. But unfortunately there is a scripture that rather interferes with them and with others, namely: "Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son." (2 John 9.) I will tell you what Joseph Smith told me personally. Said he: "You are going out to preach the gospel, and if your can find a people anywhere as you wander through the world . . . . having the doctrines of Christ, you need not baptize them.". . . . But I never found anywhere, wherever I went, any persons holding the doctrines of Christ as taught by him, with apostles and prophets and inspired men under the influence of the Holy Ghost, and with an organization similar to that which was introuduced by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Therefore I had to call upon all men everywhere to repent, for I could not find the kind of people Joseph said I need not baptize.—JD, 25:261-263, August 17, 1884.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Paraphrased from D. & C. 13
[^2] See also Chapter 35, "About Joseph Smith."
