John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XIV

THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD

MELCHIZEDEK AND THE MELCHIZEDEK ORDER OF PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE KEY TO REVELATION.—The Melchizedek priesthood holds the mysteries of the revelations of God. Wherever that priesthood exists, there also exists a knowledge of the laws of God; and wherever the gospel has existed, there has always been revelation; and where there has been no revelation, there never has been the true gospel.—JD, 13:231, May 6, 1870.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PATRIARCHAL ORDER.—We find that after the days of Noah an order was introduced called the patriarchal order, in which every man managed his own family affairs. And prominent men among them were kings and priests unto God, and officiated in what is known among us as the priesthood of the Son of God, or the priesthood after the order of Melchizedek. Man began again to multiply on the face of the earth, and the heads of families became their kings and priests, that is, the fathers of their own people. And they were more or less under the influence and guidance of the Almighty. We read, for instance, in our revelations pertaining to these matters, of a man called Melchizedek, who was a great high priest. We are told that there were a great many high priests in his day, and before him and after him; and these men had communication with God, and were taught of him in relation to their general proceedings, and acknowledged the hand of God in all things with which they were associated.—JD, 17:207, October 7, 1874.

MELCHIZEDEK.—There was Melchizedek, for instance, who was called the king of Salem and the prince of peace, of whom Paul makes some curious remarks, among which was that Christ was a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek. If he was, then of course, Melchizedek was a priest after the order of Christ. And as Christ introduced the gospel, so Melchizedek had the gospel, and had and held and administered in the same priesthood that Jesus did. And we read, too, according to some men's ideas, a very singular thing concerning him, that he was "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually." (Hebrews 7:3.) He must be, indeed a very singular man, to be without father and without mother and without descent, and yet that he should be a priest forever. Well, how is it? You generally understand it; but I will inform those who do not that the Apostle Paul referred to the priesthood that Melchizedek held. . . . The Melchizedek priesthood . . . . had nothing to do particularly with either father or mother, it being without descent. Therefore, people holding it were not altogether dependent upon their father or mother or descent for this authority; but on that priesthood, administering in time and in eternity. And this is what Paul referred to by way of contradistinction to the Aaronic priesthood which then existed.—JD, 21:244, March 21, 1880.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPJOHN, PETER, NEPHI, MORONI, HELD THIS PRIESTHOOD.—This priesthood was held by John the revelator, by Peter, by Moroni, one of the prophets of God on this continent. Nephi, another of the servants of God on this continent, had the gospel with its keys and powers revealed unto him.—JD, 18:139, October 10, 1875.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPPRIESTHOOD FUNCTION: ANCIENT AND MODERN.—Those who have held the Melchizedek priesthood, many of whom had the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and much of the spirit of prophecy, even where there was no organization of priesthood or of the kingdom of God upon the earth, stood as isolated characters in the world, and maintained their integrity before God. But we have a kingdom, the pattern of which has been revealed from the great God, given for our own happiness and salvation. And with the laying of the foundation of his kingdom on the earth there is a promise given unto us that the powers of darkness and all the power of hell combined shall not prevail against this kingdom. In this respect we differ from all others.—JD, 8:98, June 17, 1860.

MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD CALLINGS:

THE PRESIDENCY OF THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPJURISDICTION.—The presidency of the high priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPNow, will you show me an office, or calling, or duty, or responsibility, temporal or spiritual, that does not come under this statement? From this I think this presidency have something to do with the bishops and temporal things as well as with the Melchizedek priesthood and spiritual things, and with all things pertaining to the interests and welfare of Zion. That is the way I understand these matters.—JD, 21:364, August 8, 1880.

Council of the TwelveFirst Presidencya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TWELVE AND FIRST PRESIDENCY.—It is gratifying to me to be able to state that now all the various organizations of the church are provided for. For some time the twelve have been operating in the capacity of a First Presidency, and it was very proper that they should have acted in that capacity. . . . This was the course adopted at the time when the Prophet Joseph Smith left us. The twelve then stepped forward into the position of the First Presidency, and operated for about three years in that capacity. And when President Young left us, it was thought proper that the same course should be pursued. The twelve, I believe, have in this respect magnified their calling and taken a course that is approved by the Lord, and I think also by the brethren, judging from the vote given here today.

Had it not been our duty to have the church organized fully and completely in all its departments, I should have much preferred to have continued with the brethren of the twelve, speaking of it merely as a matter of personal feeling. But there are questions arising in regard to these matters that are not for us to say how they shall be, or what course shall be pursued. When God has given us an order and has appointed an organization in his church, with the various quorums of priesthood as presented to us by revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, I do not think that either the First Presidency, the twelve, the high priests, the seventies, the bishops, or anybody else, have a right to change or alter that plan which the Lord has introduced and established. And as you heard Brother Pratt state this morning, one duty devolving upon the twelve is to see that the churches are organized correctly. And I think they are now thus organized throughout the land of Zion. The churches generally are organized with presidents of stakes and their counselors, with high councils, with bishops and their counselors, and with the lesser priesthood, according to the order that is given us.

Then we have the high priests, seventies, and elders occupying their places according to their priesthood, position, and standing in the church. And the First Presidency seemed to be the only quorum that was deficient. And it is impossible for men acquainted with the order of the holy priesthood to ignore this quorum, as it is one of the principal councils of the church. While the twelve stand as a bulwark ready to protect, defend, and maintain, to step forward and carry out the order of God's kingdom in times of necessity, such as above referred to, yet when everything is adjusted and matters assume their normal condition, then it is proper that the quorum of the First Presidency, as well as all other quorums, should occupy the place assigned it by the Almighty.

These were the suggestions of the Spirit of the Lord to me. I expressed my feelings to the twelve, who coincided with me, and indeed, several of them had had the same feelings as those with which I was actuated. It is not with us, or ought not to be, a matter of place, position, or honor, although it is a great honor to be a servant of God. It is a great honor to hold the priesthood of God. But while it is an honor to be God's servants, holding his priesthood, it is not honorable for any man or any set of men to seek for position in the holy priesthood. Jesus said, Ye have not called me, but I have called you. And as I said before, had I consulted my own personal feelings, I would have said, things are going on very pleasantly, smoothly, and agreeably; and I have a number of good associates whom I respect and esteem, as my brethren, and I rejoice in their counsels. Let things remain as they are. But it is not for me to say, it is not for you to say what we would individually prefer, but it is for us holding the holy priesthood to see that all the organizations of that priesthood are preserved intact and that everything in the church and kingdom of God is organized according to the plan which he has revealed. Therefore we have taken the course which you have been called upon to sanction by your votes today.—JD, 22:38-40, October 10, 1880.

First Presidencya-Taylor, JohnTPPRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES IN ORGANIZING THE FIRST PRESIDENCY.—And now let me refer with pride to my brethren of the twelve here, which I do by saying that while they as a quorum held the right by the vote of the people to act in the capacity of the First Presidency, yet when they found, as Brother Pratt expressed it this morning, that they had performed their work, they were willing to withdraw from that presidency, and put it in the position that God had directed, and fall back into the place that they have always held, as the twelve apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I say it is with pride that I refer to this action and the feeling that prompted it. I very much question whether you could find the same personal exhibition of disinterested motives and self-abnegation, and the like readiness to renounce place and position in deference to principle, among the same number of men in any other place. They saw the necessity of this action; a motion was made in that council; and the vote was unanimously adopted that the First Presidency be reorganized, and afterwards the brethren to fill this quorum were selected.

First Presidencya-Taylor, JohnTPThe next step was to present the matter to the church, and it was laid before the priesthood at a meeting, when there were present a representation of all the important authorities of the church in the different stakes in Zion. After having done that, lest some difficulty might exist somewhere, it was thought proper to pursue the course taken today—that each organization of the priesthood, embracing all the quorums, should be seated in a quorum capacity by themselves, and separately have the opportunity of voting freely and fully without control of any kind, and of expressing their feelings, and, finally, that the whole congregation should have the same opportunity. This is emphatically the voice of God, and the voice of the people; and this is the order that the Lord has instituted in Zion, as it was in former times among Israel. God gave his commandments; they were delivered by his Prophet to the people and submitted to them, and all Israel said, Amen. You have all done this by your votes, which vote, so far as we can learn, has been without a dissenting voice, either among the separate quorums or in the vote of the combined quorums and people.

First Presidencya-Taylor, JohnTPNow, continue to be united in everything as you are in this thing, and God will stand by you from this time henceforth and forever. And any man who opposes principles of this kind is an enemy of God, an enemy of the church and kingdom of God upon the earth, an enemy to the people of God, and an enemy to the freedom and rights of man. The Lord has selected a priesthood that he might among all Israel make known his mind and will through them, and that they might be his representatives upon the earth. And while he does this he does not wish men to be coerced or forced to do things contrary to their will. But where the Spirit of God is, there are union, harmony, and liberty, and where it is not there are strife, confusion, and bondage. Let us then seek to be one, honor our God, honor our religion, and keep the commandments of God, and seek to know his will, and then to do it.—JD, 22:40-41, October 10, 1880.

First Presidencya-Taylor, JohnTPDISORGANIZATION OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY.—Supposing that I, as president of the church, were to resign, or anything occur to me. What would be the result? My counselors would drop into their former place in the quorum of the twelve, and whoever succeeded me would have the selection of his own counselors with the approval of the general conference. He might and he might not retain as his counselors those whom I have chosen. It is proper that we should understand these things in order that the right kind of feeling may exist, and no improper reflection be cast upon any person.—JD, 24:33, January 21, 1883.

THE APOSTLESHIP

Council of the Twelvea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TWELVE AS PROPHETS, SEERS AND REVELATORS.—You voted yesterday that the twelve should be prophets, seers, and revelators. This may seem strange to some who do not comprehend these principles, but not to those who do. The same vote was proposed by Joseph Smith and voted for in the temple in Kirtland, so long ago as that; consequently there is nothing new in this. And, as you heard this morning, this is embraced in the apostleship, which has been given by the Almighty, and which embraces all the keys, powers, and authorities ever conferred upon man. I do not wish to enter into the details of this matter; you will find them in the Doctrine and Covenants, very clearly portrayed, and I refer you there for the evidences on these points.—JD, 19:124, October 7, 1877.

Council of the Twelvea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE APOSTOLIC CALLING.—The twelve are set apart as special witnesses to the nations of the earth, and are empowered and authorized to open up the gospel, to introduce it, and to turn the keys thereof to all people, and the word to the apostles—and to others associated with them—to the elders of Israel generally is, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; and he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:15-16.) This is just as it was in former ages.—JD, 24:288-289, October 7, 1883.

Council of the Twelvea-Taylor, JohnTPNow then, what are we called to do? What, for instance, is the duty of an apostle? We used to understand it to be our duty to go to the ends of the earth and preach the gospel; and I may say we have traveled hundreds of thousands of miles to accomplish that object. But some of us are getting white-headed. . . . And it is so with many of the twelve; they have got past that some time ago. But the twelve went out, and were always ready to go out, and are today if required. And I will say of my brethren who are around me, I do not know of a better set of men in existence, nor could I tell where they can be found. I will bear this testimony concerning my brethren of the twelve. They are ready to do what God requires of them at any time.—JD, 20:45, August 4, 1878.

Seventiesa-Taylor, JohnTPSEVENTIES TO ASSIST THE TWELVE.—To assist the twelve in the labors in which they are engaged, are the seventies, who are called as special witnesses to the nations of the earth. What for? Who organized these seventies, and these twelve, and who dictated their duties and responsibilities? The Lord. Why did he do it? Because, as in former ages, he felt interested in the welfare of the human family, and it is not and never was the will of God, that mankind should perish, but that they all might be brought to a knowledge of the truth, and to an obedience thereof, if they saw proper, and if not, when the twelve, the seventies, the elders, and the various officers who have been ordained and set apart to preach the gospel, have fulfilled their missions to the nations of the earth; they have done just what the Lord has required at their hands, and no more. I further wish to state to the twelve and to the seventies, and to the elders, that they are not responsible for the reception or the rejection by the world of that word which God has given to them to communicate. It is proper for them to use all necessary diligence and fidelity, and plainly and intelligently, and with prayer and faith, to go forth as messengers to the nations, as the legates of the skies, clothed upon with authority from the God of heaven, even the authority of the holy priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, which is after the order of Melchizedek, which is after the power of an endless life. He has endowed them, as you have heard, with authority to call upon men to repent of their sins, and to be baptized in the name of Jesus for the remission of sins, and then he has told them to lay hands on the people thus believing, and thus being baptized, and to confer upon them the gift of the Holy Ghost, and when they have performed their labors, and fulfilled their duties, their garments are free from the blood of this generation, and the people are then left in the hands of God, their Heavenly Father, for the people, as before stated, will be held responsible to God for their rejection of the gospel, and not to us.—JD, 24:289, October 7, 1883.

Council of the TwelveSeventiesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TWELVE AND THE SEVENTIES.—It devolves upon the twelve apostles and the seventies to see that the gospel is carried, and to carry it themselves, to all the nations of the earth—first unto the gentiles and then to the Jews. This is their especial calling, and they should keep it constantly before them.—JH, March 31, 1886, p. 11; Salt Lake Herald, March 31, 1886.

Seventiesa-Taylor, JohnTPDUTIES OF SEVENTIES.—Now let us go on to the seventies. There are large numbers of them, and there has been a great desire to push men into quorums, without regard sometimes to their worth and fitness. Now what is their duty? Why, to go abroad and preach the gospel to all nations. How many do this? Very few. Well, say some, we go when called upon. That is all true. The seventies have, as a rule, been on hand to go forth and preach. But I am speaking more particularly of the nature of the priesthood they hold and the duties which devolve upon them. They should be always ready, kind of minute men under the immediate direction of the twelve, to go forth as the messengers of life and salvation to all nations on the earth. . . .

THE SEVENTY AND THE HIGH PRIEST.—We talk about and wonder who the biggest man is—the seventy or the high priest? Let us seek to know who of us is living nearer to God and acting in such a manner as to call down upon us the power of God, and angels will administer to us. We cannot tell which member of the body is most useful to us, which we can best afford to spare—the leg or the arm, the eye or the nose. All are necessary to render the body perfect.—JD, 19:141, October 14, 1877.

PATRIARCHS [^1]

Patriarchsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE OFFICE OF PATRIARCH TO THE CHURCH.—In regard to the office of patriarch, William Smith has been ordained patriarch to the church; but he is not the only patriarch, but would act as a senior patriarch, holding the keys of that priesthood; and his labors would be more especially connected with the church in Zion; and he would take the lead, priority, or presidency of the patriarchal office in this place; and in this capacity, if there should be a council of patriarchs, he as a matter of course would preside by right of office. But every legally ordained patriarch has the same right to bless that he has, and their administrations are just as legal as his are. Every ordinance that is administered by a legal administrator, is legal. A priest has just as much right to baptize a person for the remission of sins as an elder, a high priest, or an apostle; but he cannot lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, because he does not possess the authority to do it; but and an elder does, and an elder's administration would be just as legal as the administration of any of the beforementioned persons, or as that of the president of the church.

Patriarchsa-Taylor, JohnTPRIGHTS OF FATHERS TO ACT AS PATRIARCHS.—Every father, after he has received his patriarchal blessing, is a patriarch to his own family, and has the right to confer patriarchal blessings upon his family; which blessings will be just as legal as those conferred by any patriarch of the church: in fact it is his right; and a patriarch in blessing his children, can only bless as his mouthpiece.

Patriarchsa-Taylor, JohnTPA patriarch to the church is appointed to bless those who are orphans, or have no father in the Church to bless them. Not as stated inadvertently, in the editorial above alluded to "to bless all, and such as have not a father to do it," for this he could not do, where the church is so extensive; the burden would be too onerous; hence other patriarchs have been ordained, both in this country, and in England, to assist the patriarch to the church, and hence the provision made in the Doctrine and Covenants: "It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church, to ordain evangelical ministers, [patriarchs] as they shall be designated unto them by revelation." (D. & C. 107:39.) And should any of those patriarchs remove here, they have just as much right to administer in their patriarchal office under the direction of the patriarch to the church, as an elder or priest would, who should remove from one of the branches to this place, under the direction of the presidency. Brother William Smith, however, "holds the keys of the patriarchal blessings upon the heads of all my people," and would of necessity have the seniority, and of course the priority and presidency; yet it would be left for those who wished to be administered to, to make their choice; just as much as it would for a candidate for baptism to choose who should administer to him.

Patriarchsa-Taylor, JohnTPThe above is the true doctrine of the church in regard to this matter, and we speak of it for the information of the brethren at large, lest those who may have received their patriarchal blessings from other sources, or from their fathers, might be tempted to think they were of no avail, and also, to set at rest this agitated question.

Patriarch to the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PATRIARCH DOES NOT PRESIDE OVER THE PRIESTHOOD OR THE CHURCH.—We now proceed to answer some of the remarks which we have heard:

Patriarch to the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPWe have been asked, "Does not patriarch over the whole church" place Brother William Smith at the head of the whole church as president?

Patriarch to the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPAnswer. No. Brother William is not patriarch over the whole church, but patriarch to the church, and as such he was ordained. The expression "over the whole church," is a mistake made by W. W. Phelps. He is patriarch to the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The twelve are commanded to ordain evangelical ministers in all large branches of the church abroad, and who has charge over them? The patriarch? No. Those who ordained them. And to whom is committed the power and authority to regulate all the affairs of the churches abroad? And who has the charge of the whole priesthood here? Answer. The presidency of the church, and not the patriarch.

Patriarch to the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPBut does not the Doctrine and Covenants say:

Patriarch to the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTP"First, I give unto you Hyrum Smith to be a patriarch unto you to hold the sealing blessings of my church, even the Holy Spirit of promise, whereby ye are sealed up unto the day of redemption, that ye may not fall notwithstanding the hour of temptation that may come upon you." [^2] (D. & C. 124:124.)

Yes, but that is in regard to seniority not in regard to authority in priesthood, for it immediately follows, "I give unto you my servant Joseph to be a presiding elder over all my church, to be a translator, a revelator, a seer, and a prophet." [^3] (D. & C. 124:125.) In the Doctrine and Covenants we read "the duty of President of the office of the high priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses." (D. & C. 107:91.) And from this it is evident that the president of the church, not the patriarch, is appointed by God to preside.

Patriarch to the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPBut does not the patriarch stand in the same relationship to the church as Adam did to his family, and as Abraham and Jacob did to theirs? No. This is another mistake which is made by our junior, and one that may be very easily made inadvertently. Adam was the natural father of his posterity, who were his family and over whom he presided as patriarch, prophet, priest, and king. Both Abraham and Jacob stood in the same relationship to their families. But not so with Father Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, or William Smith. They were not the natural fathers of the church, and could not stand in the same capacity as Adam, Abraham, or Jacob; but inasmuch as there had been none to bless for generations past, according to the ancient order, they were ordained and set apart for the purpose of conferring patriarchal blessings, to hold the keys of this priesthood, and unlock the door, that had long been closed upon the human family: that blessings might again be conferred according to the ancient order, and those who were orphans, or had no father to bless them, might receive it through a patriarch who should act as proxy for their father, and that fathers might again be enabled to act as patriarchs to their families, and bless their children. For like all other ordinances in the church, this had been neglected and must needs be restored. But Father Joseph Smith was not president of the church, nor the president's counsel. Nor was Hyrum Smith either president or president's counsel. He was once counsel, but when he was ordained patriarch he gave it up and another was ordained in his stead, [William Law] and in all probability if Brother William magnifies his calling, he will not be able henceforth to attend to the duties of an apostle; but officiate in the same capacity in regard to blessing as his brother Hyrum did—not as president of the church, but as patriarch to it.

Patriarch to the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPThe president of the church presides over all patriarchs, presidents, and councils of the church; and this presidency does not depend so much upon genealogy as upon calling, order, and seniority. James and Joses were the brothers of Jesus, and John was his beloved disciple, yet Peter held the keys and presided over all the church. Brother William was in the quorum of the twelve yet he was not president of the twelve during his brother's lifetime, nor since; and if being ordained a patriarch would make him president of the church, it would have made Father Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith presidents over the church instead of Joseph.

Brother William understands the matter, and were it not for the folly of some men there would be no necessity for these remarks.

A patriarch is what is termed in scripture an evangelist, and Brother William acts in that capacity, and God placed in the church "first apostles,' not first evangelists, but the president stands in the same relationship to the church as Moses did to the children of Israel, according to the revelations.

Again, who ordained Father Smith to the office of patriarch? His son Joseph, and Father Smith ordained Hyrum, and the twelve (of whom Brother William is one) ordained him. Who are appointed to ordain evangelical ministers? It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church, to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation. (D. & C. 107:39.) Can a stream rise higher than its fountain? No.. . . .

We think that everyone will see that Brother William Smith's patriarchal office will not exalt him higher in regard to priesthood than he was before, as one of the twelve; but will rather change the nature of his office.

But will it take any thing from his priesthood? it may be asked. No. You cannot take any man's priesthood away without transgression. Brother William will still retain the same power, priesthood, and authority that he did before, and yet will hold in connection with that the patriarchal office and the keys of that priesthood, and as one of the twelve must maintain his dignity as one of the presidents of the church, [^4] of whom President Brigham Young is the president and head, and presides over all patriarchs, presidents, and councils of the church.—TS, 6:921-922, June 1, 1845.

HIGH PRIESTS

High Priestsa-Taylor, JohnTPQUORUM OF HIGH PRIESTS IN EACH STAKE.—We have a quorum of high priests in each stake, and it is for them to exercise themselves and their influence individually and as a quorum in the interests of righteousness and virtue and the maintenence of the principles connected with the kingdom of God. They have no particular position or calling; they are ordained to the high priesthood, and it is for their president to meet with them and have them humble themselves before God, and seek for the guidance of his holy Spirit and the light of revelation. "Which ordinance" we are told in the Doctrine and Covenants, "is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall be appointed standing presidents or servants over different stakes scattered abroad;

High Priestsa-Taylor, JohnTP"And they may travel also if they choose, but rather be ordained for standing presidents; this is the office of their calling, saith the Lord your God." (D. & C. 124:134, 135) That they may comprehend the principles of law, of government, of justice, and equity, and watch over, not only themselves, but their families and friends, associations and neighborhoods, and act as fathers in Israel, looking after the welfare of the people and exerting a salutary influence over the saints of the Most High God.—JD, 23:219, August 6, 1882.

High Priestsa-Taylor, JohnTPHIGH PRIESTS TO INSTRUCT EACH OTHER IN CHURCH GOVERNMENT.—The high priests occupy a position in their priesthood whereby they are enabled to perform the various duties that they may be called upon to fill. You will find in reading the Doctrine and Covenants the following statement regarding the quorum of high priests: "Which ordinance is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall be appointed standing presidents or servants over different stakes scattered abroad." (D. & C. 124:134.) That is, it the duty of high priests to preside; the principle of presidency is connected with them. . . . What is the duty of that quorum? To meet together to instruct one another in regard to the principles of the government of the church and kingdom of God; that its members may understand the various organizations of the church, the laws, and the principles of government thereof, and the various duties they may be called upon to fill. It may be to occupy the position of a president of a stake. It may be a counselor to the president. It may be a high counselor. It may be a bishop or his counselor. There are divers positions that high priests are called to occupy, as deaths and other changes often transpire, and new stakes and wards are being organized. But the changes do not affect the status of the individual at all. . . . Here is Brother Shurtliff called from acting as bishop to be the president of a stake. Have we a right to do that? Yes. Who is the bishop? A high priest. His place being vacated, that position needs supplying, and who shall supply it? These things are left for the counsel and the deliberation of the proper authorities to operate in for the welfare of the church as far as they know how, and according to the best judgment they possess; and then they should be presented to the people for them to vote upon. But in dropping a president it drops his counselors. They were selected to be his counselors, not somebody else's; and when some one else takes his place, then he should have his own counselors. These are the views entertained on this subject, and they are correct and very proper. The order of the church is for us to fulfil and magnify the calling to which we are called, and do it with an eye single to the glory of God, each man fulfilling the various duties and responsibilities of his office.—JD, 24:33-34, January 21, 1883.

The high priests are a sort of normal school to prepare the people to preside. They have hardly fulfilled this. Perhaps if they had been more active, and become acquainted with principles for which they are organized, we should not have to ordain so many high priests from the elders' quorum to make presidents of stakes, bishops, high councils, etc. But as it was, we had to pick up the material where we could, and I hope we will have better material next time.—JD, 19:147, October 21, 1877.

SEVENTIES AND HIGH PRIESTS

A HIGH PRIEST MAY TRAVEL AND A SEVENTY PRESIDE!—There has been, sometimes, a little feeling manifested between the seventies and high priests, as to who has the greatest authority, and some of the seventies have manifested a desire to be united with the high priests' quorum, thinking thereby to obtain a greater degree of priesthood. This is folly, for, as I stated before, it is not the office but the magnifying of an office that makes a man honorable. But in relation to their offices, they are called to move in other spheres, and fulfil other callings, rather than possessing different power and authority. Brother Carter thought that some of the seventies were out of their place, because they were appointed to preside over conferences, whereas they have as much right to preside, when legally appointed, as an high priest or an apostle. The seventies have the high priesthood, and many of them have received ordinances in the temple, qualifying them to build up the kingdom of God, if every other officer were dead or killed, and so have the high priests. So far, then, as authority is concerned, they both have authority, but it is the especial business of the seventies to preach to all the world, introduce and spread the gospel; while it is the duty of the high priests more especially to preside. Yet a high priest is not precluded from traveling and preaching, and introducing the gospel (nor a seventy from presiding.)

Priesthood Callingsa-Taylor, JohnTPAN ANALOGY.—You have your officers in the army and navy; they may be equal in authority, but act in different callings. The military officer, if at sea, while the navy is engaged in a fight with an enemy, would assist with his men to vanquish the enemy; while on the other hand the naval officer would assist the military in storming a garrison and taking possession of territory. They are both engaged in the same cause, and are fighting for the interests of the same kingdom or government; and so it is with the high priests and seventies—they are both empowered to do good, and although their callings differ in some respects, they can both act legally in whatsoever situation they are placed by authority. And though it is the especial duty of the seventies to preach, yet some of the high priests are much more competent to do it than they; and although it is the especial duty of an high priest to preside, yet a wise man who fulfils and magnifies his calling among the seventies is much more competent to preside than a foolish or ignorant high priest, who does not magnify his calling.—MS, 9:324-325, November 1, 1847.

Priesthood Callingsa-Taylor, JohnTPWe have a great number of seventies, and the question has often arisen, Which is the bigger, they or the high priests? I say I don't think it makes much difference as to which is the greater or smaller. I think the body of Christ was not one member but composed of many parts. Now which member of your body would you like to be without? An arm or a leg? No, you want both. So does the church. But which is the most useful? If you can tell me which of those members is most useful to you, I will let you know which is the more useful to the church, the high priests or seventies. We ought to magnify the priesthood we hold, and be satisfied with the positions we hold.—JD, 19:147, October 21, 1877.

Seventiesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE QUORUMS OF SEVENTIES.—Again, we have our organization of seventies, and they ought to see that there is no iniquity among their quorums—no drunkenness, no whoredom, no fraud, nothing that is wrong or improper, unholy or impure; but that they are men of God chosen and set apart as messengers to the nations of the earth, and wherever they reside it is their duty, and it is the duty of all men in Israel, to see that there is no iniquity, to use their influence on the side of right, and to put down wrong.—JD, 23:219, August 6, 1882.

THE ELDERS

Elder, Melchizedek Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPSTANDING MINISTERS.—Then again, the same thing will apply to elders. The elder is ordained in many instances to act as a standing minister among the people, to preach to them, to instruct them as we are doing and as your missionaries are doing and as others are doing, preaching among the people at home, and frequently going abroad as circumstances may require.—JD, 23:219, August 6, 1882.

Elder, Melchizedek Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPA HERALD OF SALVATION.—Talking of the elder, why he is a herald of salvation. He is a legate of the skies. He is commissioned of the great Jehovah to bear a message to the nations of the earth, and God has promised to sustain him. He has always sustained his faithful elders, and he always will. And what of the elder? He is commanded to call upon men to believe in Jesus Christ, to repent of their sins, and to be baptized for the remission of sins, promising them the gift of the Holy Ghost; and all who obey the requirements receive this divine gift.. . . .

Elder, Melchizedek Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPIs there any greater position that man can occupy upon the earth than to be engaged as a herald of salvation, commissioned of the great Jehovah to proclaim the words of life to a fallen world, and to call upon them to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus for the remission of sins, promising them if they do it that they shall receive the Holy Ghost? This is the position occupied by our elders, as well as that occupied by seventies and high priests. They go forth in the name of the Lord; and people believe their testimony and gather here.—JD, 24:35-36, January 21, 1883.

Elder, Melchizedek Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPCHALLENGE.—We want some manhood, and some priesthood and power of God to be manifested in Israel, and the Spirit of God to be poured out upon Israel and upon the elders thereof. And I pray God, the Eternal Father, to waken up these elders, that the spirit of their mission may rest upon them, and that they may comprehend their true position before God.—JD, 20:23, July 7, 1878.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] From Items on Priesthood.
[^2] All italics are added by John Taylor
[^3] All italics are added by John Taylor
[^4] This occurred during the apostolic interregnum of 1844-1847 when the twelve, Brigham Young at their head, were sustained as "presidents of the church."
