John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XV

THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE LESSER PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood, Aaronica-Taylor, JohnTPIMPORTANCE OF PRIESTS, TEACHERS, AND DEACONS.—There is as much devolving upon the priests, the teachers, and the deacons, and those of the lesser priesthood as there is upon. any other members of the church. When they do not fulfil their duties, what is the result? People go to the twelve, or to the First Presidency; they pass the more immediate authorities; and confusion and disorder exist; and valuable time is occupied almost needlessly; and those who will work may work until they are broken down ready to cease their earthly labors; and all this for the want of men's knowing their duties and doing them.

Priesthood Callingsa-Taylor, JohnTPTO INTRODUCE RIGHTEOUSNESS.—But while we are contending over little things what becomes of us? We are losing sight of our callings; we forget that this kingdom was established upon the earth for the purpose of introducing righteousness and the laws of heaven upon the earth, and of blessing mankind and of saving the living and the dead. We forget what we are here for, and what the kingdom of God is established for. It is not for you or for me or anybody else alone; it is for the interests of the world and the salvation of mankind. We are expected, every one of us, to perform the various duties and responsibilities devolving upon us. If we neglect them, are we not guilty before God? Whence come the difficulties that we have in our midst? Because as I have said in many instances the priesthood do not perform their duties, are not vigilant and faithful.—JD, 19:54, June 17, 1877.

ITEMS ON THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD [^1]

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPAN HISTORICAL SKETCH.—It seems . . . . that Moses had the greater or Melchizedek priesthood; that when he was taken, the keys went with him; that the Aaronic priesthood ruled until Christ, and the people were under the law; that when Christ came he introduced a better covenant and restored the gospel; and that the bishopric was, and the Aaronic priesthood is, under the Melchizedek, and an appendage thereto, as are also all elders appendages to the Melchizedek priesthood. And it is also evident that the presidency of that priesthood presides over all, as did Melchizedek, Moses, Joseph Smith, etc., with Jesus at the head, as the great Presiding High Priest.. . . .

Priesthood, Aaronica-Taylor, JohnTPYet the Aaronic priesthood, as the Melchizedek, is an everlasting priesthood, as before exhibited, and continueth forever as an appendage to the Melchizedek priesthood. Hence in the old apostolic days, when under an organization of the Melchizedek, the latter is the most prominent, and very little is said about the Levitical or Aaronic, probably on account of the peculiar traditions and superstitions of the Jews, which made it almost impossible for them to comprehend the greater or Melchizedek. Yet the Aaronic cannot be ignored, and in the dispensation of the fulness of times it again comes forth, as one of the grand aids or appendages to the Melchizedek priesthood. Hence, in the ushering in of this dispensation, John the Baptist appears on the stage and confers the Aaronic priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.—IP, 7, 16-17.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPSOME SUMMARY ITEMS.—First.—We find that there are two distinctive general priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical priesthood.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPSecond.—That they are both conferred by the Lord; that both are everlasting, and administer in time and eternity.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPThird.—That the Melchizedek priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church, in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPFourth.—That the second priesthood is called the priesthood of Aaron, because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed throughout all their generations.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPFifth.—That the lesser priesthood is a part of, or an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek priesthood, and has power in administering outward ordinances. The lesser or Aaronic priesthood can make appointments for the greater in preaching; can baptize, administer the sacrament, attend to the tithing, buy lands, settle people on possessions, divide inheritances, look after the poor, take care of the properties of the church, attend generally to temporal affairs; act as common judges in Israel, and assist in ordinances of the temple, under the direction of the greater or Melchizedek priesthood. They hold the keys of the ministering of angels and administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel, and the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPSixth.—That there is a presidency over each of these priesthoods, both over the Melchizedek and the Aaronic.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPSeventh.—That while the power of the higher, or Melchi- zedek, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church; to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened to them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the firstborn and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to preside over all the spiritual officers of the church, yet the presidency of the high priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church, both spiritual and temporal.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPThen comes the High Priesthood, which is the greatest of all.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPWherefore, it must needs be that one be appointed of the High Priesthood to preside over the Priesthood, and he shall be called president of the High Priesthood of the church;

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPOr, in other words, the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of the Church.—(D. & C. 107, 64-66.)

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPIt is thus evident that this priesthood presides over all presidents, all bishops, including the presiding bishop; over all councils, organizations, and authorities in the whole Church, in all the world.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPThat the bishopric is the presidency of the Aaronic priesthood, which is "an appendage to the greater or Melchizedek priesthood," and that no man has a legal right to hold the keys of the Aaronic priesthood, which presides over all bishops and all the lesser priesthood, except he be a literal descendant of Aaron. But, that "as a high priest of the Melchizedek priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of bishop. . . . if called, set apart, and ordained unto this power by the hands of the presidency of the Melchizedek priesthood."

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPWe may here notice that John the Baptist conferred this priesthood upon Joseph Smith, and that therefore, as he held it, he had the power to confer it upon others.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPEighth.—That there are bishops holding different positions: Bishop Partridge was a general bishop over the land of Zion; while Bishop Whitney was a general bishop over the church in Kirtland, Ohio, and also over all the eastern churches until afterwards appointed as presiding bishop [to the church]. That there are also ward bishops, whose duties are confined to their several wards. That there are also bishops' agents, such as Sidney Gilbert and others.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPThat the position which a bishop holds, depends upon his calling and appointment, and that, although a man holding the bishopric is eligible to any office in the bishopric, yet he cannot officiate legally in any, except by selection, calling, and appointment.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPNinth.—That the power and right of selecting and calling of the presiding bishop and general bishops is vested in the First Presidency, who also must try those appointed by them in case of transgression, except in the case of a literal descendant of Aaron; who, if the firstborn, possesses a legal right to the keys of this priesthood; but even he must be sanctioned and appointed by the First Presidency. This arises from the fact that the Aaronic is an appendage to the Melchizedek priesthood.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPThat the presiding bishop, who presides over all bishops, and all of the lesser priesthood, should consult the First Presidency in all important matters pertaining to the bishopric.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPTenth.—That in regard to the appointment and trial of ward bishops, it appears that they stand in the same relationship to the presidents of stakes as the early bishops did to the First Presidency, who presided over the stake at Kirtland; but that those presidents should consult with the First Presidency on these and other important matters, and officiate under their direction in their several stakes.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPThat in regard to the office and calling of bishops, it is very much like the office and calling of high priests. All high priests are eligible to any office in the church, when called, ordained, and appointed to fill such office. The First Presidency are high priests. The twelve are high priests; high councilors are high priests; presidents of stakes are high priests, and all their counselors; bishops and their counselors are high priests: but it does not follow that all high priests are first presidents, members of the twelve apostles, presidents of stakes, high councilors, bishops or bishops' counselors; they only obtain these offices by selection and appointment from the proper source, and when not appointed to any specific calling, they are organized in a stake quorum, under a president and council.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPSo although the bishopric is eligible to fulfil any office to which they may be appointed, all are not presiding bishops, all are not general bishops, or special bishops, or ward bishops, or even bishops' agents; they occupy their several offices, as do the high priests, by selection, appointment, as well as ordination, and that the presidency of the Melchizedek priesthood presides over, calls, directs, appoints, and counsels all. It is further evident that as the Melchizedek priesthood holds the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church, and that the presidency thereof has a right to officiate in all the offices of the church, therefore that presidency has a perfect right to direct or call, set apart, and ordain bishops, to fill any place or position in the church that may be required for that ministry to perform in all the stakes of Zion, or throughout the world. Thus, after going through the whole matter, we come back to a term frequently used among us: Obey counsel!—IP, 36-40.

THE LEVITICAL PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPWHAT IS THE LEVITICAL PRIESTHOOD?—There were in the days of Moses a tribe of the children of Israel set apart to officiate in some of the lesser duties of the Aaronic priesthood, and their office was called the Levitical priesthood.—JD, 21:364, August 8, 1880.

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LEVITICAL PRIESTHOOD AN APPENDAGE TO THE AARONIC.—Aaron and his sons held the Aaronic priesthood, and the Levites were given unto them to minister unto them to keep his charge, the charge of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle, keep the instruments of the tabernacle, and the charge of the children of Israel. . . . . They seemed to have been an appendage to the Aaronic priesthood to assist in the service of the tabernacle and other duties. Aaron and his male descendants were selected for the priesthood, the other Levites as assistants, or an appendage.—IP, 40-41.

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPSUMMARY.—From the above it would seem—

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPFirst.—That the Levites were selected in the place of the firstborn whom the Lord called his own.

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPSecond.—That they were given to Aaron to assist him in the minor or lesser duties of the priesthood; but that Aaron and his sons officiated in the leading offices of the priesthood, and not the Levites.

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPThird.—That there was a tithing paid to them by the whole house of Israel for their sustenance.

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPFourth.—That they paid a tithe of this to Aaron.

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPFifth.—That on assuming the higher duties of the priesthood of Aaron, the judgments of God overtook them.

Priesthood, Leviticala-Taylor, JohnTPSixth.—That their priesthood was only an appendage to the Aaronic priesthood, and not that priesthood itself as held by Aaron and his sons.—IP, 43.

WORK OF THE LESSER PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood, Aaronica-Taylor, JohnTPWARD TEACHING.—Much depends in these days of trial upon those who bear the lesser priesthood. They have opportunities which are of unequaled advantage. They visit or should visit the people at their homes. They talk to them by their firesides. They can see their inner lives, and learn where they need strengthening and guiding in order to be more efficient Latter-day Saints. When priests and teachers understand their duties and seek to enjoy the spirit of their offices, they can do an immense amount of good; for they are brought directly into contact with the people. They learn their wants, are made familiar with their weaknesses, and are in a position to check the growth of evil tendencies in parents and in children.

Priesthood, Aaronica-Taylor, JohnTPThere is, in many instances, doubtless, too much formality in the character of these visits—a disposition to drop into routine and to ask stereotyped questions, without conversing in a way to bring out the real feelings and spirit of the households which they visit. Visits of this character are comparatively barren of results. To make them as productive of good as they should be, live, active men should be used as priests and teachers. The best ability in the various wards can find ample field for usefulness in performing these duties. Young men who have not had experience should be associated with those who have had experience, and they should be impressed with the importance of seeking for the Spirit of God to rest upon them in power, to dictate to them the very things that should be said to the family which they visit. The teachings which might be appropriate to one family would not perhaps be so suitable for another family. Therefore, the necessity of having the guidance of the Spirit of God is apparent.—Epistle of The First Presidency, April 8, 1887; JH, April 8, 1887, p. 2; DN, April 8, 1887.

Priesthood, Aaronica-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DUTY OF THE TEACHER AND PRIEST.—The organization of the church is after the plan that exists in heaven and according to the principles that God has revealed in the interest of his church upon the earth and for the advancement and rolling forth of his kingdom. We start in with the teacher and with the priest, whose duty it is to know the position of all the members in their several districts. If they do their duty they will know really and truly the position of all those who come under their charge. Their duty is very simple. What is it? They are to see that there is no hard feeling existing in the breasts of the saints one towards another; that there are no dishonest or fraudulent acts, no lasciviousness or corruption, no lying, false accusations, profanity, or drunkenness; and that the people call upon God in prayer in their various households—the father and mother and children, and that all perform their various duties and do right.

Priesthood, Aaronica-Taylor, JohnTPI look upon it that the teachers and the priests occupy a very important position in the church and kingdom of God. . . . . For it is their right and privilege to look after these things, and not only their right and privilege but their duty. And if they do not fulfil this, they are not magnifying their calling and priesthood. But if they are and people are disposed to listen to them, then everything will be right in regard to this matter. And if there are those who are not disposed to listen to them and to do right, then it becomes the duty of the teachers, after pleading with them and doing the best they can, to report them to their bishop. Then it devolves upon him to do his part, not in anger or animosity or in the spirit of vindictiveness, but as a savior, and the teacher and the priest ought to act in the same way. And while God has organized his church upon the earth after the plan that exists in the heavens, it is for the various officers in the church to fulfil the duties devolving upon them, acting in all kindness, long-suffering, and mercy before the Lord, yet with justice and judgment that the law of God may be honored, that the principles of righteousness may be exalted, that the workers of iniquity may be ashamed, that the meek may increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men may rejoice in the Holy One of Israel; that righteousness and truth may prevail among the people of God; and we may act not in name only, but in reality as the saints of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.

Priesthood, Aaronica-Taylor, JohnTPAPPEALS.—If any persons then should feel that they are aggrieved by the acts of the teacher or the bishop, if they should think that they have been unnecessarily harshly dealt with, they have the right of appeal to the high council—high priests selected from among the people and set apart because of their fidelity, their integrity, their honor, and their justice—at least these are the kinds of qualifications necessary to fill this calling. And if upon an appeal to the high council on any of these matters (of course, including drunkenness), they find there has been unnecessary harshness, it would be for them to remedy the evil, to see that justice is done, and that no man is oppressed; on the contrary that all have their rights, freedom, liberty, and equal justice in righteousness without fear or favor.—JD, 23:216-218, August 6, 1882.

Priest, Aaronic Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPPRIESTS.—What is the duty of the priests? Only to hold office? No; it is to visit the members of the various wards, and to see that there are no hard feelings, troubles, or difficulty among the people, to anticipate the occurrence of anything of that sort, put things right, and see that the ordinances of the church are carried out.—JD, 19:142, October 14, 1877.

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPTEACHERS.—Then the teachers, who are helps to the priests, whose duty it is to go among the people and talk to them on their duties—not like so many parrots, but full of the Spirit of God. And where there may be difficulties to settle, and it is not within the power of the teachers to satisfactorily adjust them, report them to the bishop, who sits as a common judge in Israel, and to adjudicate all such matters. If thy brother offend thee, go and say to him, "Brother, you have done so and so," and if he will not listen to you nor ask forgiveness for the offense he has given you, take another man with you—one who you think has influence with him, and one whom you think he will listen to—and let him talk. And if the offending person will not listen to him, report him, to be dealt with according to the order of the church. And if he continues obdurate and stubborn, then he does not belong to us. Let us always feel like operating together for the good of each other and for the kingdom we are identified with.—JD, 19:142, October 7, 1877.

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPSome of us think that our teachers are of very little importance. I will tell you how I regard them. If the teachers do not come to visit me as often as I think they should, I do not like it very well. When they do come, I acquaint my family with it, call them together, and then tell our visitors that we are all under their jurisdiction, ready and anxious to hear from them the words of eternal life. That is how I feel towards the teachers, and in the same manner I respect all the priesthood in the various positions they occupy. Shall I assume to dictate to those who are above me? No, never. Will you? That is for you to say, not for me.—JD, 18:285, November 5, 1876.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] At this time (1879) the council of the twelve was the presiding council of the church. What is said applies equally to the First Presidency when it exists.
