John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XVI

PRIESTHOOD AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH

THE PURPOSE AND ORGANIZATION

Work of the Lorda-Taylor, JohnTPTO BUILD THE CHURCH AND THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—The Lord has given us a certain work to accomplish; and the feelings or ideas of men in the world in relation to this work have but little to do with us. We are gathered here for the express purpose of building up the church and kingdom of God upon the earth.—JD, 21:373, October 7, 1879.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NECESSITY OF ORGANIZATION.—It would be found very difficult for any individual left to himself to do right, to think right, to speak right, and to fulfil the will and law of God upon the earth; and hence the necessity of the organization of the church and kingdom of God upon the earth, of the properly-organized priesthood, of the legitimate channel, check, bounds, laws, and governments that the Almighty has introduced into his church and kingdom for the guidance, instruction, protection, welfare, upbuilding, and further progress of his church and kingdom upon the earth. As in a school it requires a man more competent to be a teacher than those who are taught, so in the church of God; and hence the various grades and positions of the priesthood. When a president, bishop, or those having authority live up to their religion and cleave unto God, it is expected by us at all times that they will comprehend things under their immediate jurisdiction—things that they control; know the wants of the people and the best course for them to pursue, better than the individuals they teach; and this extends throughout all the various ramifications of the church of God, from the First Presidency down. And indeed, between the First Presidency and the Lord of Hosts there is a regularly organized channel through which the blessings of his kingdom flow unto his Saints when they are found in obedience to his laws.—JD, 6:107, December 6. 1857.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE TWO PRIESTHOODS AND CHURCH GOVERNMENT.—God has ordained two priesthoods upon the earth—the Melchizedek and the Aaronic. The Melchizedek presides more especially over the spiritual affairs of the church, and has done in all ages when it has existed upon the earth. You will find this provided for in the Doctrine and Covenants. . . . . The Aaronic priesthood is resided over by the presiding bishop. If we had a literal descendant of Aaron, he would have a right to preside over the bishopric, and to operate and manage and direct these things without the aid of counselors. In the absence of such men, the Lord has directed us to take men from the high priesthood and set them apart to be bishops to administer in temporal things. This Aaronic priesthood is an appendage to the Melchizedek priesthood, and its province is to administer in temporal affairs. One reason why we want men of this class to administer in temporal things is because there is a special provision made for it. Nevertheless a high priest that is after the order of Melchizedek may be set apart to administer in temporal things, having a knowledge of them by the spirit of truth. And before a man attempts to administer in Zion in temporal things, he ought to obtain a knowledge of that spirit of truth to administer according to the intelligence which that spirit of truth imparts. Thus we have the Aaronic priesthood in its place; the Melchizedek priesthood in its place. And in all the various functions it is necessary to enter into all the various organizations. It is on one or two particular points that I wish to speak now.

THE PRINCIPLE OF PRESIDENCY.—In the first place, the Lord requires certain things to be done to meet his approbation; and everything has to be done under the direction of the presidency of the twelve [^1] both temporal things and spiritual things. The bishops and the presidents of stakes and all the officers in the church of God are subject to this authority and they cannot get around it. And when any officer of this church who by virtue of his calling does things without counseling with the proper authorities of the church, he takes upon himself things that he has no right to do, and such a course cannot be acceptable before God and the priesthood.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPADMINISTRATION OF TEMPORAL AFFAIRS.—Now then, we come to the bishopric. Ought the bishops to be consulted in regard to temporal things? Yes, they ought. And as an example, let me tell you that for the last year Bishop Hunter has associated with the council of the twelve [^2] whenever they have met to consider temporal matters. And I may say we have been pleased to have his company, because it was his place to understand the position of temporal things, that we may know his feelings, and counsel with him and he with us, that everything may be done according to the order and laws of God, that there may be perfect unanimity. With this view he was placed as one of the counselors to the trustee- in-trust—because the trustee-in-trust thought it belonged to him to hold that position, and thinks so today. But then, does he preside over the Melchizedek priesthood? No, he does not. Who and what is he? A high priest ordained and set apart to the bishopric. By whom? The presidency. Does he control the presidency? No, he is set apart by them; as bishop he is an appendage to the higher priesthood, and does not control it. No man controls it. I remember a remark made on one occasion by Joseph Smith, in speaking with Bishop Partridge. He was a splendid good man, as Bishop Hunter is. But he got some crooked ideas into his head; he thought he ought to manage some things irrespective of Joseph, which caused Joseph to speak rather sharply to him. Joseph said, I wish you to understand that I am president of this church, and I am your president, and I preside over you and all your affairs. Is that correct doctrine? Yes. It was true then and it is true today.

RESPONSIBILITY OF INSTITUTIONS CLAIMING CHURCH CONNECTION.—Well, it is necessary that we should have an understanding of these things, that we may make no mistakes in our administration. I want, then, in all our operations to confer with our bishops. And if this institution of ours is "Zion's Co-operative," then it should be under the direction of Zion, under the direction of the priesthood; and if it is not "Zion's" Co-operative, then it is a living lie. But do we wish to interfere with them? No, we do not. Do we wish to interrupt them in any of their operations? No, we want to help them; we want to unite them and all the people into one, with God at our head, governed by the holy priesthood. Have they rights? Yes. Do we respect them? Yes. Have the people rights? Yes. Shall the people be respected in their rights? Yes, they shall, all the people in all the stakes; and while we sustain them they must sustain us; and if they expect to have our support, they must give us theirs.—JD, 21:35-36, April 9, 1879.

AUTHORITY IN THE CHURCH

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPPRINCIPLES OF PRESIDENCY, APOSTLESHIP, QUORUMS, AND COUNSELORSHIPS.—When Joseph Smith was living, he was the president of all councils, and all authorities in the church; he stood as prophet, seer, and revelator, and apostle; the chief apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He stood before God as the representative of his church on the earth. In his absence, the twelve being next in authority, stepped in; not to deprive him of his place, which he still occupies in the heavens, but to fulfil their office and calling, and the relationship which they sustain to the church; but why did not his counselors occupy his place? Because they were not ordained to that authority, and they, therefore, could not act in it, no more than the king's cabinet could reign over the nation after the king's death. On the demise of a king it is necessary that another should be crowned in his stead, and this must be the rightful heir. It is not enough that he is his companion or counselor.

And here let me remark that there is a material difference between a counselor and a president. There are some quorums in the church wherein so much difference does not exist, as the high council and the twelve, and with some few exceptions the seventies, high priests, elders, teachers, and deacons; but the bishops have their counselors, so had Joseph, and so have some of those others. The high council, however, and twelve, have not, further than the whole quorums are counselors to each other and to their president. And in relation to the twelve, their president became such, not on account of election or choice, but because of seniority, or age, hence when Thomas B. Marsh was in good standing he was the oldest, and consequently the presiding officer; but when he apostatized the next oldest took it, which was President Brigham Young. He had the same priesthood before and the same authority, but was not the president or mouthpiece of the others, who are all presidents in all the world, without other ordinations, [^3] and in this respect differ from the council of Joseph. The twelve standing next to Joseph, on his death the charge of the church necessarily fell upon them, and President Young being their president, of course presided, and became the mouth-piece and president, not only of the twelve but of the church.—MS, 9:324, 1847.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTP"FOR THE PERFECTING OF THE SAINTS."—The Lord has placed in his church apostles and prophets,high priests, seventies, elders, etc. What for? For the perfecting of the Saints. Are we all perfect to begin with? No. These various officers are for perfecting of the Saints. What else? For the work of the ministry, that men might be qualified and informed and be full of intelligence, wisdom, and light, and learn to proclaim the principles of eternal truth and to bring out from the treasury of God things new and old, things calculated to promote the welfare of the people. Now, then, these offices having been placed in the church, every man ought to be respected in his office. I know some of you think we can respect some, and some we cannot respect; we can respect some of the prominent authorities—I do not know who they are, do you? You remember when Jesus was upon the earth, some of his followers were contending as to who was the greatest: and he took a little child and placed it in their midst, and said, he that can be most like this little child, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And I will tell you more than that, that the teacher or deacon who fulfils his duties is a great deal more honorable than a president or any of the twelve who does not. And there are duties and responsibilities devolving on all of us pertaining to these matters; and we ought to be very careful in all our acts that we do not transgress the laws of God.—JD, 21:209, March 1, 1880.

A PRINCIPLE OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT.—Brother Joseph F. Smith spoke rightly this morning when he said, that no man could guide this kingdom. He cannot unless God be with him and on the side of the elders of Israel. But with him on their side, all things will move on aright, and the intelligence and the revelations of God will be poured out. His law will be made known and the principles of truth be developed; or it is not the kingdom of God. And we all of us ought to humble ourselves before God, and seek for the guidance of the Almighty.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE FORCES THAT UNDERMINE ALL GOVERNMENT.—There are forces at work in the world that will in time overturn the world, which are today sapping the foundation of all governments and eating as a canker the foundation of all rule and dominion; and by and by their thrones will be cast down and nations and empires will be overturned, for God will arise to purge the world from its iniquities, its evils, and corruptions. And we have more or less of the principles of insubordination among us. But there is a principle associated with the kingdom of God that recognizes God in all things, and that recognizes the priesthood in all things, and those who do not do it had better repent or they will come to a stand very quickly; I tell you that in the name of the Lord. Do not think you are wise and that you can manage and manipulate the priesthood, for you cannot do it. God must manage, regulate, dictate, and stand at the head, and every man in his place. The ark of God does not need steadying, especially by incompetent men without revelation and without knowledge of the kingdom of God and its laws. It is a great work that we are engaged in, and it is for us to prepare ourselves for the labor before us, and to acknowledge God, his authority, his law and his priesthood in all things.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ORDER OF THE KINGDOM.—I have men come to me sometimes with some great complaints to make about their bishop. I hear them, but I either send them back to their bishop or to their president (of their stake) as circumstances dictate. Then I have bishops come to me finding fault with their presidents. I send them back to their presidents, and write to those whose business it is to attend to it. I acknowledge every man in his place and office, whether president, bishop, priest, teacher or deacon; and then they should acknowledge everybody over them . . . . in the name of the Lord. I know what I am saying. I tell you it is the word and the will of the Lord. Do not be wise above what is written. Do not be too anxious to be too smart, to manage, and manipulate, and to put things right; but pray for those that God has placed in the different offices of this church that they may be enabled to perform their several duties. The Lord will sustain his servants and give them his Holy Spirit and the light of revelation, if they seek him in the way that he has appointed, and he will lead them and lead you in the right path. This is the order of the kingdom of God, as I understand it, and not the other. And it is for us to learn that order and be obedient to it.—JD, 23:220-221, August 6, 1882.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPThis is an order, as I understand it, that is introduced by the Almighty, and by him alone. It is not of man, nor did it proceed from man, neither can it progress nor be perfected by man without the direction of the Almighty. In fact, with all these helps, with all these organizations, with all these principles, owing to the weakness and infirmities of man, we find it difficult to preserve in purity those sacred institutions that God has given unto us, and we continually need the greatest care, humility, self-denial, perseverance, watchfulness, and reliance upon God.—JD, 22:7, January 9, 1881.

SOME PROBLEMS OF GENERAL CHURCH ADMINISTRATION

Conferencesa-Taylor, JohnTPFUNCTIONS OF A GENERAL CONFERENCE.—We are met here in a conference capacity, and have assembled ostensibly, and in reality, to confer together about the general interests of the church and kingdom of God upon the earth. The authorities from the distant settlements are here to represent themselves and their people, and a great many are here from the surrounding settlements to listen to the teachings that may be given, to the business that may be transacted, to the doctrines that may be promulgated, and in general to make themselves acquainted with the spirit of the times, with the obligations that devolve upon them; and the various responsibilities that rest upon all parties.

Conferencesa-Taylor, JohnTPWe meet, then, as I have said, to consult on the general interests of the Church and kingdom of God upon the earth, and not upon our own peculiar ideas and notions, to carry out any particular favorite theme or to establish any special dogma of our own devising. Nor do we meet here to combine against men, but to seek, by all reasonable and proper means, through the interposition and guidance of the Almighty, and under the influence of his Holy Spirit, to adopt such means and to carry out such measures as will most conduce to our individual happiness, the happiness of the community with which we are associated, to the establishment of correct principles, to the building up of our faith, and strengthening us in the principles of eternal truth, to our advancement and progress in the ways of life and salvation, and to devise such measures and carry out such plans as will best accord with the position and relationship we occupy to God, to the world we live in, and to each other.—JD, 14:245, October 8, 1871.

Conferencesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SCOPE OF A GENERAL CONFERENCE.—The object of our meeting is not altogether for religious purposes, but to consult upon all matters for the interest of the church and kingdom of God upon the earth. On these occasions it is quite common for missionaries to be appointed to the different nations of the earth, and it is also usual to discuss the principles and doctrines that we believe in, and to attend to any business that may have to be presented from the different parts of this territory, and from all parts of the earth; and we try to build up the people in their most holy faith. We meet also to consult upon the best course for us to pursue with regard to temporal things as well as spiritual things; for as we possess bodies as well as spirits, and have to live by eating, drinking, and wearing, it becomes necessary that temporal matters should be considered and discussed in our conferences, and that we should deliberate upon all things that are calculated to benefit, bless, and exalt the Saints of God, whether they refer to our spiritual affairs or to our avocations and duties in life as husbands and wives, as parents and children, as masters and servants; whether they refer to the policy we should pursue in our commercial relations, to protecting ourselves against the incursions of savages, or to any other matter affecting us as human beings composing part of the body politic of this nation or as citizens of the world. The idea of strictly religious feelings with us, and nothing else, is out of the question; yet we do everything in the fear of God. Our religion is more comprehensive than that of the world; it does not prompt its votaries with the desire to "sit and sing themselves away to everlasting bliss," but it embraces all the interests of humanity in every conceivable phase, and every truth in the world comes within its scope.—JD, 11:353-354, April 6, 1867.

ADVICE ON CHURCH VOTING.—We have got through presenting the various quorums comprising the authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . . and I believe there has been a unanimous feeling to sustain all those officers presented in their respective positions. . . . If there are those among us that feel a little crossways, thinking that some other way might be better; yet there is so much of the feeling to the contrary that the opposition is readily brought to acquiesce in the popular vote, whether the opposers really feel so or not. But they generally feel like it. Still there is a lesson that we have been learning that none of us is perfect in. Our judgment is not perfect and as we are not perfect in our sphere, we need not expect to find others perfect in theirs. And as we are not perfect ourselves, we may have need to come to the throne of mercy and ask for wisdom and support, and we can come to the Lord with faith and full assurance. If we have need to come to the Lord, so have you. Becareful, then, how you judge. We can say to all, with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.—JD, 9:8-9, April 6, 1861.

Sustaininga-Taylor, JohnTPTHE METHOD OF VOTING FOR PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH.—It is gratifying to me, and it is no doubt satisfactory to you, to see the unanimity and oneness of feeling and the united sentiment which have been manifested in our votes. Those votes being taken first in their quorum capacity, each quorum having voted affirmatively, then by the vote of the presidents of the several quorums united, and afterwards by the vote of the quorums and people combined, men and women, among the many thousands assembled who have participated in this vote, having a full and free opportunity, uncontrolled by any influence other than the Spirit of God, to express their wishes and desires, there has not been, from all that we could discover, one dissenting vote. . . .

Sustaininga-Taylor, JohnTPWe have had an example here today of the unanimity which characterizes those possessed of the spirit of the gospel, and it ought to be a pattern for us in all of our affairs.—JD, 22:40, October 10, 1880.

PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING CONFIDENCE IN CHURCH LEADERSHIP.—Why have this people confidence in President Young and others? Because they have seen them leave their homes and go forth and endure every privation to promote their welfare in time and in eternity. . . .

Furthermore, this people have confidence in their leaders, because in times of trouble and trial they have stemmed the torrents and been foremost in the battle. It is not a kind of soft, smooth eloquence to tickle the ears of men, but it is stern matters of fact that the people know.—JD, 5:247, September 13, 1857.

LOCAL CHURCH GOVERNMENT

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPJURISDICTIONAL SPHERES.—When we have a stake organization, . . . . the presidency of the stake presides over all bishops, high councils, and all authorities of the stake. The several bishops preside over their respective wards and manage their affairs, under the direction of the stake presidency, who in their office and calling are responsible to the First Presidency of the church. The bishops are also under the direction of presiding Bishop Hunter in all affairs connected with the temporal interests of the church. And Bishop Hunter is under the direction of the First Presidency, the Aaronic priesthood being an appendage to the Melchizedek priesthood. It is however, the special duty of the Aaronic priesthood to attend to temporal matters; but then the First Presidency presides over all bishops, all presidents, all authorities, and lastly God presides over all.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPNow we are sometimes fond, that is, some of us are, of talking about our authority. It is a thing I care very little about. I tell you what I want to do if I can: I want to know the will of God so that I may do it; and I do not want to dictate or domineer or exercise arbitrary control. Then again, all men ought to be under proper control to the presidency and priesthood presiding over them. If I were a bishop, I should want to know what the president of my stake desired, and I should confer with him.—JD, 21:365, August 8, 1880.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RESPONSIBILITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.—To you, brethren, who, as presidents of stakes, high councilors and bishops, hold in your keeping the purity of the lives of the members of the Church, we again repeat the warnings and admonitions of our former epistles and say, upon you lies the responsibility of the keeping of God's house in order, each according to his calling, ordination, and appointment, and to the extent and scope of the duties imposed upon him. In these duties you cannot be negligent without incurring the displeasure of the Lord and losing his spirit. The Lord holds each man responsible for that portion of his flock which is placed in his care.—JH, March 31, 1886, p. 11; Salt Lake Herald, April 7, 1886.

Stake Presidentsa-Taylor, JohnTPPRESIDENTS OF STAKES.—The presidents of stakes have important positions. They preside over all the interests of the church where they are placed, and they should feel like acting for God, and they and their counsel should have continually with them the light of revelation, be full of the Holy Ghost, and quick to discern. There is no officer in the church who acts with a single eye to the glory of God but what will have wisdom given him according to his capacity. The president of the stake presides over the high council, a set of men appointed and ordained to adjudicate all matters in dispute that may come before them, and they should act in all meekness, humility, and wisdom, seeking intelligence from the Foundation of Light, so that they can act in righteousness and give righteous judgment.—JD, 19:141-142, October 14, 1877.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPRESPONSIBILITY OF STAKE PRESIDENTS AND OTHERS.—It is expected that these presidents of stakes be full of the Holy Ghost and the power of God, that they feel and realize that they are the servants of Jehovah, engaged in his work, and that he will require at their hands an account of their stewardships. It is necessary also that the high councils and the bishops act in the same way, together with the high priests, seventies, elders, and all those of the Aaronic priesthood, and that all operate together in the fear of God, for his eye is over you, and he expects you to work righteousness, and purge the church from iniquity, and teach the people correct principles and lead them in the paths of life. This is what God requires at your hands.—JD, 19:125, October 7, 1877.

SELECTION OF BRANCH PRESIDENTS.—It is not always wisdom to appoint the highest [priesthood] officer in a branch to preside. It frequently happens that a priest or teacher is more competent to preside over a branch than an elder; and it is the privilege of the president of the conference to appoint such to preside, with the consent of the church, according to the regulations of the Doctrine and Covenants; and, if he is a man full of the Holy Ghost, he will be able to select such as are most competent.—MS, 9:325, November 1, 1847.

POPULAR GOVERNMENT: PURPOSE OF STAKE CONFERENCES.—We convene in conference in the various stakes that everything pertaining to the interests of the stakes may be considered in those conferences, and that all matters may be properly represented, and all the saints have the privilege of voting for or against those officers who are presented to the conference for their acceptance. It is also usual to vote for the officers of wards in the wards over which they preside, such as bishops and their counselors, with all the lesser priesthood, so that there may be perfect unanimity in all our acts. Because the church of God is based upon the principle of perfect freedom of action. . . . It is proper that all of these authorities should be presented from time to time before the people, that all the people everywhere, not only in a stake, but in all the stakes, as well as at the general conference, may have the opportunity if they know of anything wrong, anything immoral or unrighteous associated with the acts of any of the leading authorities of the church, of speaking of it, that everything and everybody may be properly presented and that the conduct of all men may be intelligently scrutinized; for, if we cannot bear the scrutiny of our brethren upon earth, how shall we be able to meet the scrutiny and investigations of our Heavenly Father when we shall stand before him. And if there is anything immoral or unrighteous, of any kind, it is proper and expedient that it be righted; and this applies quite as much to the presidency, the twelve, and the leading authorities as to any other individual in the church, in order that everything may be presented in its proper form, and everybody have a full opportunity of offering his ideas and views in regard to these matters.—JD, 24:32-33, January 21, 1883.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF CHURCH LEADERS

Worthinessa-Taylor, JohnTPA LESSON FROM TEMPLE WORK.—This temple . . . . is a place where, among other things, eternal covenants and obligations are entered into, and the question is, how and in what manner shall they be performed, and who are worthy and who are unworthy? There are some things that we find it exceedingly difficult to decide upon. Why? Because the parties that are dead are not here to speak for themselves, and we cannot have them misrepresented or robbed of their rights in any shape. But if they have violated the laws of God, what then? Now, here comes a question to which I desire to draw attention. There are many men who ought to have been cut off the church. But they have not been; the bishops have been negligent, the teachers have been negligent, and perhaps the president of the stake has been negligent. I am speaking in general terms. I speak of it to draw the attention of presidents of stakes, bishops, elders, priests, teachers and deacons, and those who officiate in the church of God, and all men who are set to watch over the fold of Christ. If some of these men, that I have referred to, had been brought up on certain occasions, they might have repented of their sins and placed themselves right. But because these officers did not do their duty themselves, and did not see that other men did theirs, things have passed along out of order, and the parties in question have gone behind the veil. What account can we give of ourselves if we are found thus negligent? If people do wrong, let them be brought up, and let the teachers, priests, and bishops clear their garments of them, and feel that they have done their duty, and purified the church so far as they could.

Worthinessa-Taylor, JohnTPThe presidents of stakes should see that these things are carried out according to the laws of God. This is a standard we must attain to, so that when people say, can we go into the temple of the Lord? we may know exactly their status, what position they occupy, and what to do with them, without having to take up the records of the dead. These are responsibilities devolving upon us.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPRESPONSIBILITY FOR THE LIVING.—Our elders go abroad to preach the gospel and to gather in the people. When they are thus gathered, the presidents of stakes, the bishops, priests, teachers, and deacons are expected to watch over them, and see that they are fulfilling their obligations, or that they are not fulfilling them. If they fail to do their duty, let them be brought to account; let them be dealt with according to the laws of God. If they repent, forgive them; but it is expected that all who have taken upon them the name of Christ will obey the laws of God, and walk in obedience to his commands. These are some things that we all of us have to be responsible for, and therefore I, occupying the position that I do, feel it my duty to lay these things before you and to require them at your hands—that is at the hands of the president of the stake and his counselors, at the hands of the bishops and their counselors, at the hands of the high council, and at the hands of the priests, teachers, and deacons; for I don't want to carry myself the sins of the people. God expects us to purge ourselves from iniquity, that we may become the chosen of the Lord, and our offspring with us, not in name or in theory, but in deed and in truth, and according to the laws of life, and the spirit that dwells in Jesus Christ, our Savior, which every one of us ought to have dwelling in us and dwelling and abiding in our habitations, that we may feel that we are devoted to our God, blameless before the Lord, and keeping his commandments—.JD 25:164-165, June 15, 1884.

RINGS AND CLIQUES IN CHURCH GOVERNMENT.—But there are those in our midst, who, although they have a name and a standing in the church, disregard the authority of the priesthood, both local and general. I hear sometimes of parties, and of cliques, and of rings in our midst. What! a party in the church and kingdom of God? What! rings associated with the principles of eternal truth—associated with the celestial law that emanates from our Heavenly Father? The devil got up a ring and was cast out of heaven for getting it up, as also a third part of the spirits who associated themselves with him. They were cast out because they devised principles that were in opposition to the word and will and law of God, and every man who follows in their footsteps, unless he speedily repent, will be placed in the same position—will also be cast out. The law of God must be put in force against the transgressor. No man who professes to be a Latter-day Saint can transgress with impunity. The priesthood of God cannot be disregarded with impunity. . . .

Gossipa-Taylor, JohnTPALL TO BE GOVERNED BY THE LAW OF GOD.—If I violate any law of the Church, bring me up for it. If any one else does, bring him up for it. But don't go sneaking around back-biting and misrepresenting. Let us act as men, at least, if we won't be saints. But we should be true to our calling and profession and honor our God.

Millenniuma-Taylor, JohnTPTHE WORK DURING THE MILLENNIUM.—There is nothing new in all this. The spirit of rebellion has gone on ever since the devil and his angels were cast out of heaven. He and they have been making war against the saints, and will continue to do so; but Satan will finally be overcome. Before that, however, Satan will be bound for a thousand years, and during that time we will have a chance to build temples and to be baptized for the dead, and to do a work pertaining to the world that has been, as well as to the world that now is, and to operate under the direction of the Almighty in bringing to pass those designs which he contemplated from the foundation of the world.—JD, 24:233-235.

NO "WHITEWASHING"JUST PLAIN TALK.—Brethren and sisters, God bless you and lead you in the paths of life. Do I talk plainly? God expects me to talk plainly. I have not come here to daub you with untempered mortar, but I tell you the truth. And while he has called us to high privileges, to thrones and principalities and dominions, and to be saviors on Mount Zion, and to be kings and priests unto God, and our wives, queens and priestesses unto their husbands, while God has ordained us for this, in the name of Israel's God we will try and carry it out.—JD, 22:311, August 28, 1881.

Sustaininga-Taylor, JohnTPRESPONSIBILITY IN SUSTAINING AUTHORITY.—We have been voting for our officers and for those holding places in the church and kingdom of God in this stake of Zion. And it is well for us sometimes to understand what we do in relation to these matters. We hold up our right hand when voting in token before God that we will sustain those for whom we vote. And if we cannot feel to sustain them, we ought not to hold up our hands, because to do this would be to act the part of hypocrites. And the question naturally arises, how far shall we sustain them? Or in other words, how far are we at liberty to depart from this covenant which we make before each other and before our God? For when we lift up our hands in this way, it is in token to God that we are sincere in what we do, and that we will sustain the parties we vote for. This is the way I look at these things. How far then should we sustain them, and how far should we not? This is a matter of serious importance to us. If we agree to do a thing and do not do it, we become covenant-breakers and violators of our obligations, which are, perhaps, as solemn and binding as anything we can enter into.

Sustaininga-Taylor, JohnTPWHAT IT MEANS TO SUSTAIN.—We frequently pass by many of those important things which we have engaged to abide by, and sometimes begin to whisper by way of complaining or finding fault one with another after we have entered into solemn obligations that we will not do it. What is meant by sustaining a person? Do we understand it? It is a very simple thing to me, I do not know how it is with you. For instance, if a man be a teacher, and I vote that I will sustain him in his position, when he visits me in an official capacity I will welcome him and treat him with consideration, kindness, and respect. If I need counsel, I will ask it at his hand, and I will do everything I can to sustain him. That would be proper and a principle of righteousness. I would not say anything derogatory to his character. If that is not correct, I have it yet to learn. And then if anybody in my presence were to whisper something about him, disparaging to his reputation, I would say, look here! are you a Saint? Yes. Did you not hold up your hand to sustain him? Yes. Then why do you not do it? Now, I would call an action of that kind sustaining him. If any man makes an attack upon his reputation—for all men's reputations are of importance to them—I would defend him in some such way.

Sustaininga-Taylor, JohnTPTO VOTE IS TO COVENANT.—When we vote for men in the solemn way in which we do, shall we abide by our covenants? or shall we violate them? If we violate them, we become covenantbreakers. We break our faith before God and our brethren, in regard to the acts of men whom we have covenanted to sustain.

Sustaininga-Taylor, JohnTPWHEN THE AUTHORITY VIOLATES THE TRUST.—But supposing he should do something wrong, supposing he should be found lying or cheating, or defrauding somebody, or stealing or anything else, or even become impure in his habits? Would you still sustain him? It would be my duty then to talk with him as I would with anybody else, and tell him that I had understood that things were thus and so, and that under these circumstances I could not sustain him. If I found that I had been misinformed, I would withdraw the charge; but if not, it would then be my duty to see that justice was administered to him, that he was brought before the proper tribunal to answer for the things he had done; and in the absence of that I would have no business to talk about him.—JD, 21:207-208, March 1, 1880.

THE CHURCH JUDICIAL SYSTEM

Church Disciplinea-Taylor, JohnTPCHURCH LAW AND ORDER.—No man shall hold a standing in the church and kingdom of God, or preside in that church who will violate the laws of God, and seek to the ungodly, inasmuch as God has laws by which he expects us to be governed. . . . God has given us laws to regulate these matters and all our matters before our high councils, under the direction of inspired men who have been ordained to the holy priesthood to judge in matters brought before them. And when we turn to the ungodly, we sell ourselves to the devil, which we will not permit men to do, and maintain the fellowship of the saints and a standing in the church and kingdom of God.—JD, 22:311, August 28, 1881.

Church Disciplinea-Taylor, JohnTP. . . . Again we hear of fraudulent acts sometimes, and we permit them to be passed over. What are laws for? What are bishops' courts and high councils for? That when men transgress the laws of God, they shall be tried according to the laws of the church, and if found guilty, and are worthy of such action, they shall be cast out; that the pure and the righteous may be sustained, and the wicked and corrupt, the ungodly and impure, be dealt with according to the laws of God. This is necessary in order to maintain purity throughout the Church, and to cast off iniquity therefrom.—JD, 24:169-171, May 19, 1883.

Church Disciplinea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE BISHOPS' COURTS, THE COMMON COURTS.—Every bishop should be first ordained a high priest, and then set apart to the bishopric by the proper authority; and the bishop's counselors, if not already ordained to the high priesthood, should be, and then set apart to act in their capacity, as first and second counselors to the bishop. These three then form a quorum, and a court, and are qualified to sit in judgment upon all matters that may come before the bishop, as a common judge in Israel, which pertain to his ward. They are then properly authorized to act in this capacity, and they ought to be upheld and sustained in the position they occupy, and in all of their doings, inasmuch as they are characterized by righteousness and sound judgment, and, as the scriptures say, with humility and faith, and long-suffering and wisdom, and according to the principles laid down in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, which the Spirit of God would dictate to men occupying such a position.

Church Disciplinea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE HIGH COUNCILS.—And then if there is an appeal from this court, it goes to the high council which is also composed of high priests, set apart to this office by the First Presidency or the twelve, to be presided over by the presidency of the stake. For the lack of this more perfect organization all kind of confusion has prevailed among the brethren in many instances; all kinds of little differences are taken to the high council, which ought to be taken to the bishop's court. People sometimes quarrel about little things, very trivial affairs that do not represent more than ten or twenty dollars in monetary matters, and they are not satisfied unless the high council try such cases. And what is the result? Instead of having these little matters settled by the teachers or bishops in their own wards, they occupy the time of the fifteen men composing the council, besides their own and that of the witnesses, who generally number from five to fifteen. But these men work for nothing and board themselves, and therefore it costs the disputants nothing for the adjudication of their differences, whereas in such cases the high council would prefer to put their hands in their pockets and pay the amount in dispute rather than listen to their nonsense. And it would seem that some men are so inconsiderate, that they would impose upon them, because they are willing to give their time.

Church Disciplinea-Taylor, JohnTPARBITRATION AND PERSONAL RECONCILIATION.—Such cases should not come before the high council; they more properly belong to the lesser priesthood, to the priests and teachers and to the bishop's court. Such men do not realize their position before God and their brethren. If men have differences, they should try to settle them amicably among themselves. But if they cannot do this, let them take the first steps as directed in the church covenants, let them then come together as brethren having a claim upon the Spirit and power of God which would attend them if they lived their religion, and then, provided the priests and teachers did their duty and were filled with wisdom and the spirit of their office and calling, ninety-nine cases out of every hundred might be satisfactorily settled without either troubling the bishop's court or the high council.—JD, 19:53-54, June 17, 1877.

THE WOMEN OF THE CHURCH

Women, Roles ofa-Taylor, JohnTPWORK OF THE WOMEN.—A great deal of credit is due to our sisters. God has provided them as helpmates to their husbands, and it is the duty of the latter to cherish and protect those whom God has given unto them, and show them how to make themselves happy. Teach them—our wives and daughters—the pure principles of the gospel that the daughters of Zion may be lovely and shine as the light and glory of the age in which we live. Sisters, put away from you the vanities and frivolities of the world, administer to the poor and the afflicted. The sisters know how to sympathize with and administer to those who are poor afflicted, and downcast; and let the brethren help them in their kindly ministrations.—JD, 19:142, October 14, 1877.

Women, Roles ofa-Taylor, JohnTPI am glad there is a little spirit among our sisters, and that they dare say their souls are their own.—JD, 14:270, December 17,1871.

Relief Societya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RELIEF SOCIETY.—We have here our Relief Societies, and they have done a good work. And people are desirous to know something of these organizations. I was in Nauvoo at the time the Relief Society was organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and I was present on the occasion. At a late meeting of the society held in Salt Lake City I was present, and I read from a record called the Book of the Law of the Lord, the minutes of that meeting.

Relief Societya-Taylor, JohnTPWOMEN CALLED TO LABOR, TO EXPOUND SCRIPTURES.—At that meeting the Prophet called Sister Emma to be an elect lady. That means that she was called to a certain work; and that was in fulfilment of a certain revelation concerning her. She was elected to preside over the Relief Society, and she was ordained to expound the scriptures. In compliance with Brother Joseph's request, Sister Whitney, wife of Bishop Newel K. Whitney, and Sister Cleveland, wife of Judge Cleveland, were selected to be her counselors.

Relief Societya-Taylor, JohnTPWOMEN HOLD PRIESTHOOD IN CONNECTION WITH THEIR HUSBANDS.—Some of the sisters have thought that these sisters mentioned, were, in this ordination, ordained to the priesthood. And for the information of all interested in this subject, I will say, it is not the calling of these sisters to hold the priesthood, only in connection with their husbands, they being one with their husbands. Sister Emma was elected to expound the scriptures, and to preside over the Relief Society; then Sisters Whitney and Cleveland were ordained to the same office, and I think Sister Eliza R. Snow to be secretary. A short time ago I attended a meeting in Salt Lake City, where Sister Snow and Sister Whitney were set apart. I happened to be the only member of the twelve in town at the time, the other members of the quorum being unavoidably absent. I went to this meeting and set apart Sister Whitney and Sister Snow who were two of those I set apart some forty years ago, in Nauvoo. And after I had done so, they reminded me of the coincidence. At this meeting, however, Sister Snow was set apart to preside over the Relief Societies in the land of Zion, and Sister Whitney, her counselor, with Sister Zina D. Young, her other counselor. I speak of this for the information of the sisters, although I presume they may have read of it in their paper, The Exponent.

Relief Societya-Taylor, JohnTPWORK OF THE RELIEF SOCIETIES.—With regard to those Societies, I will say, they have done a good work and are a great assistance to our bishops, as well as being peculiarly adapted to console, bless, and encourage those of their sisters who need their care, and also to visit the sick, as well as to counsel and instruct the younger women in the things pertaining to their calling as children and saints of the Most High. I am happy to say that we have a great many honorable and noble women engaged in these labors of love, and the Lord blesses them in their labors, and I bless them in the name of the Lord. And I say to our sisters, continue to be diligent and faithful in seeking the well-being and happiness of your sex, instruct and train your own daughters in the fear of God, and teach your sisters to do likewise, that we may be the blessed of the Lord and our offspring with us.—JD, 21:367-368, August 8, 1880.

THE PROBLEM OF PROGRESS

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SAINTS FORGET; THE WORK LAGS.—We do not all of us sufficiently comprehend the great blessings that God has conferred upon us. We forget, sometimes, that we are the Saints of God; we forget that we have dedicated ourselves to the Lord, with all that we have; and we forget our high calling and our future destiny. We forget, sometimes, that we are engaged, with many others, in establishing righteousness and planting the kingdom of God upon the earth; and we condescend to little meannesses, and become forgetful of the great and glorious calling to which we are called. Many of us give way to temptation; we falter and get into darkness, and lose the Spirit of the Lord. We forget that God and angels are looking upon us; we forget that the spirits of just men made perfect and our ancient fathers, who are looking forward for the establishment of the kingdom of God upon the earth, are gazing upon us, and that our acts are open to the inspection of all the authorized agencies of the invisible world.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPAnd, forgetting these things sometimes, we act the part of fools, and the Spirit of God is grieved; it withdraws from us, and we are then left to grope our way in the dark. But if we could live our religion, fear God, be strictly honest, observe his laws and his statutes, and keep his commandments to do them, we should feel very different. We should feel comfortable and happy. Our spirits would be peaceful and buoyant. And from day to day, from week to week, and from year to year, our joys would increase.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPOTHER CAUSES.—Other causes also operate to retard the Saints in their progress. Most of us have come out of and been mixed up with the world. We have been associated with, and have received our education and ideas in the midst of corruptions of every kind, and we have sucked it in as with our mother's milk.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPEven our religion has been corrupt, and our ideas of morality have been wrong; our politics, law, and philosophy have all been wrenched, twisted, and perverted; our customs, habits, and associations have been wrong; and all that we have come out from is vanity, evil, corrupting, and damnable in its nature.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPIs it surprising, then, that we should find it difficult to live according to the light and intelligence that dwells in the bosom of God and that is manifested partially unto us, his people? Is it surprising that, surrounded as we have been, and wallowing in corruption all the day long, that we should have partaken more or less of these things, and that they should still cling to us?

PROPHECY AND POPULAR PREJUDICE.—When Joseph Smith had anything from God to communicate to the children of men or to the Church, what was it he had to fight against all the day long? It was the prejudices of the people; and, in many instances, he could not and dared not reveal the word of God to the people, for fear they would rise up and reject it. How many times has he faltered? It was not that he was particularly afraid; but he had to look after the welfare and salvation of the people.

If the Prophet Joseph had revealed everything which the Lord manifested to him, it would have proved the overthrow of the people in many instances; hence, he had to treat them like children, and feel them upon milk, and unfold principles gradually, just as they could receive them.

Was all this because it was so hard to comprehend correct principles? No; it was because we were babes and children, and could not understand.

How is it now, under the administration of President Young? Much the same, in this respect. He has often found it very difficult to make the people understand things as the Lord has revealed them unto him.

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPWe ourselves have not got rid of our evils. We have so much professed righteousness and foolish tradition within us, that we feel indignant many times at righteous principles, when God reveals them. Have you not felt so, brethren and sisters? I know you have, and you know you have.

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPWhat is the reason of this? It is because you do not understand celestial laws, nor the principles that govern intelligences in the eternal worlds; it is because you do not understand what is best calculated to elevate, ennoble, and exalt you both in this world and in the world to come; and hence many falter and stumble and fall by the way.—JD, 6:164-166, January 17, 1858.

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPWe could progress a great deal faster, and could prosper a thousand times more than we do if we would be one in carrying out the counsels given us by the Lord through his servants.—JD, 11:357, April 6, 1867.

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPRemember the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong; but to those who trust in the Lord.—TS, 6:797, 1845.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A discourse by President John Taylor, delivered at the priesthood meeting, held in the Salt Lake Assembly Hall, Friday evening, October 7, 1881. Reported by George F. Gibbs. The First Presidency had been reorganized after an apostolic interregnum of three years, and several problems had to be faced and solved. The entire discourse is reproduced, at the expense of some duplications, for its historic significance in resolving these problems. It is of importance to all members of the church and especially those holding the priesthood
[^2] D. and C., see sec. 107, v. 38; sec. 124, v. 139, 140. (Footnote by President John Taylor) These passages are as follows: "It is the duty of the travelling high council to call upon the Seventy, when they need assistance, to fill the several calls for preaching and administering the gospel, instead of any others." D. & C. 107:38 "And again, I give unto you Joseph Young [etc.] . . . . to preside over the quorum of Seventies;
[^3] Italics added by the compiler. It should also be observed that in the church, the law of common consent is equally binding with that of ordination, in ascending to new responsibility or authority.
