John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XVII

SUCCESSION IN THE PRIESTHOOD [^1]

INFORMATION FOR THE "ELDERS OF ISRAEL"

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PRINCIPLE OF SUCCESSION.—There are two or three things that I wish to speak about for the information of the elders of Israel. Since the death of President Young, of the first seven presidents of the seventies, the question has been asked who shall occupy his place. There are a number of men pretty well up in years who are associated with the first seven presidents over the seventies. Some have been of the opinion, as these men are aged, that it would be perhaps better to have some younger person appointed to fill the vacancy as presiding president over the seven presidents of seventies, occasioned by Brother Joseph Young's death. However, there seems to be an order in the priesthood pertaining to these matters that we cannot well ignore. It has been usual heretofore, in cases of this kind, both in regard to the quorum of the twelve and also in regard to high councils—not always, perhaps, carried out in regard to high councils, but acted upon in numerous instances—that is, that the members preside according to priority of ordination and seniority of age, and the two, I think, would probably go together. The twelve, when they were first organized, were directed to have the oldest man selected for their president, who was Thomas B. Marsh. There were similar arrangements made in many instances in regard to high councilors, and in such cases they were regulated, if my memory serves me aright, in the same way. This is my understanding of the order in the early history of the church. This has been the case in regard to the twelve, and there may be other circumstances that I may refer to connected with this order; but I wish to speak of this subject before I come to the other, in order that we may have a just and clear conception of the position we occupy in relation to these matters.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE TWELVE AND THE SEVENTY.—Joseph Young, Sen., who was known as President Joseph Young, occupied the position of president over the first seven presidents of the seventies. . . . until his death. . . . A peculiar connection exists between the seventies and the twelve. The twelve are a travelling high council, whose business it is to preach the gospel, or to see it preached, in all the world; that is their special calling and appointment by revelation. The seventies also possess a mission of a similar nature. This mission is to preach the gospel to all the world. They are placed under the direction of the twelve, who are authorized to call upon them to go forth to the nations of the earth; thus their mission in this respect is similar to the mission of the twelve. The same responsibilities rest upon them in regard to these duties as those which rest upon the twelve, so far as their priesthood and calling go. The high priesthood, as you are aware, differs from the priesthood of the seventies in this respect—the high priests are expected to preside. It is a part of their office and calling to do that. Their organization in a quorum capacity is, as stated, an ordinance "instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall be appointed standing presidents or servants over different stakes scattered abroad." (D. and C. 124:134.) It is not the special business of the seventies to preside, but to preach the gospel, and we understand that it is their duty, whenever called upon, to go forth and fulfil missions under the directions of the twelve. And it is so far imperative upon them that the twelve are told first to call upon the seventies, [^2] and, in the event of their not being prepared to perform this labor, then they may call upon others. But the seventies seem to be the especial helps, assistants, and fellow-laborers of the twelve. This being the case, if a rule of the kind that has been referred to in regard to age and priority of ordination exists among the twelve, the question would naturally arise: Would it not be quite as proper that the same principle should exist among the seventies, who possess a mission and calling so similar in its duties and responsibilities to that of the twelve? This seems to be reasonable, proper, and correct. There is a fitness about many of these things that it is well for us to comprehend. Joseph Young died awhile ago, that is, what we call death. But he lives; and where is he? He has gone behind the veil. Are there any other seventies gone behind the veil before him? I think there are a great many. Do they expect to hold their priesthood and position behind the veil? Yes, if they understand themselves they do, just as much as here. For if the priesthood is everlasting and administers in time and in eternity, then what has been sealed upon the earth by the proper authorities upon the heads of men is also sealed in the heavens. I so read it. And if it is sealed in the heavens, then Joseph Young would take his place in the heavens and operate in his calling and priesthood there, as he did here, and preside over the seventies who have been ordained in this dispensation in their administrations in the other world.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPIf we look at some statements made in the Doctrine and Covenants, we find these things very plainly set forth—that is, the same ideas; and they are principles that are understood by all intelligent elders of Israel. However, there is no harm to speak about them that we may all see eye to eye and comprehend alike.

THE PRINCIPLE OF SUCCESSION BASED ON EERNITY OF THE PRIESTHOOD.—The Doctrine and Covenants, in referring to the twelve, mentions their names and that of their president. It then mentions the names of the presiding officers in the seventies. It mentions the names of the members of the high council that was then organized. And in speaking about David Patten, one of the twelve, it is written: "behold, his priesthood no man taketh from him; but, verily I say unto you, another may be appointed unto the same calling." (D. and C. 124:130.) But his being dead made no difference in regard to his priesthood. He held it just the same in the heavens as on the earth. There is another man mentioned. Referring to the high council, it is stated: "Seymour Brunson I have taken unto myself; no man taketh his priesthood, but another may be appointed unto the same priesthood in his stead." (D. and C. 124:132.) Then there is something said concerning Joseph Smith, Sen., the father of the Prophet Joseph Smith, of whom it is said that he sitteth with Abraham, at his right hand. (See D. and C. 124:19.) Who was Abraham? A patriarch. Who was Father Joseph Smith? A patriarch. It is quite fitting, therefore, that he should associate with Abraham, who was and is also a patriarch; and, perhaps, if we had the full details given, we should have an account of other patriarchs as well. But here is a place alluded to, where he went when he left this world.

I have now referred to men holding three different callings in the priesthood on the earth who are indicated as being provided for in their proper positions in the heavens. If the priesthood administers in time and in eternity, and if quorums of this kind are organized upon the earth, and this priesthood is not taken away, but continued with them in the heavens, we do not wish, I think, to break up the order of the priesthood upon the earth; and it would seem to be necessary that these principles of perpetuity or continuity should be held sacred among us. . . .

SUCCESSION AMONG THE SEVENTY.—Now, because some of these brethren of the first seven presidents of seventies are feeble, aged, or infirm, it is not for us to deprive them of their rights and privileges, and put some others in their places while they remain true and faithful and good members in the church. And, therefore, the proper way, as I understand it, would be to take the senior member of that quorum, that is, the senior president of the seven presidents of seventies, and allow him to preside. The senior president is Levi W. Hancock. Let these brethren then get together and consult over these things, the senior president taking his place among them, and whatever business they may have to transact associated with the seventies, they can all operate together, each performing in his own duties as directed by counsel, as when President Joseph Young was here, each retaining his proper standing, office, calling, and priesthood. I presume my counselors agree with me in that. [Presidents George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith both answered, "Smith both answered, "Yes, sir."] The first presidency are agreed; and I presume the twelve would be. This seems to be the proper way, that all may be respected and honored in their office.

SUCCESSION IN THE TWELVE—SOME HISTORY.—Another subject that I wished to speak about is in regard to the twelve, and the changes that have taken place from time to time in the church since the organization of that quorum. I desire to show the reason for these changes, that we may understand things properly and intelligently.

As I stated, the twelve, when they were called, were placed on the same footing that I have referred to, and Thomas B. Marsh was the senior in that quorum. Hence he was appointed and he is spoken of in the revelations as their president.

At the time of his apostasy, there was another change made. David W. Patten would have been the next, had he lived, but he was killed in Missouri before Thomas B. Marsh apostatized. Had he lived, he would have been president of the twelve, instead of Brigham Young. But he died, and consequently Brigham Young, being the senior member of the twelve, was appointed in his place.

Now, in regard to the apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh, I will get Brother Reynolds to read in what his apostasy consisted. It was a horrible affair, as I look at it.

(The affidavit of Thomas B. Marsh was then read, as follows:)

AFFIDAVIT OF THOMAS B. MARSH

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPThey have among them a company, considered true Mormons, called the Danites, who have taken an oath to support the heads of the Church in all things that they say or do, whether right or wrong. Many, however, of this band are much dissatisfied with this oath, as being against moral and religious principles. On Saturday last, I am informed by the Mormons, that they had a meeting at Far West, at which they appointed a company of twelve, by the name of the Destruction Company, for the purpose of burning and destroying, and that if the people of Buncombe came to do mischief upon the people of Caldwell, and committed depredations upon the Mormons, they were to burn Buncombe; and if the people of Clay and Ray made any movement against them, this destroying company were to burn Liberty and Richmond.

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPThe plan of said Smith, the Prophet, is to take this state; and he professes to his people to intend taking the United States, and ultimately the whole world. This is the belief of the Church, and my own opinion of the Prophet's plans and intentions. The Prophet inculcates the notion, and it is believed by every true Mormon that Smith's prophecies are superior to the laws of the land. I have heard the Prophet say that he would yet tread down his enemies, and walk over their dead bodies; that if he was not let alone, he would be a second Mohammed to this generation, and that he would make it one gore of blood from the Rocky Mountains to the Atlantic Ocean; that like Mohammed, whose motto in treating for peace was "the Alcoran or the Sword," so should it be eventually with us, "Joseph Smith or the Sword." These last statements were made during the last summer. The number of armed men at Adam-Ondi-Ahman was between three and four hundred.

Thomas B. Marsh

Sworn to and subscribed before me, the day herein written.

Henry Jacobs,

J. P., Ray County, Missouri.

Richmond, Missouri, October 24, 1838.

AFFIDAVIT OF ORSON HYDE

The most of the statements in the foregoing disclosure I know to be true; the remainder I believe to be true.

Orson Hyde

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPRichmond, October 24, 1838.

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPSworn to and subscribed before me, on the day above written.

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPHenry Jacobs, J. P.

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPTestimonies from these sources are not always reliable, and it is to be hoped, for the sake of the two brethren, that some things were added by our enemies that they did not assert, but enough was said to make this default and apostasy very terrible.

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPI will here state that I was in Far West at the time these affidavits were made, and was mixed up with all prominent church affairs. I was there when Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde left there; and there are others present who were there at the same time. And I know that these things, referred to in the affidavits, are not true. I have heard a good deal about Danites, but I never heard of them among the Latter-day Saints. If there was such an organization, I never was made acquainted with it. The fact of a president of the twelve, who ought to be true to his trust, apostleship, and calling, and the guardian and protector of the people, making such statements, is truly infamous and is to be deplored by all correct feeling people. It is not unusual for lawyers to say, when speaking of any crime, that such a man, instigated by the devil, did so and so. Thomas B. Marsh was unquestionably "instigated by the devil" when he made this statement which has been read in your hearing. The consequence was, he was cut off the church. When he was cut off, he seemed to have lost all the spirit and power and manhood that he once enjoyed. I was acquainted with him before this. I was acquainted with him soon after I came into the church. With the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, he visited Upper Canada at the time I was presiding there, in the year 1837. I was with them for some time. I procured from a sister, a carriage, which was a very good one, and Brother Joseph Horne, who may be present, supplied the team, and, I think, acted as teamster. In it we visited the churches. I rode with them in the same carriage. They were with us for some time, visiting the various churches and holding meetings and conferences. Thomas B. Marsh many of you knew as he was here in the valleys, and some of you perhaps knew him at that time. At that earlier period, he was a pretty fair average man in regard to intelligence, speech, good, sound reason, etc. I have heard some people say he was a fool, but I did not so understand it. [Brother Woodruff said: "I did not, either."] Until the time of his apostasy, he was a fair average man in regard to intelligence. But when he took the steps he did, it was a shocking course for a man to pursue, occupying the position that he did. I remember a circumstance that occurred. A number of us had been out to a place called Di-Ahman. Its proper name was Adam-Ondi-Ahman. In coming into Far West, I heard about him and Orson Hyde having left. It would be here proper to state, however, that Orson Hyde had been sick with a violent fever for some time, and had not yet fully recovered therefrom, which, with the circumstances with which we were surrounded and the influence of Thomas B. Marsh, may be offered as a slight palliation for his default. Brother Heber C. Kimball and I were together, and I said to him: "I have a notion to take a team and follow after these brethren, and see if I cannot persuade them to come back," speaking particularly of Brother Marsh. "Well," said he, "if you knew him as well as I do, you would know that if he had made up his mind to go, you could not turn him." With that I gave up the idea, knowing that Brother Kimball was better acquainted with him than I was, and I did not go. The result was that he did this deed. I am here reminded of the words of Joseph in exhorting the twelve. He said:

Danitesa-Taylor, JohnTPO ye Twelve, and all Saints, profit by this important key, that in all your trials, troubles, and temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonment and death, see to it that you do not betray heaven, that you do not betray Jesus Christ, that you do not betray your brethren, and that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in the Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any of the word of God. Yes, in all your kicking and floundering, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found on your skirts, and you go down to hell. We may ever know by this sign that there is danger of our being led to a fall and apostasy, when we give way to the devil so as to neglect the first known duty. But, whatever you do, do not betray your friends. (History of Joseph Smith, June 2, 1839.)

Thomas B. Marsh, of course, was cut off from the church for this, as he ought to be, and so was Orson Hyde. I will give you a little further history of Thomas B. Marsh. On my way, I think, from a mission in Europe—I do not now remember the time—I met him in Florence, Nebraska. He hunted me up, and he looked a broken-down man. He spoke to me and asked me about affairs in the mountains, and told me what a wretched position he was in, in consequence of the course he had taken, and said he: "I want to go out there, and I would like to have your opinion as to how the people will receive me." I replied: "In regard to that, I do not think the people will entertain any hard or harsh feelings about you; they realize your position as you realize it; they would feel disposed to treat you properly and kindly; but as regards your ever occupying the position you once held, that to me would be impossible." He answered: "I do not look for anything of that kind," and I do not know but what he said that he did not deserve anything of the kind. I don't remember, however. But he did say: "I want to have a place among the brethren there. I want to stand in the position of a private member, or anywhere that shall be allotted to me. I want to die there."

His circumstances were poor, and I relieved, in part, his present necessities. After his arrival here, I remember hearing him talk in the Fourteenth Ward meetinghouse. It seemed to me about the most foolish and ridiculous talk, devoid of common sense, common intelligence, and common manhood, that I had heard for a long time. Said I to myself: "There is a specimen of apostasy." I remember I was once driving north out of the city. I think it was rather cold. I saw a man tottering along, I thought he was hardly fit to be out in such weather, and when I drew near to him, I found it was Brother Marsh. I asked him to get into my carriage. He had started for Bountiful, but I do not think he could have reached there alone. He appeared to be so weak and feeble.

Perhaps you remember, in the Old Tabernacle, he got up when something was said in regard to apostasy, and said: "If any of you want to see the effects of apostasy, look upon me." You will perhaps remember that. [A number of voices in the congregation, "Yes, sir."] He lived in that way, and died in that way. He might have been at the head of the church, but he died in that miserable condition. I refer to this, because all of these things, when you reflect upon them, have a bearing upon our history, and on the propriety of the course that has been taken in these matters. Did the twelve feel bad towards him? No. I remember that on learning that he was in poor circumstances, they proposed to give him a new suit of clothes, and assist in relieving his wants. But President Young, hearing of it, desired to do it himself, and he supplied his necessities. These are some little reminiscences associated with him. It was real apostasy, and I wanted his affidavit read to show that it was apostasy, that there was nothing wrong or unjust in regard to the treatment that he received. After his apostasy, President Young, by reason of his seniority, necessarily took the position of president of the twelve.

When the twelve arrived in England, a meeting of the quorum was held in Preston. Brother Woodruff has an account of the whole concern. [Brother Woodruff—"Yes, sir."] And there was a vote taken by the twelve at that meeting, and the vote was unanimous, that Brigham Young should be accepted as the president of the twelve apostles. Afterwards, you will find, in a revelation given concerning the twelve, that President Young's name is mentioned as being president of the twelve. It is in that revelation given concerning the Nauvoo House, January 19th, 1841. His name is mentioned as being president of the twelve, and then follow the names of the other members then belonging to that quorum.

I will now go a little back and trace up some other things associated with this subject.

There was a time when there was a large amount of apostasy in Kirtland; it was in 1837, I think. There was a very bitter feeling gotten up by a number of men who had apostatized. Parley P. Pratt was one who was affected. He, however, did not go to the length that some did; and Orson Pratt had partaken more or less of that spirit. I speak of these things as facts. Parley mentions it himself in his own autobiography, which he published, or at least prepared for publication. And then he speaks about his bitter repentance and his reconciliation with Joseph Smith, when the thing was made right. He says:

About this time, after I had returned from Canada, there were jarrings and discords in the Church at Kirtland, and many fell away and became enemies and apostates. There were also envyings, lyings, strifes, and divisions, which caused much trouble and sorrow. By such spirits I was also accused, misrepresented, and abused. And at one time, I also was overcome by the same spirit in a great measure, and it seemed as if the very powers of darkness which war against the Saints were let loose upon me. But the Lord knew my faith, my zeal, my integrity of purpose, and he gave me the victory.

I went to Brother Joseph Smith in tears, and with a broken heart and contrite spirit, confessed wherein I had erred in spirit, murmured, or done or said amiss. He frankly forgave me, prayed for me, and blessed me. Thus by experience I learned more fully to discern and to contrast the two spirits, and to resist the one and cleave to the other. And being tempted in all points, even as others, I learned how to bear with and excuse and succor those who are tempted. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, page 183.)

PRESIDENT TAYLOR'S CALL TO THE TWELVE.—But there were four of the twelve who did apostatize.—William E. McLellin, Luke Johnson, John F. Boynton, and Lyman Johnson. When they apostatized, the following revelation was given:

Revelation given through Joseph Smith, the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 8th, 1838, in response to the supplication: Show us thy will, O Lord, concerning the Twelve, etc.

Verily, thus saith the Lord: Let a conference be held immediately; let the Twelve be organized; and let men be appointed to supply the place of those who are fallen.

Let my servant Thomas remain for a season in the land of Zion, to publish my word.

Let the residue continue to preach from that hour, and if they will do this in all lowliness of heart, in meekness and humility, and long-suffering, I, the Lord, give unto them a promise that I will provide for their families; and an effectual door shall be opened for them, from henceforth.

And next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name.

Let them take leave of my saints in the city Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord.

Let my servant John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards, be appointed to fill the places of those who have fallen, and be officially notified of their appointment. (D. & C. 118.)

I will state that I was living in Canada at the time, some three hundred miles distant from Kirtland. I was presiding over a number of churches in that region, in fact, over all of the churches in Upper Canada. I knew about this calling and appointment before it came, it having been revealed to me. But not knowing but that the devil had a finger in the matter, I did not say anything about it to anybody. [Brother Woodruff here spoke up and said that he was on the Fox Islands, which were farther away still; and also knew, by the Spirit, that he would be called to the apostleship.] A messenger came to me with a letter from the First Presidency, informing me of my appointment, and requesting me to repair forthwith to Kirtland, and from there to go to Far West. I went according to the command.

When I reached Far West, John E. Page, another one mentioned in the revelation just read to you, was there also. John E. Page and I were ordained into the quorum of the twelve at the same meeting. Brother Woodruff was ordained, after the scenes of the war at Far West; but I think it was right in the midst of the war when Brother Page and I were ordained. Brother Woodruff was ordained on the cornerstone of the foundation of the temple in Far West, on the 26th of April, 1839, when we went to fulfil this same revelation that you have heard read, and I helped to ordain him. Brother George A. Smith was ordained at the same time, and I am informed that he took the place of Thomas B. Marsh, who apostatized. I had not retained this fact in my memory, but I think it is correct. There were two other men ordained at the same time [to the office of seventy], one by the name of Darwin Chase, the other Norman Shearer. The former joined Conner's company and was in the fight on Bear River, where he was shot and shortly afterwards died at Camp Douglas. These are some reminiscences associated with this affair.

REORGANIZATIONS WITHIN THE TWELVE.—Now we come to some other events. When the twelve were reorganized, there were some changes made. For instance, in the case of John E. Page, it was not long before he apostatized. Willard Richards was ordained into the twelve at Preston in Lancashire, England, at the same time and place as President Young was voted for and accepted as president of the twelve. Through some inadvertence, or perhaps mixed up with the idea of seniority of age taking the precedence, Wilford Woodruff's name was placed on the records of the time, and for many years after, before that of John Taylor. This matter was investigated some time afterwards by President Young and his council, sanctioned also by the twelve, whether John Taylor held the precedence and stood in gradation prior to Brother Wilford Woodruff, and it was voted on and decided that his name be placed before Wilford Woodruff's, although Wilford Woodruff was the older man. The reason assigned for this change was that although both were called at the same time, John Taylor was ordained into the twelve prior to Wilford Woodruff; and another prominent reason would be that as John Taylor assisted in the ordination of Elder Wilford Woodruff, he therefore must precede him in the council.

Another question arose afterwards on this same subject: Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt had both of them been disfellowshipped and dropped from their quorum, and when they returned, without any particular investigation or arrangement, they took the position in the quorum which they had formerly occupied, and as there was no objection raised, or investigation had on this subject, things continued in this position for a number of years. Some ten or twelve years ago, Brother George A. Smith drew my attention to this matter. I think it was soon after he was appointed as counselor to the first presidency; and he asked me if I had noticed the impropriety of the arrangement. He stated at the same time that these brethren having been dropped from the quorum could not assume the position that they before had in the quorum; but that all those who remained in the quorum when they had left it must necessarily take the precedence of them in the quorum. He stated, at the same time, that these questions might become very serious ones, in case of change of circumstances arising from death or otherwise; remarking also, that I stood before them in the quorum. I told him that I was aware of that, and of the correctness of the position assumed by him, and had been for years, but that I did not choose to agitate or bring up a question of that kind. Furthermore, I stated that, personally, I cared nothing about the matter, and, moreover, I entertained a very high esteem for both the parties named; while, at the same time, I could not help but see, with him, that complications might hereafter arise, unless the matters were adjusted. Some time after, in Sanpete, in June, 1875, President Young brought up the subject of seniority, and stated that John Taylor was the man that stood next to him; and that where he was not, John Taylor presided. He also made the statement that Brother Hyde and Brother Pratt were not in their right positions in the quorum. Upon this statement, I assumed the position indicated.

Thus our positions at that time seemed to be fully defined; and what had been spoken of by Elder George A. Smith, without any action of mine, was carried out by President Young. I occupied the senior position in the quorum, and occupying that position, which was thoroughly understood by the quorum of the twelve, on the death of President Young, as the twelve assumed the presidency, and I was their president, it placed me in a position of president of the church, or, as expressed in our conference meeting: "As president of the quorum of the twelve apostles, as one of the twelve apostles, and of the presidency of the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." In this manner, also, was President Brigham Young sustained, at the general conference held in Nauvoo, in the October following the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith. We find the following recorded in the minutes of that conference:

Elder W. W. Phelps moved that we uphold Brigham Young, the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, as one of the Twelve, and First Presidency of the Church.

Thus I stood in the same position that President Young did when called to occupy the same place at the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

It may be proper here to again say a few words with regard to Brother Orson Hyde, whose endorsement of the terrible charges made by Thomas B. Marsh, in his affidavit, has already been read. Suffice it to say, in addition to what has previously been stated, he was cut off the church, and of course lost his apostleship; and when he subsequently returned, and made all the satisfaction that was within his power, he was forgiven by the authorities and the people, and was again re-instated in the quorum. But having been cut off from the quorum, and having remained in that condition for some time, he of course lost his former position as to seniority, and that necessarily placed me in advance of him.

Orson Pratt also had some difficulties while we were in Nauvoo, arising out of the introduction of the celestial order of marriage. It seems, from remarks made in a conversation that I had with him afterwards, that he did not fully realize or comprehend the situation. But, at the time of the occurrence, when I saw that he was very severely tried, as I had always held pleasant relations with him, I took every pains that I possibly could to explain the situation of things, to remove his doubts, and to satisfy his feelings, but without avail. At one time I talked with him for nearly two hours, to prevent, if possible, his apostasy or departure from the church. But he was very sorely tried, and was very self-willed and stubborn in his feelings, and would not yield. His feelings were bitter towards the Prophet Joseph Smith and others, and the result was that he was dropped from his position in the quorum. But I am not aware of his ever having written or published anything against the church. On the contrary, when Dr. John C. Bennett, who had apostatized, sent a letter to Sidney Rigdon, wherein he denounced President Smith, and stated that he was a villain and a scoundrel, and that a requisition would be made for him by the State of Missouri, and requested him to show this letter to Orson Pratt; although Sidney Rigdon, who was the first counselor to Joseph, did not show this statement unfolding this conspiracy to him [the Prophet], yet, as soon as Sidney Rigdon handed the letter to Orson Pratt, he immediately took it to the Prophet Joseph. And thus, while Sidney Rigdon withheld this information from one to whom he was in honor and duty bound, as his first counselor, to make it known, yet Orson Pratt, although at the time disfellowshipped, immediately made Joseph acquainted with the conspiracy that was being plotted against him, and thus exhibited a manhood and integrity that were so woefully deficient in Sidney Rigdon. In reference to Brother Pratt's severance from the council of the twelve, the following items from the life of President Young are interesting:

August 8, 1842.—Assisted by Elders H. C. Kimball and George A. Smith, I spent several days laboring with Elder Orson Pratt, whose mind became so darkened by the influence and statements of his wife, that he came out in rebellion against Joseph, refusing to believe his testimony or obey his counsel. He said he would believe his wife in preference to the Prophet. Joseph told him if he did believe his wife and follow her suggestions, he would go to hell.

We reported to the Prophet that we had labored with Brother Orson diligently, in a spirit of meekness, forbearance, and long-suffering. He requested us to ordain Brother Amasa Lyman in Brother Orson's stead. After receiving these instructions, we met Brother Orson near my house, and continued to labor with him. He said to us: "There is Brother Amasa Lyman in your house, Brother Young; he has been long in the ministry: go in and ordain him in my stead."

August 20.—Brother Orson Pratt was cut off from the Church, and, according to the Prophet's direction, Brothers H. C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and I ordained Brother Amasa Lyman in his stead. (History of Brigham Young.)

Of Brother Pratt's integrity, indefatigable labors, purity of life, zeal for the cause of God, and untiring devotion in proclaiming the word of the Lord, I cannot speak in terms of too high praise or affectionate regard; and these other matters, painful though they be, are only mentioned now because they are necessary to make plain to your minds an important principle, and without these details you would not so readily nor fully understand my position, and the position of the twelve, at the present time.

Having said so much on these matters, I will talk a little on some other things.

Unitya-Taylor, JohnTPWe are told in the Doctrine and Covenants, that when the people are united, or the priesthood are united, and are moved upon by the Holy Ghost, their teachings "shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D. and C. 68:4.) That is the case, and I have not seen greater unanimity than we have had, both in the selection of the twelve and in that of the First Presidency afterwards. And if the united voice of a few elders is the will of God, and the word of God, and the law of God, the question is, is not the voice of the whole Church the law of God and the will of God? I speak of this for your information, that you may comprehend the ground upon which you stand, speaking not of persons, but of the principle. Speaking of myself, who am I? Just like you. Who are you? Just like me—poor, feeble, weak, erring humanity. Can I do anything without the aid of the Almighty? No; I could not leave this stand without his assistance, nor could any of you leave this house if God was to say, no, and was to withdraw the breath which you breathe, which you received from him. But God has called all of us to a high calling; and there is a regular organization in the church and kingdom of God which ought to be respected. . . .—(L. D. S. Pamphlets, Vol. 31, Widtsoe Collection.)

Footnotes [^3]

"Which quorum is instituted for traveling elders to bear record of my name in all the world, wherever the traveling high council, mine apostles, shall send them to prepare a way before my face.

"The difference between this quorum and the quorum of elders is that the one is to travel continually, and the other is to preside over the churches from time to time, and the other has no responsibility of presiding saith the Lord your God." D. & C. 124:138-140.

---
Notas:
[^1] The council was composed of the following brethren, viz.: Abraham O. Smoot, president of Utah Stake; Angus M. Cannon, president of Salt Lake Stake; Warren N. Dusenberry, Probate Judge of Utah County; Elias A. Smith, Probate Judge of Salt Lake County; Jonathan S. Page and A. D. Holdaway, Selectmen of Utah County; Ezekiel Holman and Jesse W. Fox, Jr., Selectmen of Salt Lake County; Presiding Bishop Wm. B. Preston; John T. Caine, Delegate to Congress from Utah; Bishops Thos. R. Cutler, and John E. Booth.
[^2] D. and C., see sec. 107, v. 38; sec. 124, v. 139, 140. (Footnote by President John Taylor) These passages are as follows: "It is the duty of the travelling high council to call upon the Seventy, when they need assistance, to fill the several calls for preaching and administering the gospel, instead of any others." D. & C. 107:38 "And again, I give unto you Joseph Young [etc.] . . . . to preside over the quorum of Seventies;
[^3] Italics added by the compiler. It should also be observed that in the church, the law of common consent is equally binding with that of ordination, in ascending to new responsibility or authority.
