John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XVIII

PRIESTHOOD QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS

SOME GENERAL PROBLEMS

RELATIONS BETWEEN THE FIRST PRESIDENCY AND THE PRESIDING BISHOPRIC.—I will here read on this subject a passage which people take up sometimes, without understanding it, and consequently, when they do so, they are apt to make quite a number of mistakes. The passage to which I will refer you, is the twenty-second verse of the sixty-eighth section, in the Doctrine and Covenants. After reading it, you would think you had got the whole answer, but then you might not have it, although you might think you had.

And again, no bishop or high priest who shall be set apart for this ministry shall be tried or condemned for any crime, save it be before the First Presidency of the church.

Now, does not that look very plain? It does, when apart from the context, and if we do not examine the other parts associated therewith. I will further read some more pertaining to this matter, which will be found in the Doctrine and Covenants, section sixty-eight, verses fourteen to seventeen:

There remain hereafter, in the due time of the Lord, other bishops to be set apart unto the church, to minister even according to the first;

Wherefore they shall be high priests who are worthy, and they shall be appointed by the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood, except they be literal descendants of Aaron.

And if they be literal descendants of Aaron they have a legal right to the bishopric, if they are the firstborn among the sons of Aaron.

For the firstborn holds the right of the presidency over this priesthood, and the keys or authority of the same.

Now, I desire to draw your attention to one thing very distinctly, that you may comprehend. "For the firstborn holds the right of presidency over this priesthood." Over what priesthood? The bishopric. There is a presidency in that priesthood; and this firstborn of the literal descendants of Aaron would have a legal right to that presidency. No man has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood, except he be a literal descendant of Aaron, and the firstborn among his sons. Then, he would have a legal right to it. . . . But [I wish to speak of one or two leading principles pertaining to this subject; and] as a high priest of the Melchizedek priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of bishop when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, and it is stated, and they shall be set apart "under the hands of the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood." (D. & C. 68:19.) To what authority? To what power? To what calling? To what bishopric? To the presiding bishopric. This is what is here referred to:

And a literal descendant of Aaron, also, must be designated by this Presidency, and found worthy, and anointed, and ordained under the hands of this Presidency, otherwise they are not legally authorized to officiate in their priesthood.

But, by virtue of the decree concerning their right of the priesthood descending from father to son, they may claim their anointing, if at any time they can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the Lord under the hands of the above named Presidency. (D. & C. 68:20, .)

Without that the Presiding bishop could not be set apart, because there is where the authority is placed.

And again, no bishop or high priest who shall be set apart for this ministry shall be tried or condemned for any crime, save it be before the First Presidency of the church;

In regard to what ministry? Why, the Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood. That is what is here spoken of.

And inasmuch as he is found guilty before this Presidency, by testimony that cannot be impeached, he shall be condemned;

And if he repent he shall be forgiven, according to the covenants and commandments of the church. (D. & C. 68:22-24.)

Now, then, I will read you something more on the same subject, which will be found in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPThere are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPWhy the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPBefore his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the order of the Son of God.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPBut out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPAll other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPBut there are two divisions or grand heads—one is the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the other is the Aaronic, or Levitical Priesthood.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPThe office of an elder comes under the priesthood of Melchizedek.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPThe Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things. (D. & C. 107:1-8.)

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPNow here is a principle developed that I wish to call your attention to, and that is, that it is the especial prerogative of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has been "in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things," and to have the right of presidency in those things.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPBut then, here is another distinction that I wish to call your attention to, at the same time, which is found in the next verse:

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPThe Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPBut there is a difference between the general authority of the Melchizedek priesthood and the one that is designated, which presides over them all: and that which presides over the whole has the right to administer in all things. The Aaronic priesthood is an appendage unto the Melchizedek priesthood, and is under its direction.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPI mention these things that you bishops, and you seventies, and you high priests, and you elders, and you high councilors, and you presidents of stakes and councilors, may comprehend the position of things, as here indicated; and, as was said formerly, I think it was by Paul, that you may be able to rightly divide the word of truth, and give to every man his portion in due season. These principles are written here, and are very plain, if they are understood, but if not understood, then they are mysterious, and it is required of us to make ourselves acquainted with the principles inculcated and herein developed. The things which I have mentioned are plain to the minds of all intelligent Latter-day Saints, who have studied the Doctrine and Covenants on these points.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPHigh priests after the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood have a right to officiate in their own standing, under the direction of the presidency, in administering spiritual things, and also in the office of an elder, priest (of the Levitical order), teacher, deacon, and member. (D. & C. 107:10.)

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPThat is the reason why, as soon as they possess this priesthood and right, if they are appointed to any particular office in the Church, they have a right to administer in that office.

Priesthood, Melchizedeka-Taylor, JohnTPI will now speak a little upon the high priesthood. This high priesthood, we are told, has held the right of presidency in all ages of the world. But there is a difference between the general powers of the priesthood, and the particular office and calling to which men are set apart; and you, when I tell you, will understand it very easily; for instance, the presidency of the priesthood, or the presidency of the church, are high priests. The twelve are high priests. The presidents of stakes and their counselors, the high council of a stake, and of all the stakes, are high priests. The bishops are ordained and set apart through the high priesthood, and stand in the same capacity; and thus bishops and their counselors are high priests. Now, these things you all know. There is nothing mysterious about them.

Priesthood Callingsa-Taylor, JohnTPALL PRIESTHOOD FUNCTIONS UNDER DIRECTION IN CHURCH CAPACITY.—There is another question associated with this matter. Because a man is a high priest, is he an apostle? No. Because a man is a high priest, is he the president of a stake, or the counselor to the president of a stake? No. Because he is a high priest, is he a bishop? No, not by any means. And so on, in all the various offices. The high priesthood holds the authority to administer in those ordinances, offices, and places, when they are appointed by the proper authorities, and at no other time; and while they are sustained also by the people. Now these are the distinctions which I wish to draw, simply to classify them. And when there is anything said about a high priest, you say, "I am a high priest, and if such a man has authority, I have it!" You have if you have been appointed to it, or you have not if you have not. You have it if you are appointed to fill the office, and are properly called and set apart to that office; but unless you are, you have not got that office, but still you are a high priest; and high priests after the order of the Melchizedek priesthood have a right to officiate in their own standing under the direction of the presidency, in administering spiritual things, but they must be under that direction or presidency. Now here is where the question comes in. Is it not plain when you look at it? To me it is very distinct and pointed, and it is to you who are intelligent and have studied these things. It is not because a man holds a certain class of priesthood that he is to administer in all the offices of that priesthood. He administers in them only as he is called and set apart for that purpose. . . .—JD, 22:193-196, July 18, 1880.

FULFILLING CALLINGS IN THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD

High Priestsa-Taylor, JohnTPHIGH PRIESTS.—Why are you organized as a high priesthood? Read the Doctrine and Covenants. What does it say? It says "Which ordinance is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall be appointed standing presidents or servants over different stakes scattered abroad." (D. & C. 124:134.) It is a kind of normal school, where they may be taught lessons in the presidency, and be prepared to judge and act in the various places which they may be called to. Do the priesthood fulfil their calling? No, they do not. When the stakes were being organized, we had to call upon seventies and elders, and all classes of men to hold positions which high priests should have held. But there are some who talk about being great big high priests, who, when they should have been called upon to be bishops, or bishops' counselors, were found to be incompetent because they had not prepared themselves to occupy these offices associated with their calling, and been dabbling with the world and had been led by its influence, instead of being wide awake and full of the life and power and revelations of God. If they had magnified their priesthood, then God would have been with them, and they would have been selected, until all those places would have been filled.

Seventiesa-Taylor, JohnTPSEVENTIES.—Then, how is it in regard to the seventies? Just the same . . . . .How many of them, if they were called today, are prepared to go to the nations of the earth to preach the gospel? You are not prepared to do it any more than the high priests were prepared to magnify their calling. The twelve are commanded first to call upon the seventies, but when they do so, they frequently find they with one consent begin to make excuses. I know it is so, if you do not. Very well, what then? As there are other appendages to the Melchizedek priesthood, the twelve are obliged to call upon the elders, and high priests, and others, to go and perform duties which should be performed by the seventies, but which they neglect to do . . . . Now, notwithstanding this being the case, the work of God cannot stand still. The nations must be warned. The word of God must go forth, or the twelve would be held responsible, if these things were not done; and we have to keep doing it, doing it!

Seventiesa-Taylor, JohnTPCALLING SEVENTIES FOR MISSIONS.—Now, as a sample of the excuses that men make who are called to go on missions, I will tell you what people tell me. One man says, "I have been building a house, and have not got the roof on it." Another comes, and says, "I have just been entering some land, and I am afraid I shall be placed in difficulty if I go; I pray you have me excused." And one man said he was so engaged in merchandising, and he was so much interested in the people's welfare, that he was afraid they would suffer very materially in their temporal interests if he ceased to keep store—that it would not be well to take him away. Another has bought five yoke of oxen, and is proving them, and prays to be excused. And another has married a wife and he cannot go . . . . Well, it is rather a lamentable story to tell. Yet, while we hold this important priesthood, it is a sorry way of treating it . . . .

Priesthood Callingsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LABOR NOT FOR ONE OR A DOZEN.—Now, the idea is not that one or a dozen men have to bear off this kingdom. For what is the priesthood conferred upon you? Is it to follow the "devices and desires of your own hearts," as I used to hear them say in the Church of England when I was a boy? Is it to do that? I think not. Or were we enlisted to God, for time and eternity? I think we were; and we want to wake up to the responsibilities which devolve upon us, and honor our calling and magnify our priesthood . . . .—JD, 22:201-203, July 18, 1880.

Priesthood Callingsa-Taylor, JohnTPBROTHERLY CONCERN.—Let us seek to promote one another's welfare, and feel that we are brethren, that we are the representatives of God upon the earth. Our Heavenly Father is desirous to promote the happiness and welfare of the whole of the human family; and if we, any of us, hold any priesthood, it is simply for that same purpose, and not for our personal aggrandizement, or for our own honor, or pomp, or position; but we hold it in the interest of God and for the salvation of the people, that through it we may promote their happiness, blessing, and prosperity, temporal and spiritual, both here and in the world to come. That is why the priesthood is conferred upon us, and if we do not use it in this way, then there is a malfeasance in office; then we violate our obligations before God, and render ourselves unworthy of the high calling that the Lord has conferred upon us. The priesthood always was given for the blessing of the human family. People talk about it as though it was for the special benefit of individuals . . . .—JD, 22:230, June 26, 1881.

Temple Ordinancesa-Taylor, JohnTPPRIESTHOOD AND TEMPLE WORK.—Elijah, it was prophesied, should come and turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers. That prophecy has been fulfilled, and while millions and myriads of the human family had died without a knowledge of the gospel, we are instructed what our duty is towards them. And while we are engaged in building temples and administering therein both for the living and the dead, the everlasting priesthood in the heavens are engaged in operating in the same way in the interests of all humanity, not only of those who now live but those who have lived. We need, it is true, the assistance and guidance of the Almighty, and the holy priesthood behind the veil also requires our assistance and our help. Paul, who understood these things, said that they without us should not be made perfect, and we without them cannot be made perfect. They in their day had obtained a knowledge of God and his law, and we are permitted to obtain the same. God has been pleased to restore the same principles and to place us in communion with him and them. Hence, while they are operating in the heavens we are operating here upon the earth. We build temples and administer in them. They are attending to those who have died without a knowledge of the gospel, and who will communicate from time to time with us to show us our duty.

Temple Ordinancesa-Taylor, JohnTPIt is written that saviors shall come upon Mount Zion. How can a man be a savior if he saves nobody? And how can they save unless God shows them how? How can they build temples unless they have a knowledge of the work in which they are engaged? And how can they administer in these temples unless God instructs them? They cannot do it; we cannot do it; nobody can do it; and therefore it is necessary that we should all the time be under the guidance and direction of the Almighty, for without him we can do nothing.—JD, 22:292-293, October 9, 1881.

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPETERNITY OF THE PRIESTHOOD.—And are the priesthood operating behind the veil? Yes, and we are operating here. And we have a priesthood here, and they have one there. Have we a presidency? They have one there. Have we a twelve? So they have there. Have we seventies here? They have there. Have we high priests here? They have there. Have we various quorums? Yes, and we operate in them; and when we get through we join our quorums above . . . .—JD, 22:308, August 28, 1881.

INTER-STAKE DIFFICULTIES

I shall now refer to what is known as Utah Lake and Jordan River Dam water question. . . . President Angus M. Cannon showed me a letter in which it was stated that a law-suit was commenced in regard to the affair, some of the parties thereto being outside of the church and some inside. . . . Brother Cannon (who is president of the Salt Lake Stake) came to me and wanted to know what to do. He said he could not regulate these matters as his jurisdiction did not extend beyond Salt Lake Stake, nor could President Smoot because his jurisdiction did not go beyond Utah Stake. Here was a dilemma. What shall be done? Could I show him a way out of the difficulty?

I told him I could; that a council had been provided through the Prophet Joseph Smith for just such cases. Some people don't know anything about that, but yet that is a fact. They did not know that it had ever been used before. It is a council of twelve high priests over which the First Presidency of the church should preside to adjudicate upon difficult cases that might arise in the church, and this should be the highest council in the church, and from which there should be no appeal. We called together this council and met here in this house, and the parties were heard—some outside of the church and some inside. Finally we got the matter adjusted, and I am informed that the decision is satisfactory to all parties. . . . I and Brother George Q. Cannon presided in all the meetings of the council [^1]. In selecting the council we selected men from the two counties who were conversant with county affairs, and both counties were equally represented.

But some people will say—how is it the high council could not settle the question? Because the high council in Utah Stake has no jurisdiction over affairs in Salt Lake Stake, nor has the high council of Salt Lake Stake any jurisdiction over affairs in Utah Stake, and the other council was formed just to meet such an emergency. I speak of this for your information; and, as I have said, when the matter is thoroughly completed, it will prove to be satisfactory to all parties.—JD, 26:73-74, November 30, 1884.

ADVICE TO A HIGH COUNCIL.—Now, I will tell you of a principle taught by Joseph Smith. It may be of use to you as a high council, and it will not hurt anybody else. In speaking of the discernment of spirits, said he, a man may have the gift of the discernment of spirits; he may see what is in the heart; but because that has been revealed to him, he has no business to bring that as a charge against any person. The man's acts must be proved by evidence and by witnesses.—JD, 26:359, February 20, 1884.

Footnotes

After the first session of the council, in consequence of Hon. John T. Caine's being required at Salt Lake City on official business, Elder L. John Nuttall was appointed a member of the council in place of Elder Caine.

---
Notas:
[^1] The council was composed of the following brethren, viz.: Abraham O. Smoot, president of Utah Stake; Angus M. Cannon, president of Salt Lake Stake; Warren N. Dusenberry, Probate Judge of Utah County; Elias A. Smith, Probate Judge of Salt Lake County; Jonathan S. Page and A. D. Holdaway, Selectmen of Utah County; Ezekiel Holman and Jesse W. Fox, Jr., Selectmen of Salt Lake County; Presiding Bishop Wm. B. Preston; John T. Caine, Delegate to Congress from Utah; Bishops Thos. R. Cutler, and John E. Booth.
