John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

BOOK FOUR

The Kingdom of God

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTP"We are here to do the will of God, to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish the Zion of God."

—John Taylor,

JD, 23:324.

CHAPTER XIX

THE MEANING OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD

THE IDEA OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPA THEORY OF GOVERNMENT.—We talk a good deal about the church and kingdom of God. I sometimes think we understand very little about either. The kingdom of God means the government of God. That means, power, authority, rule, dominion, and a people to rule over. But that principle will not be fulfilled, cannot be entirely fulfilled, until, as we are told in the scriptures, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ, and he will rule over them, and when unto him every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that he is Christ, to the glory of God, the Father. That time has not yet come, but there are certain principles associated therewith that have come; namely, the introduction of that kingdom, and the introduction of that kingdom could only be made by that Being who is the King and Ruler, and the Head of that government, first communicating his ideas, his principles, his laws, his government to the people. Otherwise we should not know what his laws were.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThe world has been governed in every kind of form; we have had every species of government. Sometimes we have had patriarchal government; at other times we have had unlimited monarchies or what may be called despotic governments, where the power to rule is in the hands of one individual. At other times we have had limited monarchies such as exist in many places now upon the face of the earth. In other places and at different ages we have had what is termed republican governments where the voice of the people has ruled and governed and managed the people's affairs. There have been various forms independent of these . . . . but nowhere have we had the government of God. It is true that for a limited period among a very small people in early days, among the Jews, they professed to be under the guidance of God for a certain length of time. But they were continually departing therefrom.—JD, 21:63-64, January 4, 1880.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPA CHRISTIAN CONCEPT.—"Thy kingdom come." . . . . This was taught by Jesus to his disciples when they came to him, saying, teach us to pray. . . . Thy kingdom come. What kingdom? What is the meaning of "thy kingdom come"? It means the rule of God. It means the law of God. It means the government of God. It means the people who have listened to and who are willing to listen to and observe the commands of Jehovah. And it means that there is a God who is willing to guide and direct and sustain his people. Thy kingdom come, that thy government may be established, and the principles of eternal truth as they exist in the heavens may be imparted to men; and that, when they are imparted to men, those men may be in subjection to those laws and to that government, and live in the fear of God, keeping his commandments and being under his direction. Thy kingdom come, that the confusion, the evil, and wickedness, the murder and bloodshed that now exist among mankind may be done away, and the principles of truth and right, the principles of kindness, charity, and love as they dwell in the bosom of the Gods, may dwell with us.—JD, 23:177-178, July 24, 1882.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPMORMON POLITICAL THOUGHT.—We differ from the world with regard to our political views, for they are based on our religious faith; we believe in God, and therefore we fear him; we believe he has established his kingdom upon the earth, and therefore we cling to it; we believe that he is designing to turn, and overturn, and revolutionize the nations of the earth, and to establish a government that shall be under his rule, his dominion, and authority, and shall emphatically be called the government of God, or, in other words, the kingdom of God. There is nothing strange, however, in this; for a great many parties, both in the United States and in the governments of the old world, have believed in the kingdom of God being established in the last days; it has been a favorite doctrine, both among socialists and Christians, and much has been said and written about it, theoretically. The difference between them and us is, they talk about something to come; we say that it has commenced, and that this is that kingdom.—JD, 11:89-90, March 5, 1865.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPPRIESTHOOD: THE GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—What is the kingdom of God? It is God's government upon the earth and in heaven. What is his priesthood? It is the rule, authority, administration, if you please, of the government of God on the earth or in the heavens; for the same priesthood that exists upon the earth exists in the heavens, and that priesthood holds the keys of the mysteries of the revelations of God; and the legitimate head of that priesthood, who has communion with God, is the prophet, seer, and revelator to his church and people on the earth.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPWhen the will of God is done on earth as it is in heaven, that priesthood will be the only legitimate ruling power under the whole heavens; for every other power and influence will be subject to it. When the millennium . . . . is introduced, all potentates, powers, and authorities—every man, woman, and child will be in subjection to the kingdom of God; they will be under the power and dominion of the priesthood of God: then the will of God will be done on the earth as it is done in heaven.—JD, 6:25, November 1, 1857.

A LITERAL OR SPIRITUAL KINGDOM.—Will God's kingdom be a literal or a spiritual kingdom? It would be almost unnecessary to answer such a question as the above, were it not for the opinions that are entertained in the world concerning a purely spiritual kingdom.. . . . But I have introduced this merely to meet some questions that exist in the minds of many, relative to a spiritual kingdom, arising from certain remarks of our Savior's, where he says, "My kingdom is not of this world"; (John 18:36) and again, the "kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost"; (Romans 14:17) and again, "the kingdom of God is within [or among] you." (Luke 17:21.)

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThe kingdom of God, as I have already stated, is the government of God, whether in the heavens or on the earth. Hence Jesus taught his disciples to pray, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." And when the kingdom of God is established on the earth, and prevails universally, then will the will of God be done on earth, and not till then; then will the reign of God exist on the earth, as it now does in heaven. It is this reign we are speaking of, a reign of righteousness. But whenever God's laws are established, or his kingdom is organized, and officers selected, and men yield obedience to the laws of the kingdom of God, to such an extent does God's kingdom prevail.—GG, 83, 1852.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPI have demonstrated . . . . that the kingdom of God would be literally established on the earth. It will not be an aerial phantom, according to some visionaries, but a substantial reality. It will be established, as before said, on a literal earth, and will be composed of literal men, women, and children; of living saints who keep the commandments of God, and of resurrected bodies who shall actually come out of their graves, and live on the earth. The Lord will be king over all the earth, and all mankind literally under his sovereignty, and every nation under the heavens will have to acknowledge his authority, and bow to his sceptre. Those who serve him in righteousness will have communications with God, and with Jesus; will have the ministering of angels, and will know the past, the present, and the future; and other people, who may not yield full obedience to his laws, nor be fully instructed in his covenants, will, nevertheless, have to yield full obedience to his government. [^1] For it will be reign of God upon the earth, and he will enforce his laws, and command that obedience from the nations of the world which is legitimately his right. Satan will not then be permitted to control its inhabitants, for the Lord God will be king over all the earth, and the kingdom and greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven will be given to the saints.—GG, 87-88, 1852.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPGod has introduced his kingdom after his order, and it is for him to guide that kingdom and direct it, and manage it, and manipulate it in the interest of the honest in heart, and of all nations. He has commenced it among us that he might have a little nucleus where he could communicate and reveal his will, composed of such as would carry that will out, and do his bidding and obey his behests.—JD, 21:60, September 21, 1878.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPJOHN TAYLOR'S BELIEF.—Well, we are here struggling and trying to introduce correct principles, and to advance not only the interests of the church of God, but the kingdom of God, for God will have a kingdom, . . . . and he will have rule and dominion, for this earth belongs to him and he will possess it, and his saints will inherit it at last. We did not use to be afraid of talking about these things. In former times they told us that the saints of the Most High should finally take the kingdom and the greatness of the kingdom, which should be given to the saints of the Most High God. Do you believe it? I happen to be one who believes it. And I prophesy that it will be fulfilled.—JD, 21:216, March 1, 1880.

RELATION TO THE CHURCH AND PRIESTHOOD

Priesthooda-Taylor, JohnTPA KINGDOM OF PRIESTS.—We are today a kingdom of priests holding to a very great extent the holy priesthood; and it is essential that we submit ourselves to the laws of that priesthood and be governed by them in all of our actions.—JD, 21:358, August 8, 1880.

Priesthood and Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PRIESTHOOD TO FACILITATE THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—Here then, God was desirous of introducing his kingdom upon the earth, and he had, in the first place, to organize his church, to organize the people that he had scattered among the nations and to bring them together, that there might be one fold and one shepherd, and one Lord, one faith, and one baptism, and one God, who should be in all and through all, and by which all should be governed. To facilitate this object, he organized his holy priesthood as it existed in the heavens, and he gave a pattern of these things, just as much as he did in the days of Moses, only more so.—JD, 18:138, October 10, 1875.

MEANING OF THE RELATIONSHIP.—This is a work that is not popular among men. They want their ideas, their theories, and their notions; we want the ideas and theories, the word and will, and guidance and direction of the Almighty; and if we are connected with his kingdom, if there is such a thing as the kingdom of God upon the earth, it means the rule and government of God.

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPPeradventure some will say, "We won't let you do it." Now, don't stop the Lord, will you? No matter about the theories, ideas, and notions of men. God has committed to us certain principles, and by the help of God we mean to carry them out. In doing this it devolves upon us to send the gospel to every creature under heaven. . . . And let the twelve, let the seventies, let the high priests, and let the elders work up to the dignity and importance of their calling, and feel that they are under command, as the servants of God, to do his will in spreading the gospel of life and salvation to the nations of the earth. The world will hate you. No matter—they hated your Master before you. They persecuted him before they persecuted you. He endured it; we will try to.—JD, 22:293-294, October 9, 1881.

Sustaininga-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LEGITIMATE OFFICERS OF THE CHURCH AND KINGDOM.—You should understand that when you have been voting here to sustain the presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the twelve apostles, the high council, the bishops, and other quorums, you have been voting to sustain the legitimate and authorized officers of the church and kingdom of God, whose right it is to rule and govern whenever and wherever the Almighty has a people upon the earth.—JD, 9:12-13, April 6, 1861.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPRESPONSIBILITY OF ORGANIZATION.—It is not correct to suppose that the whole duty of carrying this kingdom devolves upon the twelve or the First Presidency, as the case may be, or upon the presidents of the stakes, or upon the high priests, or upon the seventies, or upon the bishops, or upon any other officer in the church and kingdom of God; that to the contrary, all of us have our several duties to perform. And I may go farther in regard to the duties of men, and also in regard to those of women; all have their duties to perform before God. The organization of this church and kingdom is for the express purpose of putting every man in his place, and it is then expected that every man in that place will magnify his office and calling.—JD, 21:359-360, August 8, 1880.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPTHE CHURCH OF GOD A FORERUNNER TO THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—We talk sometimes about the church of God, and why? We talk about the kingdom of God, and why? Because, before there could be a kingdom of God, there must be a church of God, and hence the first principles of the gospel were needed to be preached to all nations, as they were formerly when the Lord Jesus Christ and others made their appearance on the earth. And why so? Because of the impossibility of introducing the law of God among a people who would not be subject to and be guided by the spirit of revelation. Hence the world have generally made great mistakes upon these points. They have started various projects to try to unite and cement the people together without God; but they could not do it. Fourierism, communism—another branch of the same thing—and many other principles of the same kind have been introduced to try and cement the human family together. And then we have had peace societies, based upon the same principles. But all these things have failed, and they will fail, because, however philanthropic, humanitarian, benevolent, or cosmopolitan our ideas, it is impossible to produce a true and correct union without the Spirit of the living God and that Spirit can only be imparted through the ordinances of the gospel. Hence Jesus told his disciples to go and preach the gospel to every creature, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and said he—"lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matthew 28:20.) It was by this cementing, uniting spirit, that true sympathetic, fraternal relations could be introduced and enjoyed.—JD, 18:137, October 10, 1875.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd let me say a little farther on a subject that I before referred to, that is, that God could not build up a kingdom on the earth unless he had a church and a people who had submitted to his law and were willing to submit to it; and with an organization of such a people, gathered from among the nations of the earth under the direction of a man inspired of God, the mouthpiece of Jehovah to his people; I say that, with such an organization, there is a chance for the Lord God to be revealed, there is an opportunity for the laws of life to be made manifest, there is a chance for God to introduce the principles of heaven upon the earth and for the will of God to introduce the principles of heaven upon the earth and for the will of God to be done upon earth as it is done in heaven.—JD, 18:140, October 10, 1875.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE CHURCH, A SCHOOL FOR THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—You cannot teach the arts and sciences without necessary preparation for their introduction, nor can you teach people in the government of God unless they are placed in communication with him, and hence comes the church of God, and what is meant by that? A school, if you please, wherein men are taught certain principles, wherein we can receive a certain spirit through obedience to certain ordinances.—JD, 21:65, January 4, 1880.

THE ROLE OF THE PEOPLE

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LATTER-DAY SAINTS.—The kingdom of God will be built up. The will of God must be done on the earth as it is in heaven. Will such a thing as that ever take place on the earth? Yes, as surely as you and I are here today it will. Then, if the kingdom of God is to come, if the will of God is ever to be done on the earth as it is done in heaven, where can it commence except it is among the Latter-day Saints; for there is no other people under the heavens who acknowledge the authority of God? They do not really acknowledge the rule of God, or the government of God, anywhere among all the nations of the earth; and if his will is ever done on earth as it is done in heaven, where shall it start but in the land of Zion, and among the people of Zion?—JD, 24:355-356, December 9, 1883.

"SOME ACTION IS REQUIRED."—We have been talking for years about the rule and government of the kingdom of God and its final establishment upon the earth, in peace and righteousness; and also about the time when every creature which is in the heavens and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them will be heard saying, "Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever." (Revelation 5:13.) We have been talking about these things, but there is much to be done in the intermediate space between the present and that impenetrable period in the great future. It is not all a matter of faith, but there is some action required; it is a thing that we have got to engage in ourselves, individually and collectively as a people, and it is a matter of no small concern.—JD, 9:341, April 13, 1862.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE POWER OF THE PEOPLE OF THE EARTH.—It is in vain for the elders of Israel to teach the principles of truth unless the people are prepared to receive them; and it is vain for the Lord to communicate his will unto the people unless the people possess a portion of his Spirit, to comprehend something of that will and the designs of God towards them, and towards the earth upon which they dwell. Nor can the Lord work with them unless they are prepared to cooperate with him in the establishment of his kingdom upon the earth.—JD, 11:158-159, October 7, 1865.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE INDIVIDUAL'S PLACE.—How is the world going to be redeemed, think you? If the kingdom of God is ever built up, the Almighty will have to dictate things himself. Through what medium will he do this? Is he going to send his angels to gather the people? He has thousands of them, but he has his own way of doing things and that is through the priesthood. If we are teachers, we think faithful people ought to listen to us. If we are bishops, we of course think that the people ought to respect our counsel, and if presidents, we are anxious to see the people obedient. If so, is it not right for us to listen to those that are over us? All people in this government should listen to the head, for that is the order of God.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPIt is all very nice; it is a beautiful theory; everybody under our rule must submit; our wives and our children must yield obedience; we all admire the beauty and order and harmony of the church of God until it comes to touch us, and we are the only people exempt. We are very apt to show that we like a little of our own way, and that although God's government is very good for others, that we do not like to be interfered with so much. If this be our feeling, why do we act hypocritically? Why exact of others that which we will not do or yield ourselves? Why not, if we are the rich men we profess to be, be on hand, show our willingness at all times to do what is required of us, seek the Spirit of the Lord, for when we get that, we will be willing to yield to its dictates.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPIt is very easy to submit to law, and doubtless we should all be ready enough to submit if the Almighty should come and speak to us face to face. But he chooses to speak by his messengers; to them we must yield obedience. Jesus said, in his day, what is true in this: he that receiveth you receiveth me, and receiveth him that sent me, and he that rejecteth you rejecteth me and rejecteth him that sent me.—JD, 9:345, April 13, 1862.

What is a man's duty here? It is obedience to the oracles of God that are in our midst; and so long as we keep the commandments of God, we need not fear any evil; for the Lord will be with us in time and in eternity.

"But," says one, "I have got a son, who has gone out upon the Plains, and perhaps the soldiers will kill him." . . . . Did you ever know your sons were in possession of eternal life, and that this is only a probation or a space between time and eternity? We existed before, in eternity that was, and we shall exist in eternity that is to come; and the question only is, whether it is better to die with the harness on, or to be found a poor, miserable coward. All that I said to my son Joseph, after blessing him, before he went out, was, "Joseph, do not be found with a hole in your back." I do not want any cowardice—any tremblings or feelings of that kind.

What of our friends who have gone behind the veil—are they dead? No; they live, and they move, in a more exalted sphere. Did they fight for the kingdom of God when here? Yes, they did. Are they battling for it now? Yes; and the time is approaching when the wicked nations have to be destroyed; and the time is near when every creature is to be heard saying, "Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever." (Revelation 5:13.) We have got to bring this about, whether we do it in this world or that which is to come.—JD, 5:191, August 30, 1857.

OBEDIENCE IN THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—If the Lord can have a people to listen to his law, there may be a chance to establish his kingdom upon the earth. If not, the only way he can establish his kingdom is to remove them from the earth, or give up his kingdom until another time; for it is impossible to establish his kingdom without having a people obedient to him.

What does that obedience imply? Obedience in all things,—that the twelve should be obedient to the presidency, the seventies to the twelve, and so on through all the ramifications of the priesthood—obedience of wives to husbands, children to parents—and that a general order of this kind should be established in every neighborhood, in every house, and in every heart.

Well, this is the feeling that ought to exist; and where this feeling does not exist the Spirit of God does not exist; and where there is not a feeling of obedience, the Spirit of God will be withdrawn. People cannot retain it and be in rebellion against the authorities and counsels of the church and kingdom of God.

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPWhen the kingdom of God is established and his word is listened to, the spirit of obedience extends through the ramifications of the body of Christ, even as the sap extends through the trunk of a tree till it reaches to the extreme branches and twigs, and to every part of it.—JD, 5:265, September 20, 1857.

PREACHING VERSUS PRACTICE IN DEVELOPING THE KINGDOM.—Some people think that preaching is the greatest part of the business in building up the kingdom of God. This is a mistake. You may pick out our most inferior elders, in point of talent and ability, and send them to England to preach and preside, and they think they are great men there. Their religion teaches them so much more than the gentiles know, that they are received as the great men of the earth. Anybody can preach. He is a poor simpleton that cannot. It is the easiest thing in the world. But, as President Young says, it takes a man to practice.. . . .

Church in the Worlda-Taylor, JohnTPWe are becoming notorious in the eyes of the nations. And the time is not far distant when the kings of the earth will be glad to come to our elders to ask counsel to help them out of their difficulties; for their troubles are coming upon them like a flood, and they do not know how to extricate themselves.—JD, 1:18-19, August 22, 1852.

SOME PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS.—If the kings and princes of the earth have got to come and gaze upon the glory of Zion, we must have some of that principle in ourselves that will attract the attention and admiration of surrounding nations. If we do not put ourselves in a nations. If we do not put ourselves in a way to get in possession of these principles, how can we ever arrive at them? It is impossible.—JD, 10:279-280, October 25, 1863.

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GREAT MISSION.—We have a great mission to perform—we have to try to govern ourselves according to the laws of the kingdom of God, and we find it one of the most difficult tasks we ever undertook, to learn to govern ourselves, our appetites, our dispositions, our habits, our feelings, our lives, our spirits, our judgment, and to bring all our desires into subjection to the law of the kingdom of God and to the spirit of truth. It is a very critical thing to be engaged in the upbuilding of the kingdom of God—a nucleus of which we have here.—JD, 9:12, April 6, 1861.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—There is one thing very certain, very certain indeed, and that is, whatever men may think, and however they may plot and contrive, that this kingdom will never be given into the hands of another people. It will grow and spread and increase, and no man living can stop its progress.—JD, 25:348, October 19, 1884.

THE RISE OF THE KINGDOM.—How are the nations going to be redeemed? How is the kingdom of God going to be planted upon the earth? Will it be by preaching, or by power? Will it be by the natural course of events, or by moral suasion? Will it be by the outpouring of the judgments of God on the nations? Will it be by kingdoms being overthrown and empires crumbling to ruins? How is it going to be done? I answer, these things will be accomplished by the guidance of the Lord through his prophets who are in our midst. Don't you see this, brethren?—JD, 6:167, January 17, 1858.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Taylor, JohnTPWhat is the first thing necessary to the establishment of his kingdom? It is to raise up a prophet and have him declare the will of God; the next is to have people yield obedience to the word of the Lord through that prophet. If you cannot have these, you never can establish the kingdom of God upon the earth.—JD, 6:25, November 1, 1857.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MEANS OF ESTABLISHING THE KINGDOM.—In making a brief summary of what we have said before in relation to the means to be employed for the establishment of the kingdom of God, we find the following:—

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPFirst.—That it will be not only a spiritual kingdom, but a temporal and literal one also.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPSecond.—That if it is the kingdom of heaven, it must be revealed from the heavens.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThird.—That a standard is to be lifted up, by the Lord, to the nations.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPFourth.—That an angel is to come with the everlasting gospel, which is to be proclaimed to every nation, kindred, people, and tongue; that it is to be the same as the ancient one, and that the same powers and blessings will attend it.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPFifth.—That not only will the ancient gospel be preached, but there will accompany it a declaration of judgment to the nations.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPSixth.—That there will be a literal Zion, or gathering of the Saints to Zion, as well as a gathering of the Jews to Jerusalem.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPSeventh.—That when this has taken place, the Spirit of God will be withdrawn from the nations, and they will war with and destroy each other.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPEighth.—That judgments will also overtake them, from the Lord, plague, pestilence, famine, etc.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPNinth.—That the nations, having lost the Spirit of God, will assemble to fight against the Lord's people, being full of the spirit of unrighteousness, and opposed to the rule and government of God.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTenth.—That when they do, the Lord will come and fight against them himself; overthrow their armies; assert his own right; rule the nations with a rod of iron; root the wicked out of the earth; and take possession of his own kingdom. I might here further state, that when the Lord does come to exercise judgment upon the ungodly, to make an end of sin, and bring in everlasting righteousness, he will establish his own laws, demand universal obedience, and cause wickedness and misrule to cease. He will issue his commands, and they must be obeyed; and if the nations of the earth observe not his laws, "they will have no rain." And they will be taught by more forcible means than moral suasion, that they are dependent upon God; for the Lord will demand obedience, and the scriptures say, time and again, that the wicked shall be rooted out of the land, and the religious and the meek shall inherit the earth.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThe Lord, after trying man's rule for thousands of years, now takes the reins of government into his own hands, and makes use of the only possible means of asserting his rights. For if the wicked never were cut off, the righteous never could rule; and if the devil was still suffered to bear rule, God could not, at the same time; consequently after long delay, he whose right it is takes possession of the kingdom; and the kingdom, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heavens, shall be given to the saints of the Most High God; and the world will assume that position for which it was made. A king shall rule in righteousness, and princes shall decree judgment. The knowledge of the Lord will spread, and extend under the auspices of this government. Guided by his counsels, and under his direction, all those purposes designed of him, from the commencement, in relation to both living and dead, will be in a fair way for their accomplishment.—GG, 103-105, 1852.

SOME EFFECTS OF ESTABLISHING THE KINGDOM

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPWhat will be the effects of the establishment of Christ's kingdom, or the reign of God on the earth?. . . .

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RESTITUTION.—It is the doing away with war, bloodshed, misery, disease, and sin, and the ushering in of a kingdom of peace, righteousness, justice, happiness, and prosperity. It is the restoration of the earth and man to their primeval glory and pristine excellence; in fact, the "restitution of all things spoken of by all the prophets since the world began."—GG, 105-106, 1852.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE BUILDING OF ZION.—We believe that we shall rear splendid edifices, magnificent temples, and beautiful cities that shall become the pride, praise, and glory of the whole earth. We believe that this people will excel in literature, in science and the arts, and in manufactures. In fact, there will be a concentration of wisdom, not only of the combined wisdom of the world as it now exists, but men will be inspired in regard to all these matters in a manner and to an extent that they never have been before.. . . .—JD, 10:147, April 6, 1863.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GLORY OF ZION.—When Zion is established in her beauty and honor and glory, the kings and princes of the earth will come, in order that they may get information and teach the same to their people. They will come as they came to learn the wisdom of Solomon.—JD, 6:169, January 17, 1858.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPESTABLISHING THE KINGDOM: THE GREAT COUNCIL AT ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN.—A great council will then be held to adjust the affairs of the world, from the commencement, over which Father Adam will preside as head and representative of the human family.. . . .

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThen they will assemble to regulate all these affairs, and all that held keys of authority to administer will then represent their earthly course. And, as this authority has been handed down from one to another in different ages, and in different dispensations, a full reckoning will have to be made by all. All who have held the keys of priesthood will then have to give an account to those from whom they received them. Those that were in the heavens have been assisting those that were upon the earth; but then, they will unite together in a general council to give an account of their stewardships, and as in the various ages men have received their power to administer from those who had previously held the keys thereof, there will be a general account.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThose under the authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have to give an account of their transactions to those who direct them in the priesthood; hence the elders give an account to presidents of conferences; and presidents of conferences to presidents of nations. Those presidents and the seventies give an account to the twelve apostles; the twelve to the First Presidency; and they to Joseph, from whom they, and the twelve, received their priesthood. This will include the arrangements of the last dispensation. Joseph delivers his authority to Peter, who held the keys before him, and delivered them to him; and Peter to Moses and Elias, who endowed him with this authority on the Mount; and they to those from whom they received them. And thus the world's affairs will be regulated and put right, the restitution of all things be accomplished, and the kingdom of God be ushered in. The earth will be delivered from under the curse, resume its paradisiacal glory, and all things pertaining to its restoration be fulfilled.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPNot only will the earth be restored, but also man; and those promises which, long ago, were the hope of the Saints, will be realized. The faithful servants of God who have lived in every age will then come forth and experience the full fruition of that joy for which they lived, and hoped, and suffered, and died. The tombs will deliver up their captives, and reunited with the spirits which once animated, vivified, cheered, and sustained them while in this vale of tears, these bodies will be like unto Christ's glorious body. They will then rejoice in that resurrection for which they lived, while they sojourned below.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPAdam, Seth, Enoch, and the faithful who lived before the flood, will possess their proper inheritance. Noah and Melchizedek will stand in their proper places. Abraham, with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise, will come forward at the head of innumerable multitudes, and possess that land which God gave unto them for an everlasting inheritance. The faithful on the continent of America will also stand in their proper place; but, as this will be the time of the restitution of all things, and all things will not be fully restored at once, there will be a distinction between the resurrected bodies, and those that have not been resurrected; and, as the scriptures say that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither doth corruption inherit incorruption; and although the world will enjoy just laws—an equitable administration, and universal peace and happiness prevail as the result of this righteousness; yet, there will be a peculiar habitation for the resurrected bodies. This habitation may be compared to paradise, whence man, in the beginning, was driven.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPWhen Adam was driven from the garden, an angel was placed with a flaming sword to guard the way of the tree of life, lest man should eat of it and become immortal in his degenerate state, and thus be incapable of obtaining that exaltation which he would be capable of enjoying through the redemption of Jesus Christ, and the power of the resurrection, with his renewed and glorified body. Having tasted of the nature of the fall, and having grappled with sin and misery, knowing, like the Gods, both good and evil, having, like Jesus, overcome the evil, and through the power of the atonement having conquered death, hell, and the grave, he regains that paradise from which he was banished, not in the capacity of ignorant man, unaquainted with evil, but like unto a God. He can now stretch forth, and partake of the tree of life, and eat of its fruits, and live and flourish eternally in possession of that immortality which Jesus long ago promised to the faithful: "To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne; and eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the paradise of God."—GG, 115, 116-118, 1852.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AND THE NATION—STATE SYSTEM [^2]

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE KINGDOM A CHURCH AND STATE.—Was the kingdom that the prophets talked about, that should be set up in the latter times, going to be a church? Yes. And a state? Yes, it was going to be both church and state, to rule both temporally and spiritually. It may be asked, How can we live under the dominion and laws of the United States and be subjects of another kingdom? Because the kingdom of God is higher, and its laws are so much more exalted than those of any other nation, [^3] that it is the easiest thing in life for a servant of God to keep any of their laws; and, as I have said before, this we have uniformly done.—JD, 6: 23-24, November 1, 1857.

THE AMERICAN CONSTITUTION AND THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—We are not taking any steps contrary to the laws and the Constitution of the United States. But in everything we are upholding and sustaining them.—JD, 5: 157-158, August 23, 1857.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPREALITY OF THE KINGDOM: TO UPHOLD THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.—When the people shall have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States, the elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations. This is part of the program, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances.—JD, 21:8, August 31, 1879.

Church and State, Relationship ofa-Taylor, JohnTPPROBLEMS OF CHURCH AND STATE.—We are under the United States. But the United States is not the kingdom of God. It does not profess to be under his rule, nor his government, nor his authority. Yet we are expected as citizens of the United States to keep the laws of the United States, and hence we are, as I said before, an integral part of the government. Very well, what is expected of us? That we observe its laws, that we conform to its usages, that we are governed by good and wholesome principles, that we maintain the laws in their integrity and that we sustain the government. And we ought to do it.

Church and State, Relationship ofa-Taylor, JohnTPBut there is a principle here that I wish to speak about. God dictates in a great measure the affairs of the nations of the earth, their kingdoms and governments and rulers and those that hold dominion. He sets up one and pulls down another, according to his will. That is an old doctrine, but it is true today. Have we governors? Have we a president of the United States? Have we men in authority? Yes. Is it right to traduce their characters? No, it is not. Is it right for us to oppose them? No, it is not. Is it right for them to traduce us? No, it is not. Is it right for them to oppress us in any way? No, it is not. We ought to pray for these people, for those that are in authority, that they may be led in the right way, that they may be preserved from evil, that they may administer the government in righteousness, and that they may pursue a course that will receive the approbation of heaven. Well, what else? Then we ought to pray for ourselves that when any plans or contrivances or opposition to the law of God, to the church and kingdom of God, or to his people, are introduced, and whenever we are sought to be made the victims of tyranny and oppression, that the hand of God may be over us and over them to paralyze their acts and protect us.. . . .—JD, 21:68, January 4, 1880.

THE FUTURE.—Now as to the great future, what shall we say? Why, a little stone has been cut out of the mountains without hands, and this little stone is becoming a great nation, and it will eventually fill the whole earth. How will it fill it? Religiously? Yes, and politically too, for it will have the rule, the power, the authority, the dominion in its own hands.. . . . JD, 9:343, April 13, 1862.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Their free agency, however, will be respected; likewise their freedom to organize in terms of their own belief (see Book V, passim, below). However there will be full and frank recognition of the role of Christ and his government, as the following pages will clarify.
[^2] For a detailed examination of this stirring problem, see Book Five.
[^3] But compare this with doctrinal developments concerning the United States and its constitution, below and in Book Five.
