John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XX

ON THE ROLE AND PURPOSE OF THE CHURCH

THE PURPOSE OF THE WORK

Ziona-Taylor, JohnTPTO BUILD THE ZION OF THE LATTER DAYS.—We are here to build up the church of God, the Zion of God, and the kingdom of God, and to be on hand to do whatever God requires—first to purge ourselves from all iniquity, from covetousness and evil of every kind, to forsake sin of every sort, cultivate the Spirit of God, and help to build up his kingdom; to beautify Zion and have pleasant habitations, and pleasant gardens and orchards, until Zion shall be the most beautiful place there is on the earth. Already Zion is attracting the attention of the people of the world. I have all kinds of people calling on me—lords, admirals, senators, members of the House of Representatives, members of the Parliament of England, of the Reichstag of Germany, and the Chamber of Deputies of France—all classes come and they say, "You have a most beautiful place here!" Why, yes. And by and by the kings of the earth will come to gaze upon the glory of Zion, and we are here to build it up under the instruction of God our Heavenly Father. Zion shall yet become the praise and the glory of the whole earth.—JD, 24:201, June 18, 1883.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LORD'S WORK TEMPORAL.—A great amount of the work the Lord is going to accomplish is what is generally called temporal, because it belongs to the earth. That is, the government, laws, and general direction of affairs among the nations that are not now fallen under the control of the Almighty, will have to be so changed and altered as to come under his entire control, government, and dictation in every respect. He has shown to his prophets and people long ago, to a certain extent, what kind of rule and government he would have in the last days. He showed them that a time would come when every knee should bow, and every tongue should confess unto the Lord, no matter whether they were priests or people, rulers or ruled, lawyers or doctors, no matter what position they held in the world, to him every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess that he is the Lord of all to the glory of God the Father.—JD, 10:278-279, October 25, 1863.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTO ESTABLISH THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—You have been ordained kings and queens, and priests and priestesses to your Lord; you have been put in possession of principles that all the kings, potentates, and power upon the earth are entirely ignorant of; they do not understand it; but you have received this from the hands of God.. . . .

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPWhat are we going to do, then? We are going to establish the kingdom of God upon the earth.—JD, 5:189-190, August 30, 1857.

We are all interested in the great latter-day work of God, and we all ought to be co-workers therein.—JD, 18:196, April 6, 1876.

Mission of the Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPANOTHER MISSION OF THE CHURCH: TO PERPETUATE THE LIBERTY AND RIGHTS OF MAN.—Besides the preaching of the gospel, we have another mission, namely, the perpetuation of the free agency of man and the maintenance of liberty, freedom, and the rights of man. There are certain principles that belong to humanity outside of the Constitution, outside of the laws, outside of all the enactments and plans of man, among which is the right to live. God gave us the right and no man: No government gave it to us, and no government has a right to take it away from us.

We have a right to liberty—that was a right that God gave to all men; and if there has been oppression, fraud, or tyranny in the earth, it has been the result of the wickedness and corruptions of men and has always been opposed to God and the principles of truth, righteousness, virtue, and all principles that are calculated to elevate mankind.

The Declaration of Independence states that men are in possession of certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. They belong to us; they belong to all humanity. I wish, and the worst wish I have for the United States, is, that they could have liberality enough to give to all men equal rights, and, while they profess to have delivered the black slaves, that they strike off the fetters of the white men of the South who have been ground under the heel of sectional injustice, and let them feel that we are all brothers in one great nation, and deliver all people from tyranny and oppression of every kind, and proclaim, as they did at the first, liberty throughout the land and to all people. That is the worst wish I have for them. And when I see them take another course I feel sorry for it.. . . .

I preach the gospel to the world. What is it? Force, tyranny, and oppression? No; it is all free grace, and it is all free will. Is anybody coerced? Did anybody coerce you, Latter-day Saints? Are any of you forced to continue Latter-day Saints if you do not want to? If you think you are, you are all absolved today. We know of no such principle as coercion; it is a matter of choice. The principle that I spoke of before—that is, men receive the Holy Ghost within themselves—is the cementing, binding, uniting power that exists among the Latter-day Saints.—JD, 23:63-64, April 9, 1882.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE WORK OF GOD.—We have the gospel to preach to the nations, a message that the Lord has given unto us to promulgate to all peoples.. . . . Our mission has principally been to preach the first principles of the gospel, calling upon men everywhere to believe in the Lord God of heaven, he that created the heavens and the earth, the seas, and the fountains of waters; to believe in his Son, Jesus Christ, repenting of their sins, to be baptized for the remission of the same; and then we have promised them the Holy Ghost. In doing this the Lord has stood by us, sustaining those principles that we have advanced; and when we have ministered unto men the ordinances of the gospel; they have received for themselves the witness of the Spirit, even the Holy Ghost, making known to them for a surety that the principles that they had received were from God. And in regard to this I can say as Paul said on a certain occasion—"Ye are my witnesses," for this whole congregation, with few exceptions, know this to be true.—JD, 23:235-236, August 20, 1882.

THE ORDER OF THE CHURCH

RESPECT FOR OFFICERS.—I do not know that I have ever disobeyed the requests of a bishop. Why? Because he presided over me in a ward capacity, and if he had a right to respect me as an apostle, I had a right to respect him as a bishop, and I always felt a desire to comply with all the requirements that were made of me by any of the proper authorities. I feel and always have felt the same towards teachers. If a teacher came to my house—or teachers, they generally come two at a time—if I happened to be there, I have told them that I felt happy to meet with them, and I called together the members of my family that were within my reach, and told them that the teachers had come to instruct us. Permit me here to ask, have not I a right—say as the president of the Church, or as an apostle, which I was for many years—have not I a right, or my family a right to possess the same privileges that others possess, and to have the teachers come to inquire after my welfare and that of my family, and to see that there is no wrong existing—have not I that right? I think I have. If they are the servants of God, have not I a right to listen to them? Yes, I have, and I feel it my duty to receive them kindly, treat them properly, and listen to their teaching.

On the other hand, when the teachers got through, I might give them a little instruction, say as an apostle, or as a brother—put it any way you like; that while I and my family were receiving benefits from them, it was my duty, on the other hand, to teach and instruct them in some things that I thought might benefit them.

Church Governmenta-Taylor, JohnTPNow, these are correct principles in the church and kingdom of God. The teacher occupies his place; the priest and deacon occupy their places; the elder occupies his place; the bishop his place; the high council their places; the presidents of states their places, and every one in his position ought to be honored—the twelve in their place, the First Presidency in their place—each one yielding proper respect and courtesy and kindness to the other. And when we talk about great big personages, there is no such thing. We are none of us anything only as God confers blessings upon us, and if he has conferred anything upon us, we will give him the glory.—JD, 26:130-132, October 6, 1883.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPCALLING OF THE MINISTRY.—Jesus in selecting his disciples, took one man here and another there—a tax gatherer, a fisherman, and others who it was thought were the most unlikely of any men to carry out the purposes of God. He left the great men out of the question, that is the high priests and the popular and pious of all classes, and he selected his own laborers to perform his own work; and he subsequently told them, You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you and set you apart unto this mission.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Taylor, JohnTPWhen a message had to be proclaimed to the world in these last days, the agents were chosen on the same principle. There was any amount of teachers of divinity, any amount of professors of theology, any amount of reverend, and right reverend fathers and all classes of religious men and religious teachers; but God did not recognize them. He chose a young, uneducated man and inspired him with the spirit of revelation, and placed upon him a mission and required him to perform it; and he was obedient to that requirement.—JD, 23:259, October 8, 1882.
