John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXI

THE MEANING OF CHURCH MEMBERSHIP

Church Membershipa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PHILOSOPHY UNDERLYING CHURCH MEMBERSHIP

Church Membershipa-Taylor, JohnTPWe believe that God has set his hand in these last days to accomplish his purposes, to gather together his elect from the four winds, even to fulfil the words which he has spoken by all the holy prophets, to redeem the earth from the power of the curse, to save the human family from the ruin of the fall, and to place mankind in that position which God designed them to occupy before this world came into existence, or the morning stars sang together for joy. We believe in and realize these things. We feel them, we appreciate them, and therefore are we thus assembled together.—JD, 1:147, 148, June 12, 1853.

Church Membershipa-Taylor, JohnTPOBJECTS OF MORMONISM.—We are seeking, in the first place, to regenerate ourselves, and then, under the guidance and direction of the Almighty, to regulate the world in which we live. We know that this is not very popular; but that makes no difference to us. So far as we, ourselves, are concerned we know precisely where we stand. So far as the world is concerned, as to the reception of our ideas by them, that is their business, and God's business. They have to do with him, and we have to do with him. We are in his hands, and all the world of mankind are in his hands, and he will manage and control them and dictate and regulate them according to the dictates of his will, and not according to my theories or yours or any other person's and the judge of all the earth will do right.—JD, 14:339-340, March 3, 1872.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPREQUIREMENTS OF GOD'S FOLLOWERS.—There is an inexorable law of God that requires from his professed followers the principles of virtue, honor, truth, integrity, righteousness, justice, judgment, and mercy.—MA, 162.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPNO CENSORSHIP OF TRUTH.—No people upon the face of the earth are blessed to the same extent as this people. It is our privilege to have knowledge of all doctrines and principles that are taught, and if we do not have this knowledge, we are living below our privileges. It is said in one of the revelations that the voice of the people is the voice of God; this is because they are taught alike; they are taught correct principles and when they are united, then their voice in regard to any principle becomes the voice of God, for it brings us into connection with him and his Spirit.—JD, 9:344, April 13, 1862.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MISSION OF THE MEMBERS.—We have a great and important mission committed unto us, and it is for us to seek to comprehend that mission and fulfil the various duties and responsibilities devolving upon us. The Lord has given unto us a form of government, an organization, priesthood, and authority to enable us to perform these several duties, and he has certain plans, purposes, and designs to accomplish pertaining to us, pertaining to this nation, to other nations, and to the world in which we live—pertaining to those who have lived and are now in another state of existence, and also pertaining to those who shall yet live.—JD, 23:258, October 8, 1882.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPI am not going to preach. I wish to tell my feelings, and look at you, and think about what we have done, and what we are going to do, for it is not all done yet. We have only commenced the great work of the Lord, and are laying the foundation of that kingdom which is destined to stand forever. What we shall do is yet in the future. We have commenced at the little end of the horn, and by and by we will come out at the big end.—JD, 1:16, August 22, 1852.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPWe are here to serve God and keep his commandments; and if we will purge ourselves from our iniquities, live our religion, and keep the commandments of God, there is no power on this side of hell, nor on the other, that can harm us, for God will be on our side to protect us in the position we occupy.—JD, 22:3, October 7, 1879.

THE MEANING OF WORSHIP

Meetings, Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPOBJECTS OF MEETING TOGETHER.—We meet together, as intelligent beings, desirous of understanding something of our common origin, our present existence, and our future destiny. We meet to find out something in relation to our Heavenly Father, in relation to his providential dealings with the human family, in relation to his policy and designs pertaining to us, and in relation to the object of our creation; and to know something, if possible, pertaining to that world that lies beyond our present scene of action. These are some things among the many that we are desirous to know, to comprehend, to find out, if possible.

Meetings, Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPWe further wish to pursue a course that shall be acceptable to our God and Father. Having partaken of a portion of his Holy Spirit, we are desirous to be taught more perfectly the things pertaining to the kingdom of God. We are desirous of cultivating his Holy Spirit, and to draw from the fountain of light and intelligence; from the spirit of revelation that flows from God, and the spirit that dwells in us, comfort, consolation, and intelligence, that we may feel that we are the sons and daughters of God, that we are walking in the light of his countenance, that we are doing the things that are pleasing and acceptable in his sight, that our own consciences are producing satisfactory evidence to our minds, that our conduct and acts are acceptable before the Lord, and that the Holy Ghost also bears testimony to us that we are his children, doing his will, walking in the light of his countenance, helping to establish his kingdom on the earth, and to fulfil the varied duties we are placed here upon the earth to attend to.—JD, 11:20, December 11, 1864.

Sacrament Meetingsa-Taylor, JohnTPSACRAMENT MEETINGS.—In meeting together on Sabbath days we assemble generally for the purpose of renewing our spiritual strength by partaking of the emblems of the broken body and shed blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, communing with our own hearts and reflecting upon things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and of speaking and listening to those things that have a tendency to enlighten our minds and establish us in the faith, to increase and confirm our hopes, and to enable us to press onward with avidity, confidence, and renewed determination in the path which the Lord has marked out for us to travel in.—JD, 18:278, November 5, 1876.

Sacrament Meetingsa-Taylor, JohnTPWe have met to partake of the sacrament of the Lord's supper, and we should endeavor to draw away our feelings and affections from things of time and sense. For in partaking of the sacrament we not only commemorate the death and sufferings of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but we also shadow forth the time when he will come again and when we shall meet and eat bread with him in the kingdom of God. When we are thus assembled together, we may expect to receive guidance and blessings from God.—JD, 14:185, March 20, 1870.

Sacrament Meetingsa-Taylor, JohnTPThis ceremony has been attended to throughout generations that are past, and still it is attended to. Jesus said also, "do this until I come again." Notwithstanding the great falling off—the great apostasy since the days of Christ and his apostles, this ordinance has generally been adopted by the Christian churches, so called, however they may err in many other principles of faith and doctrine. This ordinance has been renewed to us, and is part and parcel of the new covenant God has made with his people in the latter days. It was practiced among the ancient saints who resided upon this continent, long before it was discovered by Columbus, as well as upon the continent of Asia among the saints that lived there. When we attend to this ordinance, we do it upon the same principle that they did anciently, whether among the Saints of God on the Asiatic continent or among the Saints on the American continent.—JD, 10:113, February 22, 1863.

Meetings, Churcha-Taylor, JohnTPWORSHIP "IN SPIRIT AND IN TRUTH."—The best of us are not too good; we all of us might be better, and do better, and enjoy life better, having more of the Spirit of the Lord in our own homes and in our own hearts, and do more to promote the welfare of all who come within our reach and influence. To serve the Lord is one of the great objects of our existence; and I appreciate as a great privilege the opportunity we enjoy of worshiping God on the Sabbath day. And when we do meet to worship God, I like to see us worship him with all our hearts. I think it altogether out of place on such occasions to hear people talk about secular things; these are times, above all others perhaps, when our feelings and affections should be drawn out towards God. If we sing praises to God, let us do it in the proper spirit; if we pray, let every soul be engaged in prayer, doing it with all our hearts, that through our union our spirits may be blended in one, that our prayers and our worship may be available with God, whose Spirit permeates all things, and is always present in the assemblies of good and faithful Saints.—JD, 22:226, June 26, 1881.

Servants of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPWhat then shall we do? We will do everything which God requires at our hands. Have we families? We will try to train them up in the fear of God. Have we wives? We will treat them as we would angels of God, and be their protectors and guardians and make them comfortable and happy. And then, as was remarked, we will dedicate our houses and lands to God, and ourselves to God, and our wives and children and everything we have, and feel that we are the children of God and our offspring with us. Again, if I were a woman, I would try to treat my husband right and to make a heaven of my home, and would try to make everything pleasant around me. You husbands now and then quarrel with your wives, and you wives quarrel with your husbands. . . . I will say, cease such folly, and have another kind of feeling; and treat everybody not as he always treats us, for that would not always be right; but let us do unto all men as we would have them do unto us.—JD, 22:220, 221, June 27, 1881.

PROFESSIONS AND PROBLEMS OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Servants of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPPROFESSIONS IN GENERAL.—We profess that this is the work of God in which we are engaged, and our profession is strictly correct. When we say this is the church and kingdom of God, we believe it, and so it is. And it is the only Church and the only kingdom that he has on this earth in this generation that we know anything about. We profess to know that God has revealed his law, that he has restored the holy priesthood, and that he is communicating his will to the human family. We profess to believe that the kingdom of God will overrule and prevail over every other power and every other form of government, and that it will go on from strength to strength, from power to power, from intelligence to intelligence, from knowledge to knowledge; and that in the due course of events it will rule over the whole earth, until every creature upon the earth and under the earth and on the sea will be subject to the law of God, to the kingdom of God, to the dominion of God, and to the rule of the holy priesthood. This is our profession. We believe it: at any rate we profess to believe it; and if we do not, we are hypocrites.—JD, 1:371, 372, April 19, 1854.

Disobediencea-Taylor, JohnTPA DAILY REMINDER.—How many of us have fallen on the right hand and on the left; those we have judged to be men of intelligence, some of them have stepped aside in one shape and some in another. Some have given way to their corrupt appetites and passions, and have fallen in an evil hour, have lost the Spirit of God, have destroyed themselves, and have destroyed others. Corrupted, weak, fallen, degenerate, and abominable, they have sunk to their own place. How much of this has there been both among men and women, to the violation of the most sacred covenants they have made before God, angels, and men. They have broken their covenants, corrupted themselves, departed from the right way, lost the Spirit of God, and they are anxious to go here and there, and everything is wrong with them, and every place fails to yield them comfort, because a consciousness of their guilt is continually with them; everything is out of place to them; and their understandings are darkened. At one time they were quick to comprehend truth by the light of the Spirit, but now they walk in darkness. . . .

Disobediencea-Taylor, JohnTPHave you forgotten who you are, and what your object is? Have you forgotten that you profess to be Saints of the Most High God, clothed upon with the holy priesthood? Have you forgotten that you are aiming to become kings and priests to the Lord, and queens and priestesses to him? Have you forgotten that you are associated with the Saints of God in Zion, where the oracles of truth are revealed, and the truths of God are made manifest, and clearly developed; where you and your posterity after you can learn the ways of life and salvation; where you are placed in a position that you can obtain blessings from the great Elohim, that will rest upon you and your posterity worlds without end? Have you forgotten these things, and begun to turn again to the beggarly elements of the world, and become blind, like others we have spoken of, turning like the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire? We ought to reflect sometimes upon these things, and understand our true position.—JD, 1:372, April 19, 1854.

Apostasy of Individualsa-Taylor, JohnTPAN ITEM OF FAITH.—There has been something said about men turning away from the Church of Christ. If a man has not the witness in himself, he is not governed by the principles of eternal truth, and the sooner such people leave this Church the better.—JD, 10:260-261, October 10, 1863.

Disobediencea-Taylor, JohnTPWe cannot run our own way and have the blessing of God. Every one who attempts it will find he is mistaken. God will withdraw his Spirit from such, and they will be left to themselves to wander in the dark, and go down to perdition. It is expected of us that we shall move on a higher plane, that we shall feel that we are the children of God, that God is our Father, and he will not be dishonored by disobedient children, or by those who fight against his laws and his priesthood. He expects us to live our religion, to obey his laws and keep his commandments.—JD, 25:164, June 15, 1884.

DOING "AS THEY DARNED PLEASE."—Some men who think they are doing pretty well, and doing, according to their own expression, "as they darned please," will wake up to find they have not been doing the will of God. They may have thought that they had wives and children, but they will wake up to find that they have not got them, and that they are deprived of many of those great blessings they anticipated enjoying. With all of our mercy, kindness, and tender feelings towards our brethren and sisters, and towards all people, we cannot violate the law of God, nor transgress those principles which he has laid down with impunity. He expects us to do those things that are acceptable before him, and if we don't, we must pay the penalty of our departure from correct principle.—JD, 25:163, June 15, 1884.

Disobediencea-Taylor, JohnTPHUMAN WEAKNESSES.—What do you think about a lying elder, a swearing high priest, a Sabbath-breaking seventy, and a covetous Saint? The souls of such men ought to be inspired with the light of revelation, and they ought to be living witnesses, epistles known and read of all men! Do you think you can live your religion, have the Spirit of God and obtain eternal life, and follow after these things? I tell you, Nay.

It was said of olden time—"Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him." (1 John 2:15.) That is as true today as it was eighteen hundred years ago. It is proper that we, as elders of Israel, and as heads of families, should reflect upon these things, for in many instances we are setting examples before our children that will tend to plunge them to perdition. Is this what we are gathered here for? I tell you, Nay; we are gathered here to serve God and keep his commandments, and to build up his Zion upon the earth.—JD, 18:141-142, October 10, 1875.

Honestya-Taylor, JohnTPHONESTY IN WORSHIP.—There is one great principle by which, I think, we all of us ought to be actuated in our worship, above everything else that we are associated with in life, and that is honesty of purpose. . . .

Honestya-Taylor, JohnTPIt is proper that men should be honest with themselves, that they should be honest with each other in all their words, dealings, intercourse, intercommunication, business arrangements, and everything else. They ought to be governed by truthfulness, honesty, and integrity, and that man is very foolish indeed who would not be true to himself, true to his convictions and feelings in regard to religious matters. We may deceive one another, as in some circumstances, counterfeit coin passes for that which is considered true and valuable among men. But God searches the hearts and tries the reins of the children of men. He knows our acts and the motives which prompt us to perform them. He is acquainted with all the doings and operations of the human family, and all the secret thoughts and acts of the children of men are open and naked before him, and for them he will bring them to judgment.

These ideas are believed in by men generally, who, with very few exceptions, whatever their general conduct or ideas on religious matters may be, believe in an all-seeing eye which penetrates and is enabled to weigh the actions and motives of the children of men. This is an idea that will not be disputed by any race of men now existing upon the earth, nor perhaps by any who have existed heretofore, for whatever may have been the theories or notions of men in former times, they have generally had a reverence for, and a belief in, an all-wise, supreme, omnipotent Being, who, they supposed, was greater than all of them, and who governed and controlled by their actions. A feeling of this kind is frequently made manifest in the scriptures, and it is nothing new in our age to believe in a God of this character.—JD, 16:301-302, November 16, 1873.

THE MORMON POSITION

Church in the Worlda-Taylor, JohnTPTO BE "IN THE WORLD, BUT NOT OF THE WORLD."—We have separated ourselves from the world in which we live. We have been baptized, by immersion in water, for the remission of sins. We have had hands laid upon us for the gift of the Holy Ghost; and the question with us now is, shall we condescend to go again into the beggarly elements of the world, or shall we continue in obedience to the law of God? If we do not obey the law which the Lord has given for our guidance, we shall go down to destruction, and our second state will be far worse than the first. We are now laying a foundation for ourselves and our posterity; and what is it that will flash upon our minds if we turn away from the truth? We shall think of the time when we thought we were the Saints of God. We shall think of our associations with this people, and these reflections will greatly increase our misery.—JD, 8:99-100, June 17, 1860.

Tolerancea-Taylor, JohnTPTOLERATION.—It is a mistaken notion, let me say here, that some people entertain that because men persecute us, we must persecute them: that because men would proscribe us in our religious faith, we must persecute them in theirs. There is no such principle associated with God, or with those who dwell in the love of God, or who are actuated by the Spirit of God. Everything of that kind proceeds from beneath and not from above. God is interested in the welfare of all people, all nations, all kindreds, and all tongues.—JD, 22:290-291, October 9, 1881.

As intelligent beings it is for us to comprehend all truth so far as we are capable of understanding it.—JD, 26:87, February 12, 1882.

Blessings of the Faithfula-Taylor, JohnTPPROMISES TO THE SAINTS.—If there have been any blessings enjoyed by men in former dispensations of the world, they will also be given to you, ye Latter-day Saints, if you will live your religion and be obedient to the laws of God. There is nothing hidden but what shall be revealed, says the Lord. He is prepared to unfold all things, all things pertaining to the heavens and the earth, all things pertaining to the peoples who have existed, who now exist or will exist, that we may be instructed and taught in every principle of intelligence associated with the world in which we live, or with the Gods in the eternal worlds.—JD, 25:184, May 18, 1884.

Blessings of the Faithfula-Taylor, JohnTPNow, then, if we are blessed we have not to thank any man, or any set of men for it. If we are provided for, we have not obtained it from anybody else, but from the Lord God of Israel, who has watched over and protected his people just as he said he would do. He said it was his business to take care of his saints, but, then, it is our business to be saints.—JD, 26:69, November 30, 1884.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPI will tell you the only thing I am afraid of about the saints is that they will forget their God and that they will not live their religion. Then again I have not that fear, because I know the generality of them will. I know this kingdom will not be given into the hands of another people. I know that it will continue to progress and continue to progress and continue to increase in spite of all the powers of the adversary, in spite of every influence that exists now, or that ever will exist on the face of this wide earth. God is our God, and he will bring off Israel triumphant.—JD, 14:367, March 17, 1872.

Church Membersa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ONLY FEAR.—The only fear I have for the Latter-day Saints is that they will not live their religion. And I call upon you here today to lay aside your covetousness, your greed, and your avarice, and act honorably and justly one with another as your brethren; humble yourselves before God and seek unto him for his guidance; and he will help you; he will bless you sustain you; and he will deliver you.—JD, 21:6, August 31, 1879.

Righteousnessa-Taylor, JohnTP"IT IS GOOD TO BE A SAINT."—It is good to be a Saint. When we get the Spirit of the Lord upon us, we feel to rejoice exceedingly, and sometimes when we don't have much of that, it feels rather what we used to call hard-sledding. But there is nothing that makes things go so well among the saints of God as living their religion and keeping the commandments of God, and when they don't do that, then things go awkward and cross and every other way but the right way. But when they live their religion and keep the commandments, "their peace flows as a river, and their righteousness as the waves of the sea."—JD, 26:71, November 30, 1884.
