John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXII

MISSIONARY WORK (PROSELYTING THE KINGDOM)

PROCLAIMING THE GOSPEL

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MISSIONARY SPIRIT.—I rejoice in proclaiming this glorious gospel, because it takes root in the hearts of the children of men, and they rejoice with me to be connected with, and participate in, the blessings of the kingdom of God. I rejoice in afflictions, for they are necessary to humble and prove us, that we may comprehend ourselves, become acquainted with our weakness and infirmities; and I rejoice when I triumph over them, because God answers my prayers; therefore I feel to rejoice all the day long.—JD, 1:17, August 22, 1852.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPI, myself, have traveled hundreds of thousands of miles preaching the gospel; and without purse or scrip, trusting in the Lord. Did he ever forsake me? Never, no never. I always was provided for, for which I feel to praise God my Heavenly Father. I was engaged in his work, and he told me that he would sustain me in it. He has been true to his trust; and if I have not been true to mine, I hope he will forgive me and help me to do better. But the Lord has been true and faithful, and I have never needed anything to eat or drink or wear, and was never prevented for want of means of traveling where I pleased.—JD, 21:95, April 13, 1879.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GREAT RESPONSIBILITY.—Our duty is to preach the gospel to all men. Who, the First Presidency? Yes, if there is nobody else. The twelve? Yes, it is their especial calling to preach it themselves or see that it is preached to all the world. And, then, the seventies, it is their duty to go forth at the drop of the hat, as minute men, to preach the gospel to all nations, under the guidance of the twelve. And, then, it is for those who are in Zion, the high priests, and others to go and preach the gospel.

Work of the Lorda-Taylor, JohnTP"TURN NOW TO ISRAEL."—And we are doing this in spite of the opposition of men, and in the name of God we will do it until he who directs us shall say, "It is enough: turn now to Israel." When he says that, then we will quit. And if they love the devil better than God, they can do so and sup trouble and sorrow and calamity and war and bloodshed. For nation will rise against nation, country against country; and thrones will be cast down; and empires will be scattered to the four winds, and the powers of the earth everywhere will be shaken; and the Lord will come forth by and by to judge the nations; and it behooves us to know what we are doing, and while we profess to be the saints of God not to be hypocrites, but be full of truth and full of integrity and magnify our calling and honor our God.

Work of the Lorda-Taylor, JohnTPThis is what God expects of us. And then to build temples, and what then? Administer in them. Send the gospel to the nations of the earth. And then gather the people in. What then? Build more temples. What then? Have men administer in them. And when we get through with our relatives and friends, and trace back our ancestry as far as we can, then we will call upon God to give us information as to who need to be administered for in the heavens; and we will work at it for a thousand years, until all the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and everything spoken of in the prophets shall be fulfilled.—JD, 26:110, October 20, 1881.

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPFOR THE BENEFIT OF THE WORLD.—The gospel was then revealed, what for—for you and me, or for this man and that man? No; it was for the benefit of the world; it was in the interests of humanity; and it was to be proclaimed to every nation, kindred, people, and tongue, by men commissioned of God to do so. . . .

Gospela-Taylor, JohnTPAnd we are still struggling on, in the face of a general opposition, trusting in our God to sustain us, while we shall continue to sow the precious seed of the everlasting gospel, and maintain in our own midst the principles of life eternal, and freedom, liberty, and equality to the human race. And our sons who have grown up are now doing what we have done; and they too are full of the Spirit, full of life, light, and intelligence, having, as we had and still have, the interests of humanity at heart, as they move among the people as messengers of life and salvation.

Kingdom of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPOur course is onward; and are we going to stop? No. Zion must be built up, God has decreed it, and no power can stay its progress. Do you hear that? I prophecy that in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. For Zion must and will be built up despite all opposition, the kingdom of God established upon the earth in accordance with the designs and purposes of God. That is true, and you will find it to be true; it will make no difference.—JD, 23:33-34, March 5, 1882.

THE COMMAND OF GOD.—We are sending the gospel to the nations of the earth. Why? Because God has commanded it.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPWhat are the seventies for? For this purpose. What are the twelve for? For this purpose. What are the elders for? When there is a deficiency among the seventies they are chosen for this purpose; and the high priests have to assist in the same way. What to do? To teach, to instruct, to enlighten, to bless, and to lead the people of the world in the ways of life.—JD, 25:95, February 10, 1884.

TESTS OF MORMONISM.—I have generally taken the liberty of applying the word of God to principles of religion whether taught by the Methodists, Church of England, Roman Catholics, or any others; and when Mormonism was presented to me, my first inquiry was, "Is it scriptural? Is it reasonable and philosophical?" This is the principle I would act upon today. No matter how popular the theories or dogmas preached might be, I would not accept them unless they were strictly in accordance with the scriptures, reason, and common sense.

I used to be told when investigating religious principles that it was dangerous to do so, and I had better let them alone; but I did not think so. I believe it is good to investigate and prove all principles that come before me. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, and reject that which is evil, no matter what guise it may come in. I think if we, as Mormons, hold principles that cannot be sustained by the scriptures and by good sound reason and philosophy, the quicker we part with them the better, no matter who believes in them or who does not. In every principle presented to us, our first inquiry should be, "Is it true? Does it emanate from God?" If he is its author, it can be sustained just as much as any other truth in natural philosophy; if false, it should be opposed and exposed just as much as any other error. Hence upon all such matters we wish to go back to first principles.—JD, 13:14-15, March 14, 1869.

TRENDS IN MISSIONARY WORK

"PURSE AND SCRIP."—We used to be in the habit of going without purse or scrip. That is the way I have traveled hundreds and thousands of miles; but then we felt as the disciples of old did. When we returned, if asked if we had lacked anything, we could say verily no. But there was a time afterwards when Jesus said—Let him that has a purse take it with him, and let him that has no sword sell his coat and buy one. We do not always remain in status quo. At that time we were the poorest people in the world. But now we are better off than the generality of mankind and we are able to help one another, and there is no necessity for our missionaries to go under the circumstances they have done heretofore. And since it is the counsel that they shall not, why let us do what we can to help them.—JD, 12:48, May 19, 1867.

REASONING UNDERLYING THE PERPETUAL EMIGRATION FUND.—We have expended millions upon millions in gathering the poor to this land, by what is known as the Perpetual Emigration Fund. We may ask, why did this people in these valleys expend such large sums? Was it because they were sending for relatives and friends? No, but because they were of the family of Christ, the sons and daughters of God, and desired to come to Zion. We have sent as much as five hundred teams at a time to help out the poor. You have done it, and many of you have either sent your sons or gone yourselves, and you have carried provisions for them as well as bringing them here. I do not think there is very much harm in that.

And what then? When these same men who had received the message of truth in far-off lands, and who had been gathered here, had been further instructed, we have sent them back again to the nations from whence they came, to proclaim to their kindred and friends, to their tongue and nation, what God had done for them. After fulfilling their missions they return again. What to do? To slumber and sleep away their time? No, but to continue their work in reclaiming the waste places, and to build temples in the interest of humanity, as the friends of God and of the world.—JD, 19:127, October 7, 1877.

DEVELOPMENTS IN MISSIONARY WORK: A PROPHETIC INSIGHT.—There is a terrible time approaching the nations of the earth, and also this nation, worse than has ever entered into the heart of man to conceive of—war, bloodshed, and desolation, mourning and misery, pestilence, famine, and earthquakes, and all those calamities spoken of by the prophets will most assuredly be fulfilled, and they are nearer by forty years than they were forty years ago. And it is for us, Latter-day Saints, to understand the position we occupy. . . .

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPAmong the honorable men I have referred to, there are some things that make it extremely difficult for men sometimes to perform the kind of missions that they did formerly, owing to age, infirmities, and circumstances. Yet I have frequently felt ashamed when I have seen the acts of many of these quorums to which I refer, when they have been called upon to go on missions. One has one excuse, and another, another. It was easier some twenty years ago to raise two or three hundred men than it is now among all those thousands in Israel. How do you account for this? Partly in consequence of an apathy that exists in the different organisms of the priesthood; and partly from circumstances with which we have been surrounded.

We have been grappling with these difficulties in common with others; and the Lord has placed us in this position to try us to see what material we are made of. Or, to use a common saying, to see who would be found at the rack, hay or no hay. But the general feeling seems to be—and I suppose it is so with us in Salt Lake and other places—that we would rather go to the rack when there was plenty of hay. But there is such a thing as having faith in God.

I will tell you how I have viewed these things. A great many have been thrown into circumstances that without distressing their families it would be extremely difficult to pick themselves up and go on missions. We did not use to think about this; but there should be in this, as in other things, a cooperation, a united order, if you please. We have found, in looking over some of our affairs, that these pinching times have reached to England. And lately when our elders have returned home after having been absent two or three years, they themselves not having the means to pay their way home, they have had to give their notes for the money; and the consequence was they would return with a load of debt upon their shoulders. The council have considered this matter, and decided to cancel such indebtedness. It amounted to some fifty thousand dollars. And then we contrived with Brother Staines and the presidency in Liverpool to try to make such arrangements that when our brethren return home from missions, they shall come free. How do you feel? All who are in favor say aye. [The congregation said aye.]—JD, 20:46-47, August 4, 1878.

TO ALL THE NATIONS

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPI never see the elders go forth on missions to preach the gospel, but I consider that they are going forth to take part in one of the greatest works ever committed to the human family.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPWhatever their feelings may be, they go forth as the angels of mercy bearing the precious seeds of the gospel, and they shall be the means of bringing many from darkness to light, from error and superstition to life, light, truth, and intelligence, and finally, to exaltation in the celestial kingdom of our God.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTP"TO COMBAT THE ERRORS OF AGES."—When these brethren go forth, it may be a new work to them. They will have to combat the errors of ages, to contend with the prejudices which they themselves state to you held such a powerful influence over them; they will also have to preach to and reason with men who have no regard for truth, much less for the religion which we have embraced, yet these elders go forth as the sent messengers of the Lord Jesus Christ. They go to proclaim that God has established his work upon the earth, that he has spoken from the heavens, and that the visions of the Almighty have been opened to our view; the light of ages is being revealed to the servants of the Most High, the darkness which has enshrouded the world for ages is being dispersed; and these chosen elders of Israel are sent forth to proclaim these glad tidings of salvation to the dark and benighted nations of the earth. I consider it a great privilege for any man to be set apart to so honorable, so praiseworthy, and so important a mission. . . . They go forth and they shall come back rejoicing, bearing precious sheaves with them, and they will bless the name of the God of Israel, that they have had the privilege of taking a part in warning this generation.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE FAMILIES AT HOME.—As regards the circumstances of their families, it is proper and correct that men should have some feelings for those they have left at home. It is true there ought to be sympathy and some care for those with whom they have been immediately associated. Yet their families as well as our families, and all of us and our affairs, are in the hands of God, and, inasmuch as they go forth putting their trust in the living God, all will be peace, and they will find peace and contentment from this time forth until they return, inasmuch as they will magnify their callings and lean upon their God. In this is their safety, in order that they may be enabled to bear a faithful testimony to the world among whom they may travel to deliver their message of warning and of glad tidings of great joy to the honest in heart.—JD, 10:36-37, April 27, 1862.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MISSIONARIES.—We want men to preach the gospel who are honorable and upright men, and full of the Holy Ghost. And when such men go, they go with our faith, carrying with them our esteem and love and affection; and if they need anything, we will give it to them. If their families need anything, we will have them looked after; we will feed them and clothe them and take care of them, and consider that they are our brethren and not that they are poor, miserable paupers, or that their wives and families are a trouble to us. We want to do away with all such feelings. Let us cultivate the spirit of magnanimity and kindness, and as the Lord blesses us, let us bless others; and that is all the things of the earth are worth. Do good to all men, especially to the household of faith. And by and by, as was the case formerly, those who go forth weeping, bearing precious seed, will return rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them.—JD, 20:178, April 8, 1879.

INSTRUCTIONS TO MISSIONARIES

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTP"FULFIL YOUR MISSION."—I would say to these brethren—let it be your study to fulfil your mission. Never mind the world, never mind the dollars and cents, the pounds, shillings, and pence. You cleave to God, live your religion, magnify your callings, humble yourselves before God, call upon him in secret, and he will open your path before you, and you shall have food and clothing, and your every want will be supplied, and you will be able to accomplish a good work and return to Zion in peace and safety. These are my feelings.—JD, 12:397, April 14, 1867.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPPRAYER AND STUDY.—In relation, again, to these elders, I will tell you the first thing I used to do when I went preaching, particularly when I went to a fresh place—and that was to go aside to some place, anywhere I could get, into a field, a barn, into the woods, or my closet, and ask God to bless me and give me wisdom to meet all the circumstances with which I might have to contend; and the Lord gave me the wisdom I needed and sustained me. If you pursue a course of this kind, he will bless you also. Do not trust in yourselves, but study the best books—the Bible and Book of Mormon—and get all the information you can, and then cleave to God and keep yourselves free from corruption and pollution of every kind, and the blessings of the Most High will be with you.—JD, 12:398, April 14, 1867.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE HUMBLE SPIRIT.—There is a very great difference between our mode of promulgating the gospel and that pursued by the world. . . . The grand difference between us and them is that we go forth in the name of Israel's God, sustained by his power, wisdom, and intelligence, to proclaim the principles of eternal truth communicated to us by him, while they go forth . . . . having learned what they call the Science of Divinity; they consider themselves qualified to teach it anywhere and under all circumstances. They have nothing more to learn and nothing more to teach. When our elders go forth, they have no preparation beyond the common rudiments of education that all are supposed to learn; but it is not words they go to teach, it is principles. And although before an audience learned in the laws of God, they may feel a good deal of tremor and bashfulness in trying to express themselves, yet, when they go forth and stand before congregations in the world, the Spirit of the Lord God will go with them, the Lord will sustain them, and will give unto them wisdom, "that all their adversaries will not be able to gainsay nor resist." That is the promise made to the servants of the Lord who go forth trusting in him.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPI have a great deal more confidence in men who rise feeling their weakness and inability than I have in those who feel that they are well informed and capable of teaching anything and everything. Why? Because when men trust to themselves they trust in a broken reed, and when they trust in the Lord, they will never fail. I have been out when I was . . . . young . . . . , before my head was gray, and I had to learn to trust in God. When we go forth into the world, we do not go among friends, for sometimes they do not treat us very friendly. I would say to these brethren, they will meet with enemies on every hand who will oppose and persecute them, malign their characters, and say all manner of evil about them, and who will try to overturn the principles they advocate, unless there is a very great change in the world since the time that I used to preach among them.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPAt the same time they will find many very good people who will bless them, feed and clothe them, and take care of them. And the Lord is over all, he watches over his people, and if these brethren will continue to trust in God . . . . his Spirit will rest upon them, enlighten their minds, enlarge their capacities, and give to them wisdom and intelligence in time of need. They need not be under any apprehension with regard to the wisdom of the world, for there is no wisdom in the world equal to that which the Lord gives to his Saints; and as long as these brethren keep from evil, live their religion, and cleave to the Lord by keeping his commandments, there is no fear as to the results; and this will apply to all the Saints as well as to these brethren.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPSEARCH THE SCRIPTURES.—I would say, however, to those going on missions, that they should study the Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and all our works, that they may become acquainted with the principles of our faith. I would also say to other young men who are not now going on missions, but who will probably have to go at some time in the future, that these things are of more importance to them than they realize at the present time. We ought to be built up and fortified by the truth. We ought to become acquainted with the principles, doctrines, and ordinances pertaining to the church and kingdom of God. We are told, in the Doctrine and Covenants, to search after wisdom as we would for hidden treasures, both by study and by faith, to become acquainted with the history and laws of the nation we live in, and of the nations of the earth. I know that when young men are working around here, going to the canyon, working on the farm, going to the theatre, and so on, their minds are not much occupied with these things. But when they are called upon to take a part in the drama themselves, many of them will wish they had paid more attention to the instructions they have received, and had made themselves more familiar with the Bible, Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTEACH WITH POWER.—These missionaries are now going to school to teach others, and in teaching others they themselves will be instructed, and when they rise to speak in the name of Israel's God, if they live in purity and holiness before him, he will give them words and ideas of which they never dreamed before. I have traveled hundreds and thousands of miles to preach this gospel among all grades and conditions of men, and there is one thing that always gave me satisfaction—I never yet found a man in any part of the world who could overturn one principle that has been communicated to us; they will attempt it, but error is a very singular weapon with which to combat truth; it never can vanquish it.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPWhen men go forth in the name of Israel's God, there is no power on earth that can overturn the truths they advocate. Men may misrepresent and calumniate them; they may circulate false reports, for as a general thing men love lies better than truth; but when men go forth possessing the truths of the everlasting gospel which God has revealed, they have a treasure within them that the world knows nothing about. They have the light of revelation, the fire of the Holy Ghost, and the power of the priesthood within them—a power that they know very little about even themselves, which, like a well-spring of life, is rising, bursting, bubbling, and spreading its exhilarating streams around. Why, says the Lord, with you I will confound the nations of the earth, with you I will overturn their kingdoms.—JD, 12:395-397, April 14, 1867.

USE OF THE BIBLE.—The Bible is believed by all! Suppose we transplant them to Hindustan or China. What evidence would they have to present before the people? They present the scriptures, and tell the people that they are true. But how are we to know it, say the people. We tell you so. That is all very well; but we want some proof. Well, say you, they speak of Jesus' coming to atone for the sins of the world. Yes; but the Jews tell us he was an impostor and a wicked man. But we believe him to be a good man, and the Son of God. Did you ever see him? No. How do you know anything about him then? We believe him to be good. Who wrote this book? His apostles. Oh, his particular friends! Yes. Did you ever see them? No. Did you ever see anybody that had? No. Well, we do not put much confidence in your remarks; but we will read your book.

Having read it, they say, oh, I perceive that certain signs are to follow them that believe—the sick are to be healed, devils cast out; they are to speak in other tongues, have the gift of prophecy, etc. Do these signs follow you? Oh, no! But you say you are believers, and your Bible says these signs shall follow them that believe. Oh, they are done away and not necessary. But one of your apostles (Paul) says, "Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts." (I Corinthians 14:1.) But they are not needed. Strange! Your apostle, Paul, says, "the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you." (I Corinthians 12:21.) But shall we not receive these gifts if we believe in Jesus, repent, and are baptized? No. Oh, you have a friend here, I see, who is also a Christian minister. Do you believe in the same book, sir? Yes. Do you believe in the same doctrine? No. But do you get yours from the same book? Yes! And does it teach you differently? We believe differently.

But you have, we perceive, another friend here; is he also a minister? Yes. Which of your doctrines does he believe? Neither. Do you all believe the Bible? Yes. Do you believe it to be true or false? True. Does a true book teach three different ways? Those are our opinions. Oh, I thought you had come to teach truth; if opinions are all, we have plenty of them already, and can dispense with your services. Your Bible says that the gospel was to be preached to all the world, and these signs would follow the belief and obedience to it. Do you live in the world? Yes. Then it must apply to you. I can have no confidence, gentlemen, in men who present me with a book, and call it the word of God, and then deny that word.—PD, 16, 1850.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTHE "GRIND."—Those who have to go out have to put their noses to the grindstone, and keep them there, and let them grind at it, and not murmur a word. . . . You need not attempt to without faith in God; and you will have need of all the wisdom and intelligence you can command. You cannot go and convert the world all at once, for it is too far sunken in folly and vice.—JD, 6:259, August 28, 1852.

THE WARNING TO THE NATIONS

THE MESSAGES BEING FULFILLED.—Years and years ago, I preached abroad among the nations of the earth, and I see around me here many of my brethren, the elders, whose heads are now as gray as mine, who did the same. We preached to many of you who are here, and told you that the world would wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Did we not preach this doctrine? I think we did, ten, twenty, thirty, and forty years ago. We told you then that in consequence of the wickedness that would exist upon the earth, thrones would be cast down, empires demoralized, and that wars and bloodshed would exist upon the face of the earth, and that God would arise and vex the nations and bring them to judgment, because of their iniquities. Is it anything astonishing that these words should be fulfilled? Why, they are the words of truth! They were spoken by the spirit of revelation, and were in accordance with the revelations given to ancient men of God, who spoke as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and who, while rapt in prophetic vision, saw and foretold what should transpire on the earth. God revealed the same things to us that he did to them.—JD, 14:247-248, October 8, 1871.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPQuite a favorite theme has been with many of our elders, that the "little stone" spoken of in the scriptures has been cut out of the mountain without hands, and it is destined to strike the image whose head was of gold, breast and arms of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, and feet part of iron, and feet part of iron and part of clay, upon its feet, breaking it to pieces; and that the materials, which represent the various nations of the earth, composing the image, should become like the chaff of a summer's threshing-floor, carried away by the wind until there was no place found for it. This is exactly as it has been foretold many thousands of years ago. . . . When this little stone, then, as it rolls forth, strikes the toes of the great image, are you surprised that there should be a little kicking? You don't like to have your toes trodden upon any more than anybody else. The fact is, the same great conflict is going on between the two great powers; the only difference is that we are in much better circumstances than many who lived in earlier days who had to wander about in sheep and goat skins, seeking the dens and caves of rocks as places of retreat and safety.—JD, 21:5-6, August 31, 1879.

Tolerancea-Taylor, JohnTPATTITUDE TOWARD THE WORLD.—In relation to the inhabitants of the world generally, I sometimes think that we entertain very erroneous notions concerning them—that our ideas are too narrow and too contracted, that we do not comprehend the relationship in which they stand to God our Heavenly Father—and we are apt to fall into an error which was indulged in by the Jews in former ages, and to cry out, "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are we." Because God has conferred upon us light and intelligence, and revealed his will unto us, we are too apt to look down upon the rest of mankind as aliens and undeserving of divine regard; but we are told that God has made of one blood all the families of the earth, and that he has given unto them a portion of his spirit to profit withal. We are also informed, that God is the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh. We are given to understand that he feels interested in the welfare of all the human family, for it is written that they are all his offspring. Therefore, we as Latter-day Saints, ought to feel towards the world and the inhabitants thereof as God our Heavenly Father feels towards them; for we are told that God so loved the world, that he gave his Only Begotten Son to atone for their sins, that whosoever believeth on him might not perish, but have everlasting life, and if this is the feeling of our Heavenly Father towards the inhabitants of the earth, we ought to entertain the same sentiment.—JD, 24:287-288, October 7, 1883.

WHAT MORMONISM IS DOING.—The world want to know what Mormonism is doing. Some of us hardly know. But it is known that we are building temples, but the Christian world do not know what temples are for. If temples were built for them, they would not know how to administer in them. And we did not know until God revealed it. And unless Elijah had come and conferred the keys, it would not have been revealed. Hence I was showing you who and what Joseph Smith was. He has introduced the gospel together with the dispensation of the fulness of times, which embraces all other things.

Ziona-Taylor, JohnTPThen again, did Enoch build up a Zion? So we are doing. What is it? The Zion of God. What does it mean? The pure in heart in the first place. In the second place those who are governed by the law of God—the pure in heart who are governed by the law of God. Shall we build up a Zion? We shall; but we shall not, every one of us, have our own way about it. We shall feel that we need the will of God; and we shall feel that we require the priesthood, under his direction, to guide and direct us. Not men who are seeking to aggrandize themselves; but men who are seeking to build up the church and kingdom of God upon the earth; men of clean hands and pure hearts, every one honoring his priesthood and magnifying it. . . . Now, this is what we are building up, and they built up a similar thing before the flood; and the elders went forth in those days as they now go forth; and they baptized people and laid hands upon them, and gathered them to Zion; and after a while that Zion was caught up from the earth. And we will build up a Zion: that is what we are aiming at. And that Zion also, when the time comes, will ascend to meet the Zion from above, which will descend, and both, we are told, will fall on each other's necks and kiss each other.—JD, 26:109-110, October 20, 1881.

THE METHOD.—At the commencement of the dispensations God sends out his elders generally to all the world to preach the gospel to every creature. In this dispensation he not only does this; but, as we live in a gathering dispensation, he also gathers in the people. When they learn a little of his law, there are many ordained to the priesthood and sent out as messengers, and we keep sending them out to preach the gospel and to gather in the elect; and we send them to their own people to tell them what God has done and is doing. And they keep coming and going.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPAnd whom do we send? If we send to England, we send Englishmen, or men who can speak the English language; if to Scandinavia, we send Scandinavians. We send generally their own people, accompanied with men of experience, after the gospel has been introduced to them. Why? That they may go and teach their own people the way of life and salvation. What then? They come back again and build temples. And what then? They and their people from the various nations of the earth go into these temples and administer for their fathers, and grandfathers, their uncles and aunts, their friends and relatives, and thus reach back, back into distant times to redeem and save others.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPAnd who are these men? Just such as the ancient prophets talked about. They are saviors upon Mount Zion, are they not, saving and redeeming their people—and those men who are quarrying and hauling the rock, and those who are engaged in laying up these terrace and temple walls, and those who are otherwise engaged in making the necessary preparation for the building of the temple are all laboring in the same direction. The Lord requires this work at our hands in order to test us, to see whether we will carry out his laws or not. And when we build our temples and he accepts of them, we will then enter into them and administer in the name of God; and administering in them we become saviors upon Mount Zion, as it is written.—JD, 21:96-97. April 13, 1879.

MEN OF THE WORLD.—If the men of the world, if the princes and potentates of the earth, if the statesmen and great men among the nations could . . . . understand the gospel as it has been revealed to us—if they could know anything of our high calling's glorious hope, and of the principles that animate our bosoms, they would, many of them, lay down their honors and their thrones, and come down and ask for admission into this kingdom. But they have got to receive the kingdom of God like a little child, just the same as you and I, or they cannot enter it. They have to enter by the door into the sheepfold; and hence there is a test for every man to try him by; and hence the difference between our views and position which necessarily produces a difference in our feelings. They think differently; they speak differently; they look upon things in a different point of view to what we do. They look upon us as being enthusiastic, foolish, wild, and visionary, and among the rest as being polluted; and they would, forsooth, sympathize with us, some of them, and think we are in the most dreadful position of any people under the face of the heavens—that we are degraded and fallen. But they know not the spirit that animates our bosoms; they know not the hope that God has inspired in our hearts; they know not the things pertaining to the kingdom of God. . . .—JD, 5:145, August 23, 1857.

Unitya-Taylor, JohnTPUNITY OF PEOPLE IN THE GOSPEL.—We have been in the world and we have preached the gospel to the world and are doing it, and that is part of our duty, and we are fulfilling it as fast as the Lord opens the way. We have done a great deal. I think that at an assembly some little time ago there were twenty-five nationalities represented. Is there any difference of sentiment among these diverse people? No. In speaking with a gentleman recently on some of the difficulties between the English and the Irish people, I told him that it was lamentable that such a feeling should exist. Well, said he, they are two different races and they cannot affiliate, one being Celtic and the other Anglo-Saxon, and their sympathies and feelings are dissimilar. Their ideas and feelings differ; their education and their instincts differ. That is very true so far as it goes. But what of us? We are gathered here under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and that as I before said, produces a unity of feeling and spirit, a oneness and sympathy that does not exist in the world and Jesus has said, "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:35.) . . . . And how is it, brethren? Are we Scandinavians; are we English; are we Scotch, Swiss or Dutch, as the case may be? No; the Spirit of God, which we obtained through obedience to the requirements of the gospel, having been born again, of the water and of the Spirit, has made us of one heart, one faith, one baptism; we have no national or class divisions of that kind among us.—JD, 24:2, February 11, 1883.

THE LAMANITES.—The work of the Lord among the Lamanites must not be postponed, if we desire to retain the approval of God. Thus far we have been content simply to baptize them and let them run wild again, but this must continue no longer; the same devoted effort, the same care in instructing, the same organization of priesthood must be introduced and maintained among the house of Lehi as amongst those of Israel gathered from gentile nations. As yet, God has been doing all, and we comparatively nothing. He has led many of them to us, and they have been baptized, and now we must instruct them further, and organize them into churches with proper presidencies, attach them to our stakes, organizations, etc. In one word, treat them exactly, in these respects, as we would and do treat our white brethren.—MS, 44:733; a letter from Salt Lake City dated October 18, 1882.
