John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXIII

THE ECONOMY OF THE KINGDOM: THE UNITED ORDER AND COOPERATION

THE BASIC PRINCIPLES

Obediencea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ABUNDANT EARTH.—The gold and the silver are God's, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. All that we possess is the gift of God. We should acknowledge him in all things. We sometimes talk about men having this right and the other right. We have no rights, only such as God gives us. And I will tell you what he will show to the Latter-day Saints. He will yet prove to them that the gold and the silver are his, and the cattle upon a thousand hills, and that he gives to whom he will, and withholds from whom he pleases. He will yet show you this is a matter of fact. Our safety and happiness and our wealth depend upon our obedience to God and his laws, and our exaltation in time and eternity depends upon the same thing.—JD, 24:267, June 24, 1883.

Gratitudea-Taylor, JohnTPACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF GOD.—We are told that with none is the Lord angry, except those who do not acknowledge his hand in all things. Seek for his blessing upon everything you engage in. If you have a farm, dedicate it to God, and pray that his blessing may be upon it. If you build a house, dedicate it to God; also your garden, your cattle and sheep, and all that you possess, and pray that his blessing may rest upon you and upon everything that pertains to you.—JD, 22:313, October 19, 1881.

Blessings of the Faithfula-Taylor, JohnTPTEMPORAL WELFARE.—I will tell you a secret. If we could only prepare ourselves to do the will of God and keep his commandments and live our religion so that God could trust us with more means than we have, he would so order things, and that too by natural ways, that our desires in that direction would be fully gratified. But we are not prepared for it. It would only destroy us and lead us to the devil and the Lord knows it. At the same time, we cannot complain in this regard; the Lord has treated us very well. I do not know of a people anywhere that are better off as a whole than we are. It is true we do not have the amount of wealth among us that may be found in older countries; but then we do not have the poverty, the suffering, and distress that may be found elsewhere. It is for us to introduce principles that will obviate all these difficulties, and that will prepare us to receive blessings from God, and to administer the same wisely.—JD, 21:217, March 1, 1880.

AN EXAMPLE OF COOPERATION.—Some time before we left the city of Nauvoo, a conference was called and a unanimous vote was taken in the temple of the Lord that we would assist all the Saints in Nauvoo who wished to remove, to the extent of our property, until there should not be one worthy Saint left. This resolution so far has been faithfully carried out, and every exertion has been made by the council of the twelve for the accomplishment of this object, and by trustees appointed for that purpose. Men have scoured the country for one hundred miles round, to purchase cattle, mules, etc., for the removal of the saints; and we have drained the surrounding country for that distance, and for several hundred miles on the route we have traveled, of all the cattle they could spare, and we have, in fact, the best cattle and horses in the country.—MS, 8:116, November 15, 1846.

Law of Consecrationa-Taylor, JohnTPCONSECRATION THE TEST OF FAITH.—I will tell you how I feel about the principle of consecration, that has been presented by the president before the conference; but there is one thing that will perhaps make a difference with me, I have not much to consecrate or sacrifice, consequently I cannot boast much in these matters. No matter about that, let it come; for I feel I am enlisted for the war, and it is going to last for time, and throughout all eternity; and if I am a servant of God, I am under the direction of those servants of God, whom he has appointed to guide and counsel me by revelation from him. . . .

Law of Consecrationa-Taylor, JohnTPThe principle that was laid before us has been published years ago in the revelations of God, and the saints have anxiously looked forward to the time when it would be fully entered into by them. But there is one thing you may set down for a certainty: . . . . if a man feels right in one, he will in all the revelations from that source. I would hate, after struggling, and trying to master the evil around me, and to conquer the evil disposition that besets me, to let some little thing upset me, and root me up, and cause me to lose my high calling's glorious hope, and make a shipwreck of my faith, and send me down to perdition; and I know you would hate it also. We have got to follow the oracles of heaven in all things; there is no other way but to follow him God has appointed to lead us and guide us into eternal salvation. He is either delegated from heaven to do this, or he is not; if he is, we will follow his counsel; if he is not, then we may kick up our heels, and every man help himself the best way he can.—JD, 1:375, April 19, 1854.

Law of Consecrationa-Taylor, JohnTPNEW STEPS IN THE WORK.—We are called upon once in a while to take a new step in this great work. At one time it was polygamy, at another it was baptism for the dead, then it was building temples, then certain endowments, then the sealing of our children to us, then certain promises made to ourselves, such as God made to Abraham in former days, and now it is that we must get a little closer together, and be more united in regard to our temporal affairs, that we may be prepared to act and to operate in all things according to the mind and will of God.—JD, 17:177, October 9, 1874.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPA FUNDAMENTAL LAW.—Referring to the United Order, the Lord has given us to understand that whosoever refuses to comply with the requirements of that law, his name shall not be known in the records of the church, but shall be blotted out; neither shall his children have an inheritance in Zion. Are these the words of the Lord to us? I suppose there are none here today but would say, Yes. How, then can I or you treat lightly that which God has given us? It is the word of God to me; it is the word of God to you. And if we do not fulfil this requirement, what is the result? We are told what the result will be.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPThese things have not taken place now; but we have been wandering about from place to place, and the Lord has blessed us in a remarkable degree. And we are gathered together, as I have said, for the purpose of building up Zion, and we are supposed to be the servants of God having engaged to perform this work; and individually, I would say, I do not want to profess to be a Saint if I am not one, nor if the work we are engaged in is not of the Lord. If the principles we believe in are false, I do not want anything to do with them; on the other hand, if they are true then I want to be governed by them, and so do you. We must carry out the word and will of God, for we cannot afford to ignore it nor any part of it. If faith, repentance, and baptism, and laying on of hands are right and true and demand our obedience, so do cooperation and the United Order.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPSome may say, here such and such a man has been connected with the United Order, and how foolishly he has acted, and others have gone into cooperation and made a failure of it. Yes, that may be all very true, but who is to blame? Shall we stop baptizing people and make no further efforts to establish the kingdom of God upon the earth, because certain ones have acted foolishly and perhaps wickedly? Do the actions of such people render the principles of the gospel without effect or the doctrines we teach untrue? I think you would not say so. What do we do with such cases? We purge them out; we cut them off according to the laws God has laid down; but we do not stop the operations of the gospel. Such a thought never enters our minds, for we know the work already commenced is onward and upward. Shall we then think of putting an end to these other principles because men have acted foolishly and selfishly and done wrong? No, I think not; I do not think we can choose one principle and reject another to suit ourselves. I think that all of these things, as we have received them, one after another, are equally binding upon us.—JD, 21:58-59, September 21, 1878.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPINFORMATION ABOUT THE UNITED ORDER.—We have heard a good deal . . . . in relation to what is called the Order of Enoch, the New Order, the United Order, or whatever name we may give to it. It is new and then it is old, for it is everlasting as I understand it. I am asked sometimes—"Do you understand it?" . . . . We know that such an order must be introduced, but are not informed in relation to the details, and I guess it is about the same with most of you. We have been talking about an order that is to be introduced and established among the saints of God for the last forty-two years, but we have very little information given us concerning it, either in the [biblical] scriptures or in the Book of Mormon. The fullest detail that we have of it is in the Doctrine and Covenants, and that is the case with almost everything pertaining to the kingdom of God on the earth. . . .

A REALISTIC OUTLOOK.—When the president communicated with us a little before starting from the south, about this new order, I really did not know what shape it would assume or how it would be introduced, but it has got to come.

And then on the other hand, I do not know that we need have very much anxiety in relation to the matter, for if it be of God, it must be right, and its introduction is only a question of time. As to the modus operandi, that is another question. . . .—JD, 17:47, April 19, 1874.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPCOOPERATION AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY.—We have been praying a long while that we might go back to Jackson County, and build up the center stake of Zion; that we might enter into the United Order of God, and be one in both temporal and spiritual things, in fact, in everything; yet when it comes along, it startles us, we are confused and hardly know what to think of it.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPThis reminds me of an anecdote, which I will relate to you. Among the passengers on a steamer crossing the Atlantic, was a very zealous minister who was all the time preaching to those on board about the glory and happiness of heaven, and how happy they would all be when they got there. During the voyage a very heavy storm arose, and the vessel was drifted from her course and was in great danger of striking on a reef of rocks. The captain went to examine his chart, and after a while returned with a very sorrowful face, and said—"Ladies and gentlemen, in twenty minutes from this time we shall all be in heaven." "God forbid!" said the minister.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPMany of us are a good deal like this minister; for years we have been talking about a new order of things, about union and happiness, and about going back to Jackson County, but the moment it is presented to us we say—"God forbid." But then, on sober, second thought, another feeling seems to inspire us, and wherever we go a spirit seems to rest upon the people which leads them almost unanimously to embark in these things; and when we reflect, saying nothing about our religion, an extended system of cooperation seems to agree with every principle of good, common sense. Is there anything extraordinary or new in the doctrine that it is well for a community to be self-sustaining?

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPHUMAN NEEDS.—Now, for instance, we require a great many things in connection with human existence. We need boots and shoes, stockings, pants, vests, coats, hats, handkerchiefs, and shirts. We need cloth of various kinds, and dresses, shawls, bonnets, etc. And in every reflecting mind the question naturally arises, is it better for us to make these things ourselves at home, or to have somebody abroad make them for us? Is it better for each man to labor separately, as we do now, or to be organized so as to make the most of our labor? We have a large number of hides here in this territory, what do we do with them generally? Send them to the states. We raise a large amount of wool here, what do we do with it? We export a great deal of it to the states. We have got a large amount of excellent timber here; what do we do for our furniture? We send to the states for a great deal of it. Where do we get our pails and our washtubs, and all our cooperware from? We send to the states for it. Where do we get our brooms from? From the states; and so on all the way through the catalogue, and millions on millions of dollars are sent out of the territory every year for the purchase of articles, most of which we could manufacture and raise at home. This is certainly very poor economy, for we have thousands and thousands of men who are desirous to get some kind of employment, and they cannot get it. Why? Because other people are making our shoes, hats, clothing, bonnets, silks, artificial flowers, and many other things that we need. This may do very well for a while in an artificial state of society. But the moment any reverse comes, that kind of thing is upset, and all our calculations are destroyed.

ORGANIZING FOR NEED AND EMERGENCY STRESS.—I believe in organizing the tanners and having the hides tanned at home. When the hides are tanned, I believe in organizing the shoemakers, and manufacturing our own shoes and boots. I believe in keeping our wool at home, and in having it manufactured in our own factories, and we have as good factories here as anywhere. They should work up all the wool in the country, and if there is not enough raised to keep them running, import more. Then I believe in organizing men to take care of our stock—our cattle and sheep, and increasing the clip of wool, that we may have enough to meet the demands of the whole community. Then, when our cloth is made, I believe in organizing tailors' companies to manufacture that cloth into clothing—pants, coats, vests, and everything of the kind that we need. Then for our furniture, I believe in going into the mountains and cutting down the timber, framing it into proper shape, and then manufacturing the various articles of furniture that we need. If we require another kind of timber, import that. But make the furniture here.

PRODUCTION, THE KEYNOTE.—When we talk about cooperation, we have entered but very little into it, and it has been almost exclusively confined to the purchase of goods. There is not much in that. I wish we would learn how to produce them instead of purchasing them. I wish we could concentrate our energies, and organize all hands, old, middle-aged, and young, male and female, and put them under proper direction, with proper materials to manufacture everything we need to wear and use. We have forgotten even how to make sorghum molasses, and our memories are getting short on other points. We can hardly make a hat or coat, or a pair of boots or shoes, but we have to send to the states and import these paper ones, which last a very short time and then drop to pieces, and you have your hands continually in your pockets to supply these wants, and by and by your pockets are empty. It is therefore necessary that we right-about face, and begin to turn the other end to, and be self-sustaining.

UNITY.—The president said he would like the elders to give both sides of the question; but there is only one side to this question, and that is union in all our operations, in everything we engage in. They started a little thing like this in Box Elder County some time ago, and I was very much pleased to see the way things went there. I have spoken about it once or twice in public. They have got their cooperative store, it is true; but that is only a small part of it. Sometime ago I asked them—"You have a factory here, haven't you?" "Yes." "Well, do you sell your wool, send it to the states to mix up with shoddy and get an inferior article, or do you make it up yourselves?" "We make it up ourselves." "Then you don't sell your wool, and keep your factory standing idle?" "No, we don't; our factory has never stood idle a day for want of wool since it was organized." Said I—"That looks right. What do you do with your hides? Do you send them off?" "No, we have a very good tannery and we tan them, and make them into leather for shoes, and for harness and for other purposes." "Oh, indeed!" "Yes, that is the way it is." "Well, then, what next?" "Why, when we get our shoes made, we have a saddlers' organization, and they make all the saddlery and harness we want." "And what do you do with your cows? Do you let them run on the plains, and live or die, just as it happens, without making any cheese or butter?" "No, we have a cooperative dairy, and we have our cows in that, and we receive so much from them all the time regularly." "Well," said I, "that looks right. And are you all interested in this?" "Well, about two-thirds or three-fourths of us are all engaged in these matters." "How about your store, does it run away with the best part of it?" "No." "Does the factory get the cream of it?" "No." "Does some keen financial man get his fingers in and grab it?" "No, we are all mutually interested in everything, the profits as well as the losses." I have learned, since I was there, that they have made it a great success.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPNow, then, if you can organize one little thing in that way, everything can be done in the same way. I was talking with President Lorenzo Snow, and he told me that they pay their men every Saturday night. They have a money of their own, and they pay their hands with it, and that is good for everything they require. And they make their arrangements unitedly, and they operate together for the general good. Said I, "How do they feel about this United Order?" "Oh," I was told, "They are ready for anything that God may send along." That is the feeling among the saints, I believe, generally.—JD, 17:66-68, May 7, 1874.

PRINCIPLES OF THE UNITED ORDER

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPA REVELATION FROM THE MOST HIGH.—We have had a great deal said about the United Order, and about our becoming one. And some people would wish—oh, how they do wish, they could get around that principle, if they could! But you Latter-day Saints, you cannot get around it; you cannot dig around it; it will rise before you every step you take, for God is determined to carry out his purposes, and to build up his Zion; and those who will not walk into line he will move out of the way and no place will be found for them in Israel. Hear it, you Latter-day Saints, for I say to you in the name of Israel's God that it is a revelation from the Most High, and you cannot get around it. There seem to be difficulties in the way at present; but we shall surmount these. The only way for us to do now, in consideration of the weaknesses and infirmities with which we are surrounded, is to do the very best we can, and advance those interests as near as we can, practically and in their spirit and essence, until we can bring about the thing that God designs, for men are not prepared for these things yet in full. But we are in part, as they of old prophesied in part, and understood in part; and by and by that which is perfect in relation to these matters will be introduced.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPPREVIOUS EFFORTS.—Joseph Smith tried to introduce this order, but such was the corruption, covetousness, fraud, and injustice of men that he found it almost impossible to do it. This was the idea he conveyed, if not the precise words that he used in speaking upon this subject. We have made various attempts to do what the Prophet Joseph tried to do. In some places they are doing very well, and in other places very poorly. I can tell you this much about it, it is pretty hard work to make sheep out of goats. Did any of you ever try it? . . . .

There are some things that Brother Lorenzo Snow is doing that are very creditable; but it is not the United Order. He is working with the people something after the same principle that our sisters teach the little ones how to walk. They stand them in a sort of chair which rolls along, and the babies appear delighted; they think they are walking. But we have not learned how to walk yet. And then there are other institutions scattered throughout the territory, having the same laudable object in view. Many of them have most excellent principles among them, and they manifest a most admirable spirit; but they only see in part, and know and comprehend in part. . . .

THE ORDER MUST LIVE IN THE HEARTS OF THE PEOPLE.—I suppose these things could go on and increase, and everything in regard to your commercial relations could be operated with one common consent, under the proper authority and administration of the priesthood, and you all labor unitedly, with singleness of heart before God. And what would be the result? You could not be preyed upon by outsiders; you would have no middlemen living off you, and what speculations might be entered into would be in the interest of the community. And then you could operate in regard to your farming interests, and the disposing of your grain, and cooperating together, you will be able to form a phalanx in this valley that will become a power in this part of the land. And then if you could go to work and manufacture your own boots and shoes and harness, and your own wearing apparel, men's and women's wear, as they are doing in Brigham City, a great deal of remunerative employment could be furnished your own people, and it would be the means of putting trades in the hands of many of your boys; and by and by you could become a self-sustaining people. . . .

We have had enough talk about these things; the only thing left is to contrive in all our various settlements, to introduce such things, gradually and according to circumstances, as will subserve the interests of the people and make them self-sustaining. And then let the people throughout the territory do the same thing, and we shall be progressing in the march of improvement, and get, by and by, to what is called the United Order. But I will tell you one thing you can never do—unless you can get the United Order in the hearts of the people, you can never plant it anywhere else. Articles and constitutions amount to very little. We must have this law, which is the law of God, written in our hearts. Many men associated with these institutions do not act in good faith. I have seen men unite with them, thinking that they could get a very easy living by preying upon the people who were more confiding and honorable than themselves. Will such men be blessed? No, they will not, but the curse of God will rest upon them for trying to pervert his purposes; and it would have been better for them never to have entered into such connections. These have been some of my reflections in relation to these matters.—JD, 20:43-44-45, August 4, 1878.

MATTERS OF FACT.—In the first place, it has been a matter of facts with me, for years and years, that such a state of things has to be introduced amongst us. I think that is an opinion that prevails very generally among the Latter-day Saints, and I do not think there is much difference of opinion in relation to it. We have read about it in the Doctrine and Covenants. I think there are as many as a dozen revelations in that book in reference to this subject, and perhaps more than that. I do not propose to quote them, however, at the present time. . . .

CONFORMITY WITH THE LAW OF THE LAND.—Well, we have to go with the general stream; or at least it is necessary that we protect ourselves from legal cormorants, and from every man who would devour, tear in pieces, and destroy, who is after our property and our lives. This class of persons would be very glad to take not only the property but the lives of some of the leaders of God's people here on the earth. Nothing would suit them better; they are so holy, pure, and law-abiding. These are the circumstances that we are placed in. Now what shall be done? There are certain principles that emanate from God; but we have to protect ourselves in carrying them out, and make them conform, as new as we can, to the laws of the land.

STEWARDSHIPS.—In the Doctrine and Covenants it is said, in the first place, that a man shall place his property at the feet of the bishop. That is what that lays down, and you say that is what you would like to do. Some would, very many would not. The bishop, after examining into the position and circumstances of the man, and finding out what his wants are, and what his capabilities and talents, what the size of his family, etc., appoints to him a certain amount of means, which he receives as a stewardship.

THE PROBLEM OF FREEDOM.—"Well," say some, "how does this order you are talking about introducing agree with that? Where does the stewardship come in?" I will tell you. We have organized this as near as may be on the principles of cooperation, and the voice you have in selecting your officers, and in voting for them and the stock you hold in these institutions is your stewardship. You may say—"Is not that taking away our freedom?" I do not think it is. I am not prepared to enter into details, but I should say that one-third, perhaps one-half, of the wealth of the world is manipulated just in the same way. How so? Why, there are among the nations national securities of various kinds issued, which are taken by the people; we have United States bonds, state bonds, county and city bonds in this country as well as in Europe, to which the people subscribe and in which they have an interest, all of which is voluntary, and the free act of the people. Then we have railroad bonds, steamship bonds, and we have telegraph, mercantile, manufacturing, and cooperative associations, which are represented by those who hold stock therein, and there are hundreds and thousands of millions of dollars throughout the world that are operated in this way by financiers, statesmen, men of intelligence—merchants, capitalists, and others, in every grade and condition in life; none of whom consider that there is any coercion associated with it. These men all have their free agency.

What is the modus operandi? For illustration,—a company is organized, men subscribe stock into that company, or they purchase bonds perhaps from a government, for which that government pays interest; or, if it is in a company, that company manipulates and arranges matters, not the stockholders individually, they never think of it; they select the officers to do these things for them, and all they have to do with it is to vote in these officers, each person voting according to the amount of stock he holds in the institution. And then they draw their dividends at certain specified times. This is the way, I presume, that one-half or perhaps three-quarters of the wealth of the civilized world is manipulated today.

Well, is freedom taken from these men? Are the men engaged in these operations thieves and robbers? Some of them act very fraudulently it is true, and the amount of defalcation and fraud in our country, of late, is painful to reflect upon. But then, they consider they have a perfect right to buy or to sell any of this stock, and if parties enter into institutions of any kind, mercantile or manufacturing, they must be subject to the rules or laws thereof. But the stockholders do not individually operate these institutions, and what I wanted to say is, that herein we, as they, have our stewardship and freedom of action.. . . .

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPTHE IDEAL OF UNITED BROTHERHOOD.—I cannot conceive of anything more beautiful and heavenly than a united brotherhood, organized after the pattern laid down in the Doctrine and Covenants; when all act for the benefit of all—when while we love God with all our hearts we love our neighbor as ourselves; where our time, our property, our talents, our mental and bodily powers are all exerted for the good of all; where no man grabs or takes advantage of another; where there is a common interest, a common purse, a common stock; where, as they did on this continent, it is said of them that "they all dealt justly to each other," and all acted for the general weal, "when every man in every place could meet a brother and a friend," when all the generous and benevolent influences and sympathies of our nature are carried out, and covetousness, arrogance, hatred, and pride, and every evil are subdued and brought into subjection to the will and Spirit of God. These principles are very beautiful and would be very happifying for a community, a territory, a state, nation, or the world.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPA CELESTIAL LAW.—Now, then, these things are presented before us, and I suppose we shall have to come into them as best we can, and if we ever get into the celestial kingdom of God we shall find that they are just such a set of people. If ever we build up a Zion here on this continent, and in case Zion ever comes down to us, and we expect it will, or that ours will go up to meet it, we have got to be governed by the same principles that they are governed by, or we can not be one. And if we ever get into the eternal worlds, we shall have to be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ.—JD, 17:177-181, October 9, 1874.

THE PRIESTHOOD MUST LEAD THE WAY.—We read of the Zion that was built up by Enoch, and that this Zion and the people that were united with Enoch, who were subject to the same laws which God is seeking to introduce among us, were caught up into the heavens. We have been expecting all along to build up a similar Zion upon these mountains, and we have talked a great deal about going back to Jackson County. We can not build up a Zion unless we are in possession of the spirit of Zion, and of the light and intelligence that flow from God, and under the direction of the priesthood, the living oracles of God, to lead us in the paths of life.—JD, 18:78-79, August 31, 1875.

THE COOPERATIVE MOVEMENT.—I will tell you, Latter-day Saints, that unless we can enter into our cooperative institutions and the United Order with singleness of heart and pure motives, as the elders do when they go forth to preach the gospel, because it is God's command, your efforts will be of small avail. We do not want to stop and ask, is there money in it?

Is it his will, his law and principle? When we combine our interests on this principle, and work to it, we will succeed and prosper. But in too many instances our cooperative institutions have jumped the track. What, the big co-op? Yes, and little co-ops too. Have you got a co-op here? No, you have not. Do you know of any? We find little institutions they call co-ops in most of our settlements, but when you come to inquire into affairs connected with them we generally find, that, instead of their being run in the interest of the community, and with a view to build up the kingdom of God, a few individuals represent the co-op, who are the ones who are benefited by it. That is the trouble. But is the principle right? Yes, if you can live it, dealing honestly one with another; but if you cannot, you need not try it, for instead of giving satisfaction, it will only be a disappointment. But I will promise the Latter-day Saints that if they will go into these things allowing God to dictate in the interests of Israel and the building up of his Zion on the earth, and take themselves and their individual interests out of the question, feeling they are acting for him and his kingdom, they will become the wealthiest of all people, and God will bless them and pour out wealth and intelligence and all the blessings that earth can afford. But if you will not, you will go downward, and keep going the downward road to disappointment and poverty in things spiritual as well as temporal. I dare prophesy that in the name of the Lord.

United Ordera-Taylor, JohnTPThat is the way that I look at these things, and that is the way I figure them up, and not in the light of every man looking for gain from his own quarter. These things are stumblingblocks in the way of the people, and have been for some time. Well, what shall we do? Why, do the best we can, and keep on trying to improve upon our present condition, always keeping in view the object to be gained, dealing honestly upon a fair basis and correct principles, then we will succeed and things will move on pleasantly, and we shall be united people, owned and blessed of the Lord. It was on this principle that the Nephites became a prosperous, a blessed and happy people; it was not because one was a little smarter than another, or through his smartness taking advantage of his neighbor; it was not that a man was a good financier, that he should "financier" other peoples' property into his own pockets and leave them without.—JD, 20:163-164, March 2, 1879.

TO SUSTAIN COOPERATION.—We took a vote at the priesthood meeting . . . . and so far as I could discern, the brethren all voted to sustain cooperation, and that those in the merchandise business will purchase of the co-op.

But some may say, have not the cooperative organizations made many blunders? Yes, they have, and in many instances acted very foolishly. But shall we give up the principle of cooperation because of the unwise acts of a few individuals? We do not act thus in regard to other matters. We baptize men into the church, and lay our hands upon them that they may receive the Holy Ghost, and after they have thus been blessed with the light, spirit, and power of God, many of them act very foolishly, violate their covenants, and transgress the laws of God. Shall we, therefore, repudiate baptism and the laying on of hands because of their folly and wickedness? Certainly not. The Lord has provided a way to purge the church, and those men are dealt with according to the laws of the church, and are rooted out. This is the way that we ought to manage in our temporal affairs. If the people do wrong, deal with them according to the laws of the church, and if the cooperatives do wrong, professing to be governed by correct principle, deal with them in the same way, and let those wrongs be righted and evil eradicated.—JD, 20:59, September 22, 1878.

COOPERATION: AN ANECDOTE ABOUT SOME FINANCIERS.—A smart young man had just returned from college, and at the table he wished to show his parents what extraordinary advancements he had made. "Why, father," says he, "you can hardly conceive of the advance I have made."

"Well, my son," says the father, "I am sure I am glad to hear you say so, and I trust you will make a great man." There happened to be two ducks on the table for dinner, and this young man proposed to give his father a specimen of his smartness.

"Now," he says, "you see there are only two ducks, don't you?"

"Yes," answered the father.

"Well, I can prove to you that there are three ducks."

"Can you," says the father, "that's quite extraordinary really; how can you do it?"

"Well," says the son, "I will show you. That's one?"

"Yes."

"And that's two?"

"Yes."

"Well, two and one make three, don't they?"

"Quite so," says the father, "it is very extraordinary, and to show how much I appreciate it, I will eat one of these ducks, and your mother will eat the other, and we will leave the third for you."

Some of our "financiers" have made this kind of discovery, but when it comes to the practical thing they, like the boy, have got to fall back on father's duck or mother's duck. This kind of proficiency may be all very well in its place, but then we have no place for it; we want to act honestly and begin right, and then carry it out right. Let the big co-op straighten itself out, and then the little co-ops do the same, and let us stick to one another and all act one with another, and lay aside our scheming; and let us have honest, honorable men, elders of Israel who have at heart the building up of God's kingdom, to do our business, who will act for the welfare of all. That is my doctrine on that point.—JD, 20:164-165, March 2, 1879.

BABYLON AND BUSINESS.—Now then, in regard to our temporal affairs, these are the things which seem to perplex us more or less. We have been brought up in Babylon, and have inherited Babylonish ideas and systems of business. We have introduced, too, among us, all kinds of chicanery, deception, and fraud. It is time that these things were stopped, and that matters assumed another shape. It is time that we commenced to place ourselves under the guidance and direction of the Almighty. You can not talk in any places about temporal matters, but everybody is on the alert at once, and the idea is—Do you want my property? No. Do you want my possessions? No, no; there is no such feeling, but we do want men and women to give God their hearts; we do want people, while they profess to fear God, not to be canting hypocrites and to depart from every principle of right.

We remember the time very well, or most of us, when we first entered into this Church, if a man was found lying he would be brought before the Church and dealt with. If a man was found stealing he would be brought up before the Church and dealt with. If a man defrauded his neighbor, and it could be proved, he was brought up and dealt with; and so if a man got drunk and for all these delinquencies, if parties did not repent of them they were immediately cut off the Church as unworthy of fellowship. And now, after so many years' travail, are we to continue and fellowship all these evils? No, no, we can not do it, and God will not do it; and if we carry them along with us, we shall not enter into the celestial kingdom of God.—JD, 18:79-80, August 31, 1875.
