John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXIV

THE ECONOMY OF THE KINGDOM: TITHING, REVENUES, AND SOME ECONOMIC PROBLEMS

TITHING

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPBACKGROUND OF THE REVELATION.—The people were anxious at the time the revelation was given in Far West, to know what the Lord required as a tithing from his saints. I was there at the time. It was in 1838—quite a little time to look back to. Some time, however, before this revelation was given, God had revealed the principle of the United Order, which, as you know, the people could not abide; and when we come to think about it, it could hardly be expected that they could do so, they having been in the Church but a short time, taken out of the world, with all the prejudices and weaknesses that you and I have. But the time will come when we will obey these things as they are given by the revelations of God, and it will not be a hardship either; it will be a pleasure to those who are under the influence of the Lord. But, like all other things, it will be "free will and free grace."

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE COMMAND TO THE SAINTS.—Now, then, we come to this. Here is a command given; whom to? Not to outsiders, not to men of the world, not to people who do not to men of the world, not to people who do not believe in God nor in his laws. But it is given directly to us who profess to have faith in him, in his laws, and in his priesthood. The question then is, what is our duty, as we have not obeyed the other law? I will remark here, incidentally, that when this law of tithing was given, a great many people were gathering up to Far West and to that district of country, as we are to this country; but it would apply more to our early settlements than at the present time. This people thus gathering to Far West, were told that it was required of them to give their surplus property—I will read it:

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPVerily, thus saith the Lord, I require all their surplus property to be put into the hands of the bishop of my church in Zion,

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPFor the building of mine house, and for the laying the foundation of Zion and for the priesthood, and for the debts of the Presidency of my Church.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd this shall be the beginning of the tithing of my people. (D. & C. II9:1-3.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPWhat then?

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd after that, those who have thus been tithed shall pay one-tenth of all their interest annually; and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood, saith the Lord. (D. & C. II9:4.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPNow, here is a people, of whom we form a part, who met together to ask the prophet of the Lord to inquire for them the will of the Lord concerning this matter of tithing; and he gives it in these words:

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd this shall be a standing law unto them forever. (D. & C. II9:4.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPI will ask, has the Lord ever annulled this? No. Then it stands in full force today to this people. Then again:

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPVerily I say unto you, it shall come to pass that all those who gather unto the land of Zion shall be tithed of their surplus properties, and shall observe this law, or they shall not be found worthy to abide among you. (D. & C. II9:5.)

THE LAW CAME BY REQUEST OF THE PEOPLE.—That is very plain talk. Is there any compulsion about it? No; but if they do not do it, they shall not be considered worthy to abide among you. What are we to make of it? . . . . I did not make it. President Young did not make it. Neither did Joseph Smith make it, but by the request of the people he asked the Lord what his will was, and this was the answer; and this was given in 1838. And does it not seem strange that we do not comprehend it? I think it does sometimes. Here we have had the Doctrine and Covenants in our hands, which contains this revelation, since the year 1838; that is nearly forty-three years ago. We have had forty-two years to study this doctrine, and it is as plain as you can make it, and yet it would seem that we cannot understand it. Do we want to understand the laws of God? If we do and will read these things under the influence of that spirit which I have referred to, I think that we will understand our duties without much trouble.. . . .

TITHING AND THE BUILDING OF ZION.—Now, if we abide this, all well and good. If not, it is written, "They shall not be found worthy to abide among you." What will you do with them? I often think that there are a great many people who are not worthy to abide among us; don't you? And then if God were to put judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, most of us would be in a very poor fix. I will tell you what I think should be done.. . . . I think the people ought to be instructed in these things, and then if they do not live up to them, you will not then be held responsible to the authorities that preside over you. The Lord tells us that they shall not be worthy of a place among us. Do we want to alter that? Not one iota. Would I wish to be harsh to men that are ignorant? No, I would not; I would bear with them, and teach them, and instruct them. And if I were a bishop I should instruct my teachers to do it; and then by and by, after they were fully informed, and had every opportunity to become acquainted with things, we might take final action in relation to their standing. I would not wish to enforce that law at present, until men were thoroughly informed. For instance, the case I referred to yesterday.

There were two men; one paid one hundred dollars in tithing, the other paid twenty-five dollars in tithing. Both of them owned about the same amount of property; but the first paid his tithing, the other did not. The second, however, paid some seventy-five dollars in donations; but he did not pay his tithing; he only paid a quarter of it. That now may have arisen from ignorance with regard to the law. The last paid out as much money as the first; and he may have been wrongly taught. Some of the bishops do not understand these things, and yet we have had this doctrine given unto us for forty-two years. Has a man a right to turn and change things as he pleases? I have not, and I do not believe any other man has. And if any bishop or a president of a stake or anybody else tells you that you can do as you please about the disposition you make of the means you pay, as long as you pay a certain amount, or you may pay it on tithing or not, as you please, I tell you that he teaches false doctrine. But should we be hard with such people? No. If they have been under influences of this nature and been wrongly taught, I will say, as a certain party said to me who had been doing these things, "I will switch off and pay my tithing according to the law." You, bishops and presidents of stakes, switch off and get the people to do things right. There is no commandment about donations, but there is about tithing; and I am not at liberty to change this, neither any other man.—JD, 22:11-13, January 9, 1881.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPTITHING: THE TESTING OF FAITH.—Speaking of tithing, we as a people acknowledge that the law of tithing emanates from the Lord; then how is it that we need talking to so much in relation to it. If we are not honest with ourselves, and honest with our God, of what good to us are all our professions of being representatives of God, of being elders in Israel, of being clothed with the holy priesthood, of being teachers of the ways of life. The ancient Jews, the old Pharisees with all their wickedness and corruption, could boast of paying tithes of all they possessed. We profess to be better than the old Pharisees, and yet it seems that it is very difficult for men among us to be honest with themselves and with their God in relation to so simple a principle as this is.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPWhat is the matter? We have been dug out of the mire, been born in sin, and shapen in iniquity, as it were. We have been clothed in corruption and mixed up in the abominations of the world; we have come out from a people that did not acknowledge God, and are dishonest in their acts, and it seems almost impossible for us to lay aside our dishonesty and wickedness. If we cannot attend to these little things, how is it possible that we can rise in the political horizon and be as a beacon for all nations to gaze upon. The Lord does not care a straw whether we pay our tithing or not, it does not make him one particle richer or poorer. The gold and silver are his and the cattle upon a thousand hills. The world and all its fulness belong to him, for he organized and framed it. But as it is, of what benefit is it to him? He wants in the first place to get men to acknowledge God, I was going to say in one little carnal principle, one little earthly principle, he wants to get them to acknowledge him, by giving him a certain little part, or one-tenth of what he gives to them to see whether they will be honest in this trifle, to see whether they will act as honorable high-minded men or not, or whether they will try to cheat him out of it. If we do this honestly and conscientiously until we have fulfilled our duty, we are then prepared for anything else. It is the principle and not the tithing we pay that is esteemed of the Lord; he cares not for our tithing, but he cares about our doing right. If we cannot be faithful in a few things, we cannot expect to be made rulers over many things.—JD, 10:280-281, October 25, 1863.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Taylor, JohnTPWe have been taught to pay our tithing, that we might acknowledge to God that we are his people, and that if he gave us all we ask, we might give one-tenth back to him, and by that act acknowledge his hand. Does the Lord care about these things?—No, He does not care about them, so far as they benefit him, but he does, so far as they develop perfection in the saints of God, and show that they acknowledge his hand as the author and the giver of every blessing they enjoy.—JD, 11:164-165, Salt Lake City, October 7, 1865.

THEN WHY RESORT TO VOLUNTARY DONATIONS?—We are engaged in this place in building a tabernacle [the Assembly Hall], in which we can meet during the winter season. We do not call upon you outside brethren to assist us in this undertaking, because it is local and belongs to this stake. This is a matter that was designed by President Young before his death; and we have been desirous, as Brother Cannon said this morning, to carry out the views of our venerated president as far as we can. We have commenced to build this house; we want to put it up without delay. In this, as in every other matter, we do not wish anybody to contribute his means or labor toward it, unless he feels free to do it; for there are plenty that will do it willingly, and it will be built; and we shall have a nice, comfortable place to worship in through the winter, and it will serve the priesthood for all necessary purposes, as well as the public.. . . . It will be done by voluntary donations and by utilizing labor tithing. Some people may say, why do it by voluntary donations? Why not use the tithing for all such purposes? Is not that sufficient? Yes, if all of you strictly paid it, but then you do not all do this, and consequently we have to resort to other means. But, as I have before said, in this and everything else, we do not wish to press the people, nor place any in unpleasant positions.—JD, 19:128-129, October 7, 1877.

SOME ECONOMIC PROBLEMS

AN EDITORIAL ON LABOR, CITY OF NAUVOO, OCTOBER 15, 1844.—Labor is the manufacturer of wealth. It was ordained of God as the medium to be used by man to obtain his living: hence it is the universal condition of this great bond to live. . . .

God never meant to bemean his creation, especially his own image, because they had to labor:—no; never; God himself according to the good old book labored on this world, six days; and when Adam was animated from clay to life, by his spirit's making use of him for a dwelling, we read that God put him into the garden to dress it:—Therefore, in connection with the samples of all holy men, we are bound to honor the laboring man: and despise the idler.—

Let them labor like men, prepare for that august hour, when Babylon and all her worldly wisdom, her various delicacies, and delusive fashions, shall fall with her to rise and trouble the earth no more! What a glorious prospect, to think that drunken Babylon, the great city of sin, will soon cease, and the kingdom of God rise in holy splendor, upon her ashes, and the people serve God in a perpetual union! . . . . God will soon make a man more precious than fine gold. Do you know it? Let the world traffic, we must make men better by wisdom, virtue, and industry.—TS, 5:679-680, October 15, 1844.

Wealtha-Taylor, JohnTPA MISTAKEN NOTION.—It is a mistaken notion that wealth makes people happy. Cattle, sheep, houses, possessions would not bring you happiness. The scriptures tell us that he that hath eternal life is rich: and the Lord has told us to seek after the riches of eternal life.—JD, 22:314, October 19, 1881.

THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM AND THE PROBLEMS OF LIFE.—God has given unto us a land. But there are houses to build, farms to open, fences to make, our wants to be provided for, our animals to be taken care of, etc. All these are necessaries that seem to crowd themselves upon us. Bishop Hunter says, children never come into the world with shoes and stockings on.

Gratitudea-Taylor, JohnTPNo, nor clothes either, and if they did, their clothes would soon be too small for them. We have to try to make provision for the wants of our families, and to make them comfortable. The difficulties that you have to contend with, we have experienced; and as far as difficulties are concerned, none of us is free from them. Men of wealth among us, as elsewhere, who command their tens and hundreds of thousands, who have their every want supplied, have more anxiety, care, and perplexity than many of you, who have to struggle for a comfortable living. And if you were placed in their position you would be a great deal more uneasy than you are now. We do not realize these things, but they are given unto us for our experience, and we should learn to understand and appreciate the position we occupy here upon the earth. . . . If . . . . I were living here and was rearing a family, the first thing which I should do would be to dedicate myself and my family, my house and garden, my land, my cattle, and everything I possessed to God, and should ask his blessing upon them. Then every morning when I arose, I should kneel down to supplicate his blessing upon me and mine during the day, to preserve us from evil influences, accidents, and dangers, and to otherwise bless our labors in obtaining a livelihood. And then I would pray for those who presided over me in the priesthood.—JD, 22:313-314, October 19, 1881.

PROBLEMS AND POSSIBILITIES. [^1]—I will tell you a feeling I had some years ago. I was over at Fillmore. From there you can see right on to this desert. And I thought—as I looked across this immense valley—if there was only water there, what a magnificent country that would make! I remember I thought thousands and tens of thousands could inhabit that land if it only had water. I did not then know the position of things. I have now had an opportunity of visiting Deseret and looking at the river, and am pleased to find you have such an abundant supply of water. An immense population could be sustained with the amount you have. I suppose the river shows its best now; the water is high; but if that water could be properly manipulated, it does seem to me—provided you can conquer the mineral in the soil—that a vast amount of land can be put under cultivation and an immense population sustained. . . . You certainly have a fair opportunity for development; having a large area of land, which I am told is productive, and with the proper application of the water, and a concentration of effort I can see no reason why this can not be made a very flourishing, beautiful and populous place.—JD, 24:201-202, June 18, 1883.

LATTER-DAY SAINT COMMUNITY BUILDING: MALAD, OCTOBER 20, 1881.—Now, you who live in this little place, look to it that you are found in the line of your duty. You have a beautiful location, and I would like to see you make the most of it. I would like to see at least a hundred times more apple, pear, and cherry trees planted out; and all of your streets lined with shade trees. And improve your dwelling houses. If you cannot find the style of house to suit you, go off to other places until you do find one, and then come back and build a better one. Beautify this place, and make your homes pleasant and agreeable, that you may have nice places for your wives and children, and thus help to fulfil that scripture which says, that Zion shall become the praise of the whole earth; and that kings will come to gaze upon her glory. . . .

Then you have a public square, make some nice grounds in an about it. And then beautify your private squares at your own homes. Let every man make his own grounds pleasant and agreeable. And let every woman make her husband as happy as she can. The sisters ought to be like angels, ought they not? Be full of good, kind, pleasant, and agreeable feelings. And we men who profess to be saints of God—saints of God! What an expression! Do we understand it? There is a peculiar form of expression in the German language. The term Latter-day Saint in the German is: Der Heiligen der Letzten Tage, which being interpreted is, the holy of the last days. There is something very expressive about that. We should be the holy of the last days, under the influence and guidance of the Lord.—JD, 26:111, October 20, 1881.

Beautya-Taylor, JohnTPCITY BEAUTIFICATION.—We want to see beautiful cities, beautiful houses, and pleasant homes, and everything around you calculated to promote your happiness and well being.—JD, 25:267, August 17, 1884.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The reference is to the areas within Millard Country, Utah. Brigham Young once thought the Pauvan Valley alone could, if water were available, support 100,000 people. See M. R. Hunter, Brigham Young The Colonizer (1940), p. 268.
