John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXV

SOME PRINCIPLES OF EDUCATION

THE MEANING OF EDUCATION

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NEED FOR DISCRIMINATE THOUGHT.—We heard some remarks made this morning upon education—about words and language, and so forth. In relation to the education of the world generally, a great amount of it is of very little value, consisting more of words than ideas; and whilst men are verbose in their speaking or writing, you have to hunt for ideas or truth like hunting for a grain of wheat among piles of chaff or rubbish. It is true that a great amount of it is really valuable, and it is for us to select the good from the bad.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPThe education of men ought to be adapted to their positions, both as temporal and eternal beings. It is well to understand the arts and sciences; it is well to understand language and history; it is well to understand agriculture, to be acquainted with mechanics, and to be instructed in everything that is calculated to promote the happiness, the well being, and the comfort of the human family.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPTRUE EDUCATION MUST BE PUT TO USE FOR HUMAN BENEFIT.—That education which but amounts to a little out-ward appearance and applies only to a few conveniences of this life is very far short of that education and intelligence which immortal beings ought to be in possession of. The education of the present day is generally misapplied. Indeed, men have misapplied the education which they have received for generations and generations.

The priests in Egypt had mysteries immediately associated with themselves, and the calculation was to keep their people ignorant of those things which they knew, that they might govern them the more readily and that they might reign and tyrannize over them. Among the various nations in different ages, their sages and wise men held their intelligence as a secret mystery to be divulged almost or altogether to their disciples, who generally conveyed it in unknown character symbols, or hieroglyphics. The Egyptians had their priests; the Assyrians, their magi and astrologers; the Greeks, their philosophers; and the Jews, their wise men; and all more or less mysterious or cabalistic.

This was a misapplication of information, or that which they might possess, although, in many instances, the information amounted to nothing in reality.

The same is applicable, in a great measure, to our lawyers, doctors, and priests. They make use of terms that nobody can understand but the initiated. If you study medicine, law, or botany, and many of the sciences, you must study Latin first, because the doctors and professors make use of that language to convey their ideas in; and the calculation is for all except men of science or linguists to be befogged and bewildered—yes, all except the initiated few who have been able to bestow the same amount of time as they have in learning some of the dead languages.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPWhom does their learning benefit? Certainly not the multitude. I will tell you my idea of true intelligence and true eloquence. It is not as some people do—to take a very small idea and use a great many grandiloquent words without meaning—something to befog and mystify it with—something to tickle the ear and please the imagination only. That is not true intelligence. But it is true intelligence for a man to take a subject that is mysterious and great in itself, and to unfold and simplify it so that a child can understand it. I do not care what words you make use of, if you have the principles and are enabled to convey those principles to the understandings of men.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPIt is true, at the same time, that a man who has a good use of language can present his ideas to better advantage than one who has not in some instances, and in some he cannot; for the Lord gives some men a natural talent and powers of description that others do not possess and cannot acquire. But the great principle that we have to come to is the knowledge of God, of the relationship that we sustain to each other, and of the various duties we have to attend to in the various spheres of life in which we are called to act as mortal and immortal, intelligent, eternal beings, in order that we may magnify our calling and approve ourselves before God and the holy angels. And if we obtain knowledge of this kind, we shall do well; for this is the greatest good of the whole. It embraces everything that we want.

In relation to the principles of eternal life, we are told that these treasures we have in earthen vessels were given of the Lord and retained in those vessels through our faithfulness.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPA CRITIQUE OF KNOWLEDGE.—Now, then, if men, without much of the advantage of what is termed education in this world, are filled with the Spirit of God, the revelations of the Holy Ghost, and can comprehend the relationship of man to God, can know their duties, and can teach a people, a nation, or a world how they may be saved and obtain thrones, principalities, powers, and dominions in the eternal worlds—if men can understand these principles by the gift of the Holy Ghost and the revelations of the Most High, and are enabled to place them before the people so that they can comprehend them, then, I say, these are the men of education—the men of intellect—the men who are calculated to bless and ennoble the human family. This is the kind of education that we want and the more simple those principles can be conveyed the better. They are more adapted to the wants and intelligence of the human family. . . . Do you repudiate education, then? No—not at all. I appreciate all true intelligence, whether moral, social, scientific, political, or philosophical. But I despise the folly that they hang on to it, and the folly that they call education.—JD, 5:259-261, September 20, 1857.

Knowledgea-Taylor, JohnTPGOD AND KNOWLEDGE.—It is good for men to be taught in the history and laws of nations, to become acquainted with the principles of justice and equity, with the nature of disease and the medicinal properties of plants, etc. But there is no need of their being without the knowledge of God, for in fact every branch of true knowledge known to man has originated in God, and men have come in possession of it from his word or from his works. O, the folly of men in not acknowledging God in all things, in laying aside God and his religion, and trusting in their own judgment and intelligence. All the intelligence which men possess on the earth, whether religious, scientific, or political—proceeds from God. Every good and perfect gift proceeds from him, the fountain of light and truth, wherein there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. The knowledge of the human system has proceeded from the human system itself, which God has organized.

Knowledgea-Taylor, JohnTPAgain, if you trace the old English laws and the laws of ancient nations, it will be seen that the principles of justice, which are the foundation of them, are gathered from the Bible, the revealed will of God to the children of Israel for their government and guidance, to a certain extent, in some of the principles of law, justice, and equity. Did knowledge of any kind that is in the world originate in man? No. Franklin possessed great information relating to natural laws. He drew the lightning from the clouds but he could not have done that if there had not been lightning in the clouds. He merely discovered a certain principle, and developed the action of a certain law that existed co-equal with the earth. Then how foolish it is for men under these circumstances, to lay aside God, and think that they can progress, and be smart and intelligent without him.—JD, 10:275, October 25, 1863.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPEDUCATION FOR HEALTH.—We should seek to know more about ourselves and our bodies, about what is most conductive to health and how to preserve health and how to avoid disease; and to know what to eat and what to drink, and what to abstain from taking into our systems. We should become acquainted with the physiology of the human system and live in accordance with the laws that govern our bodies, that our days may be long in the land which the Lord our God has given us. And in order to comprehend ourselves fully we must study from the best books, and also by faith. And then let education be fostered and encouraged in our midst. Train your children to be intelligent and industrious. First teach them the value of healthful bodies, and how to preserve them in soundness and vigor; teach them to entertain the highest regard for virtue and chastity, and likewise encourage them to develop the intellectual faculties with which they are endowed.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPGEOGRAPHY AND AGRICULTURE.—They should also be taught regarding the earth on which they live, its properties, and the laws that govern it; and they ought to be instructed concerning God, who made the earth, and his designs and purposes in its creation, and the placing of man upon it. They should know how to cultivate the soil in the best possible manner; they should know how to raise the best kind of fruits adapted to the soil and climate; they should be induced to raise the best kinds of stock, and to care for them properly when they come into their possession. And whatever labor they pursue, they should be taught to do so intelligently; and every incentive, at the command of parents to induce children to labor intelligently and understandingly, should be held out to them.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPARCHITECTURE.—Again, the subject of architecture should receive attention from you. Your children should be encouraged to improve in the building of houses, and not be satisfied merely to copy after what their fathers did in the days of their poverty. The building rock at your command is of the very best, and it is easily procured; what remains for you to do is to put the material together in such a shape as shall reflect your best judgment and intelligence consistent with due regard to health and convenience. The building of the temple here will no doubt have a tendency to awaken the desire on your part to improve in this direction. I have noticed that the building of our temples affords a great many young men the opportunity of learning trades which, perhaps, otherwise would not be the case; and by the time such a building is erected, they become competent tradesmen, prepared to work in the various branches of mechanism that they learn on these buildings.

"IMPROVEMENT IN ALL THINGS."—Improvement in all things relating to our spiritual and temporal welfare should be our aim in life, and we should encourage in our children this desire to improve, and not feel all the time, "Come day, go day, God send Sunday."

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPIt is highly necessary that we should learn to read and write and speak our own language correctly; and where people are deficient themselves in education, they should strive all the more to see that the deficiency be not perpetuated in their offspring. We ought to take more pains than we do in the training and education of our youth. All that we can possibly do by way of placing them in a position to become the equals, at least, of their race, we ought to take pleasure in doing; for in elevating them we bring honor to our own name, and glory to God the Father. To do this requires labor and means, and it also requires perseverance and determination on the part of all concerned. . . .

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SELECTION AND PAYMENT OF TEACHERS.—Whatever you do, be choice in your selection of teachers. We do not want infidels to mold the minds of our children. They are a precious charge bestowed upon us by the Lord, and we cannot be too careful in rearing and training them. I would rather have my children taught the simple rudiments of a common education by men of God, and have them under their influence, than have them taught in the most abstruse sciences by men who have not the fear of God in their hearts. . . . The acme of scientific development in the world is predicated upon a knowledge of the laws of nature in its multifarious forms.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPWe need to pay more attention to educational matters, and do all we can to procure the services of competent teachers. Some people say, we cannot afford to pay them. You cannot afford not to employ them. We want our children to grow up intelligently, and to walk abreast with the peoples of any nation. God expects us to do it; and therefore I call attention to this matter. I have heard intelligent practical men say, it is quite as cheap to keep a good horse as a poor one, or to raise good stock as inferior animals. It is not quite as cheap to raise good intelligent children as to rear children in ignorance?—JD, 24:167-169, May 19, 1883.

Profanitya-Taylor, JohnTPPROFANITY AND OATHS.—It is a disgrace for men of education and intelligence to be unable to utter five words without an oath. Every child ought to point the finger of scorn at any man that will come down to such a mean standard.—JD, 7:201, November 13, 1859.

TruthIntelligencea-Taylor, JohnTPTRUTH AND INTELLIGENCE.—Truth and intelligence have a tendency to enlarge the capacity, to expand the soul, and to show man his real position—his relationship to himself and to his God, both in relation to the present and the future, that he may know how to live on the earth and be prepared to mingle with the Gods in the eternal worlds.

Now, if men will teach me these principles, I do not care what words they use. If truth comes, tail or head foremost, I am not very particular.—JD, 5:262, September 20, 1857.

Humilitya-Taylor, JohnTPThose men who profess so much intelligence that they cannot listen to the word of the Lord, and have so much egotism and philosophy that they cannot listen to sound reason and common sense, cannot be edified by these things, while we, who have not such lofty pretensions, enjoy them.—JD, 5:241, September 13, 1857.

Intelligencea-Taylor, JohnTPThere is not a particle of the human system but what is full of intelligence and displays forethought, prescience, design, skill, and creative power; and everything bespeaks the handiwork of a wise, intelligent, omnipotent Creator, or God.—JD, 20:220, December 15, 1878.

EDUCATION IN THE CHURCH

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPWe want . . . . to be alive in the cause of education. We are commanded of the Lord to obtain knowledge, both by study and by faith, seeking it out of the best books. And it becomes us to teach our children, and afford them instructions in every branch of education calculated to promote their welfare, leaving those false acquirements which tend to infidelity, and to lead away the mind and affection from the things of God. We want to compile the intelligence and literacy of this people in book form, as well as in teaching, preaching; adopting all the good and useful books we can obtain; make them. And instead of doing as many of the world do, take the works of God to try to prove that there is no God, we want to prove by God's works that he does exist, that he lives and rules and holds us, as it were, in the hollow of his hand.—JD, 19:310, April 8, 1878.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPEDUCATION CANNOT BE NEGLECTED.—And then we want to study also the principles of education, and to get the very best teachers we can to teach our children; see that they are men and women who fear God and keep his commandments. . . . Let others who fear not God take their course; but it is for us to train our children up in the fear of God. God will hold us responsible for this trust. Hear it, you elders of Israel and you fathers and you mothers! . . . . We want to get together to train our children up in the fear of God, to teach them correct principles ourselves, and place them in possession of such things as will lead them in the paths of life.—JD, 20:179, April 8, 1879.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTP"MONEY IS NOT TO BE COMPARED WITH INTELLIGENCE."—And then with regard to our educational pursuits, let us do all we can in that direction. Some people talk about the means it takes. Why, money is not to be compared with intelligence.—JD, 20:169, March 2, 1879.

THE EDUCATION OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.—You will see the day that Zion will be as far ahead of the outside world in everything pertaining to learning of every kind as we are today in regard to religious matters. You mark my words, and write them down, and see if they do not come to pass. We are not dependent upon them, but we are upon the Lord. We did not get our priesthood nor our information in regard to his law from them. It came from God. . . .

I remember talking with some celebrated scientists from Europe some time ago, and I explained to them some of the principles relative to the heavenly bodies that were revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith. They were astonished to know that ideas so grand could be developed through one that was comparatively unlearned. One of them remarked that they were the most magnificent principles he had ever heard of. Another one said that he had read and studied a great deal, but he had a good deal more yet to learn. We are, as the French would say, en rapport, with God; that is in communication with God. Let us live so that we can keep that up, so that angels can minister to us and the Holy Spirit dwell with us.—JD, 21:100, April 13, 1879.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTPTEACHING THE THINGS OF GOD.—There is no man living, and there never was a man living, who was capable of teaching the things of God only as he was taught, instructed and directed by the spirit of revelation proceeding from the Almighty. And then there are no people competent to receive true intelligence and to form a correct judgment in relation to the sacred principles of eternal life, unless they are under the influence of the same spirit, and hence speakers and hearers are all in the hands of the Almighty.—JD, 17:369, April 8, 1875.

SCHOOLS, TEACHERS AND AUXILIARIES.—Our young people's Improvement Associations are very creditable institutions, and the fruits of the labors of those engaged in this work are already manifesting themselves. I feel in my heart to say, God bless the young men and young women of Israel. Let it be the desire of your hearts to imitate the virtues of your parents and of all good men and women, keeping your bodies and spirits pure before God and man.

Then, we have our Sunday Schools, and many of our brethren and sisters in this direction are doing a good work. I would advise the superintendents of Sunday Schools to endeavor to collect the best talent they can to teach and instruct our children. What greater or more honorable work can we be engaged in than in teaching the children the principles of salvation? You that are diligent and that give your hearts to these things, God will bless, and the day will come when the youth of Israel will rise up and call you blessed.

Schoolsa-Taylor, JohnTPThen with regard to our common schools, let us try to instruct our youth as best we can, and get the best of teachers, men and women of intelligence and education who are not only moral, but good Latter-day Saints; men and women who are not only capable of imparting to our children the rudiments of education, but who are also capable of teaching them the laws of God as he has revealed them for our guidance. And when you get good teachers you should appreciate them, and you should cooperate with them in their endeavors to teach our youth; and then see that they are properly remunerated for their services.—JD, 21:368-369, August 8, 1880.

Sunday SchoolSchoolsa-Taylor, JohnTPSUNDAY SCHOOL INSTRUCTION.—Our brethren and sisters should always remember that the work of teaching in our Sunday Schools impose upon them a moral obligation to make their daily walk and conversation accord with their teachings. Of all lessons, the living lesson is the best. Children are surprisingly shrewd in detecting inconsistencies between the instructions and habits of their instructors. Besides, the teacher who seeks to live up to his own advice, not only benefits his scholars, but his teachings exert a salutary influence upon himself, and he profits by his own lessons.—Epistle of the First Presidency, April 8, 1887, JH, April 8, 1887, p. 2.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTP"TRAIN UP OUR CHILDREN IN THE FEAR OF GOD AND I WILL RISK THE BALANCE."—Let us continue to go in every good word and work. Let our young people's Improvement Associations, and our Sunday and day schools receive our encouragement and aid; and let our children be taught by our friends and not our enemies.

It is for us to keep the commandments, to train up our children in the fear of God, to live unto God, and I will risk the balance.—JD, 26:97, February 12, 1882.

Educationa-Taylor, JohnTP"WE SEEK AFTER THESE THINGS."—God expects Zion to become the praise and glory of the whole earth so that kings, hearing of her fame, will come and gaze upon her glory. God is not niggardly in his feelings towards us. He would as soon we all lived in palaces as not. But he wants us to observe his laws and fear him, and standing as messengers to go forth to the nations clothed upon with the power of the priesthood which has been conferred upon us; seeking "first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness;" seeking first the welfare and happiness of our fellow men, and God will add unto us all the gold and silver and possessions and everything that may be good for us to receive. I was going to say, perhaps more than would be good for us. But all these things shall be added, for no man that forsakes father and mother, houses and lands, wives and children for God and his kingdom, but what shall receive in this world a hundred-fold, and in the world to come life everlasting. This was true anciently, it is true today. This being the case, we ought to foster education and intelligence of every kind; cultivate literary tastes, and men of literary and scientific talent should improve that talent; and all should magnify the gifts which God has given unto them. Educate your children, and seek for those to teach them who have faith in God and in his promises, as well as intelligence.. . . . If there is anything good and praiseworthy in morals, religion, science, or anything calculated to exalt and ennoble man, we are after it. But with all our getting, we want to get understanding, and that understanding which flows from God.—JD, 20:47-48, August 4, 1878.
