John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXVI

THE LAW OF MARRIAGE

ON MARRIAGE

Marriagea-Taylor, JohnTPA NATURAL PRINCIPLE.—Marriage is the legitimate union of the sexes. God made male and female, not only of man, but of all animals, fowls, fishes, and, as stated, everything that creepeth upon the earth; and endued them with organs and power to propagate their own species. He also endued the herbs, plants, flowers, trees, grasses, and all the vegetable kingdom with fecundity, whose seed (as expressed in the scriptures) should be in itself. Thus everything in the animal and vegetable kingdoms was prepared to propagate, increase, and perpetuate its own species. That principle, and the organs and media necessary for its development, have continued intact from the commencement up to the present time and it is a fact that all life in this creation, animal or vegetable, possesses the inherent power within itself fully to maintain and perpetuate its own species. This principle applies to the lower as well as to the higher grades of creation. The most repulsive animal and venomous reptile possess this power, as well as those that are the most refined, symmetrical, beautiful, or intellectual; and the most noxious and poisonous weeds or plants possess this fecundity, in common with the most lovely, sweet, nutritive, aromatic, or life-sustaining species. So that this grand, life-giving, preserving, and perpetuating power exists among all life, whether vegetable or animal.—M, 1-2.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPMARRIAGE AND THE LAW OF THE GOSPEL.—The gospel, when introduced and preached to Adam after the fall, through the atonement of Jesus Christ, placed him in a position not only to have victory over death, but to have within his reach and to possess the perpetuity, not only of earthly, but of heavenly life; not only of earthly, but also of heavenly dominion; and through the law of that gospel enabled him (and not him alone, but all his posterity) to obtain, not only his first estate, but a higher exaltation on earth and in the heavens, than he could have enjoyed if he had not fallen; the powers and blessings associated with the atonement being altogether in advance of and superior to any enjoyment or privileges that he could have had in his first estate. Hence, he and his partner became the father and mother of lives—lives temporal, lives spiritual, and lives eternal, and were placed in the position to become Gods, yea, the sons and daughters of God, and to the increase and extent of their dominion there was to be no limit; worlds without end.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPBut it became necessary that Adam should obey, observe, and keep the law of the gospel, and it also became necessary that his posterity, who would possess the same exaltation and blessings, should also keep and observe the same law; and if they did not, they could not obtain the blessings of celestial lives and exaltations in the eternal worlds. But, while this was the law pertaining to celestial affairs, man was not deprived of the power, the right, and the privilege, the faculties and instincts of the association of the sexes, nor of the propagation of his own species; and hence, when man had transgressed the law of God and had corrupted himself to such a degree that it is said of him that his thoughts were only evil, and that continually; and when it had become an act of justice with the Almighty, in reference to the unborn spirits, in consequence of the extreme degradation of the human family, to introduce a better race, man possessing the power, while living, to propagate his own species, he could only accomplish and bring about this design by destroying that corrupt race, and appointing a selected and chosen race for the above named purpose.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPThe law before referred to was the law of the gospel. When the gospel is lived up to and enjoyed, its powers and blessings are also enjoyed, pertaining both to time and eternity; but when the law of the gospel is not lived up to, yet the principle of procreation and the association of the sexes still continues as a principle separate and distinct from that of the gospel [law]; and the nearer we can approach pure and correct principles, whereby the chastity of the race may be preserved, in our marital relations, the more will our actions be acceptable to our Heavenly Father. Hence, it has always been considered, among all intelligent and right thinking people in the nations, both in a social and political capacity, that it is in the interests of humanity that the marital relations should be sustained, that virtue and chastity should be preserved, and that in proportion as these principles are disregarded has the elevation or degradation of the race been manifested.—M, 3-4.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPTHE LAW OF CELESTIAL MARRIAGE.—The Lord has revealed unto us the ancient law, which was revealed to Adam through the gospel, and which is called the law of celestial marriage. This, as before stated, applies only to certain conditions of men, and can only be enjoyed by parties who have obeyed the everlasting gospel. It is one of the eternal principles associated therewith, uniting mortal and immortal beings by eternal covenants that will live and endure forever.. . . . But with regard to the law of celestial marriage, there are certain safeguards thrown around it, as there always were, and those safeguards are, and always were, in the hands of the proper authorities and priesthood, delegated by God to man for the protection and preservation and right use of this most important, sacred, exalting, and eternal ceremony or covenant. These things are clearly defined in the revelation on celestial marriage, and can rightly only be enjoyed and participated in by such as are considered worthy, according to the laws, rites, privileges, and immunities connected therewith.. . . . Are the barriers placed around this sacred institution to be broken down and trampled underfoot? And are unworthy characters who do not fulfil the requirements of the gospel to have conferred upon them the blessings of eternal lives, of thrones, and powers, and principalities in the celestial kingdom of God? We emphatically answer, No!

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPFREEDOM TO ACCEPT OR REJECT THE LAW.—On the other hand, are men and women, who, while nothing immoral can be laid to their charge, and who are considered worthy of a standing in the church, but who may be thoughtless, careless, and indifferent in regard to many religious matters, and who either do not comprehend the gospel, or who do not appreciate the privileges conferred by the celestial law of marriage connected therewith—are they, while they cannot enjoy the greater privileges of the gospel, to be deprived of the privileges and blessings arising from the marital relations, and of the proper exercise of the impulses and instincts of nature? We as emphatically answer, No! There ought to be placed within the reach of the young of both sexes a full and fair opportunity of correctly fulfilling the perpetuation of their species, free and untrammelled, leaving it for themselves to embrace or reject the higher or more exalted law, as all men are left free to receive or reject the gospel; thus preserving the free agency of man in this as in all other things. While the parties themselves do not take a course to embrace and enjoy the higher privileges of the gospel, it is not for us to throw barriers in their way, but to encourage, by all possible means, our youth to enter into such marital relations as they are capable or worthy of enjoying, leaving it for them in the future to receive or reject the fulness of the gospel; and thus preserve the virtue, chastity and purity of our youth.. . . .—M, 5-7.

Marriage, Temporala-Taylor, JohnTPCIVIL MARRIAGE.—The question arises, what shall be done in regard to those persons, who being members of the church, are not worthy to enter into those sacred and eternal relations of which we have been speaking? This is probably a question that concerns our civil polity rather than our religion, but we have deemed it worthy of our consideration, and after due deliberation have determined that in cases where recommends cannot be justifiably given for the blessings of the house of the Lord, the parties desiring marriage be united by the bishop, inasmuch as they are worthy of the recognition of their brethren and sisters and have not forfeited their right to be esteemed members of the church, though not sufficiently valiant in the cause of righteousness to be deemed altogether worthy of those weightier blessings that belong to the new and everlasting covenant. But that holier order to which we have referred is the law of marriage as it exists in its fulness, in its completeness, in the strength and beauty of its purity, without end or change, but eternal as the existence of the soul, abiding forever.

Marriage, Temporala-Taylor, JohnTPThis recommendation, with regard to those who cannot live the higher law, who do not possess much faith, but possess a little faith, is given as a means of purification among some of our youth and others, who, while they are desirous to marry and fulfil the great law of nature and be fruitful and multiply, are not justly and consistently entitled to those blessings which the fulness of the gospel covenant provides. It has therefore been deemed best by myself and council, as well as by the council of the apostles, under our present circumstances, to place them in the hands of the bishops, rather than to have them go for the performance of the marriage ceremony to justices of the peace and others, who, in their operations, do not carry the weight of blessing and responsibility which belongs of right to the priesthood in all its ministrations and labors.

The foregoing ideas and considerations were submitted by me to the council of the apostles, and were approved by that body, and have already been read from the manuscript to assemblies of the priesthood or saints in Salt Lake City and other places. They are now presented to the presiding authorities in the various stakes and wards, and unity of action and concord of feeling may exist on this as on all other subjects in which we, as the servants of the Lord, and all the saints, are directly concerned. [^1]—M, 7-8.

ETERNITY OF THE MARRIAGE COVENANT

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ORDER OF GOD'S KINGDOM.—God has shown us, in regard to our marital relations, that our wives are to be sealed to us for time and eternity. By what authority? By the authority of that holy priesthood that administers on the earth and in heaven, and of which Jesus said that whatever they should bind on earth should be bound in heaven, and whatsoever they should loose on earth should be loosed in heaven; and these relationships that exist among us here are calculated to be consummated there, and men and women who understand their true position expect to enjoy each other's society and association there, as much as they do in their own homes here, just the same. And though they may sleep in the dust, yet, by the power of the resurrection. . . . when the trump shall sound and the dead in Christ shall rise, they will burst the barriers of the tomb and come forth, each and all claiming their proper mates—those with whom they were associated on the earth—through eternity.. . . .—JD, 18:141, October 10, 1875.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPLEGITIMACY [^2] OF ETERNAL MARRIAGE.—Why is a woman sealed to a man for time and all eternity? Because there is legitimate power on earth to do it. This power will bind on earth and in heaven. It can loose on earth, and it is loosed in heaven. It can seal on earth, and it is sealed in heaven. There is a legitimate, authorized agent of God upon earth. This sealing power is regulated by him. Hence what is done by that, is done right, and is recorded. When the books are opened, every one will find his proper mate, and have those that belong to him, and every one will be deprived of that which is surreptitiously obtained.—JD, 1:232, April 8, 1853.

Marriage, Eternala-Taylor, JohnTPETERNITY OF THE MARRIAGE COVENANT REVEALED TO JOSEPH SMITH.—The Lord, however, has revealed many other great and important principles to us, and among these the eternal covenant between man and woman. Did Joseph reveal that principle? Yes, he did. Do you know it? Yes, I do know it. If nobody else knows it, I do. Did he tell you of it? Yes, he did. But I have had other manifestations besides that, and therefore I know of what I speak, and I know the principle is of God.—JD, 21:166, December 7, 1879.

SOME FAMILY LIFE PROBLEMS

Parentsa-Taylor, JohnTPCHARGE TO PARENTS.—We have been commanded of the Lord to set our households in order. Apostles, Presidents of Stakes and Bishops, have you done this with your own households? Have you also seen that the Saints have done the same? Have you impressed upon the people under your charge the absolute necessity of purity if they desire the blessing and protection of the Most High? Wolves never watched with greater cunning and more ravenous hunger a flock of sheep and lambs than the people of your wards and stakes are now being watched by those who are ready to devour them. Are you awake to this danger, and do you take every precaution against it?

Parentsa-Taylor, JohnTPParents, are you full of fidelity yourselves to every principle of godliness, and do you surround your sons and daughters with every safeguard to shield them from the arts of the vile? Do you teach them that chastity in both man and woman should be more highly esteemed than life itself? Or do you leave them in their ignorance and inexperience to mix with any society they may choose, at any hour that may be convenient to them, and to be exposed to the wiles of the seducer and the corrupt? These are questions you will all have to answer either to your shame and condemnation or to your joy and eternal happiness. Know this, that God, in giving us the precious blessings we possess, demands from us a suitable return. By receiving them we are placed under obligations. If these are not discharged, condemnation inevitably follows.

Youtha-Taylor, JohnTPROLE OF THE CHURCH AUXILLARIES IN MEETING FAMILY LIFE PROBLEMS.—We hear favorable accounts of the action of Primary Associations, Sunday Schools, Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement Associations, and Relief Societies. These organizations have unlimited opportunities of doing good. If those who have them in charge are faithful in attending to their duties, great will be their reward. If we desire the prosperity of Zion, we will carefully guard and train our young. They come to us pure from the Lord. By proper training we can make them mighty instruments for good. But, Superintendents and teachers of Primary Associations and Sunday Schools, and Presidents of Young Men's and Young Women's Associations and Relief Societies, remember this, that God will never bless an unvirtuous people, and while a flood of corruption, destructive of all true morality and virtue, is sweeping over the land, we must erect barriers to stop its contaminating influence. You have the young in your charge. Teach and impress them by every means in your power how dreadful a sin is unchastity. They are taught to shrink in horror from murder; and they should be taught to shrink with abhorrence from the next great sin to shedding blood, and that is unchastity.—Epistle of the First Presidency, October 6, 1885; MS, 47:715-716 (1885).

Homea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE HOME ENVIRONMENT.—We should live together in love. There should be union in every family circle and harmony in every neighborhood and city. We should be cleanly in our persons, in our dress, and in our habitations and surroundings. Industry should be habitual with the adults of our community, and the rising generation should be taught its lessons and be impressed with its value as a means of happiness. God has given us the earth as a dwelling place, and when mankind live as they should do, it is a delightful residence. It is our duty to adorn and beautify it—to make it so lovely and attractive that angels may condescend to visit it. We should, therefore, have fruitful farms, choice orchards, well arranged gardens, and if every dwelling is surrounded by flowers it will neither detract from its beauty in the eye of visitors, nor make it less attractive as their home to the children of the household.

Homea-Taylor, JohnTPIn some quarters there has been ruinous neglect on the part of parents in making their homes attractive to their children. A well-ordered, lovely home, in which peace and good-will prevail is a place of perpetual delight to those who reside there, whether old or young. Where such homes exist the young who live there are not found loafing at street corners or stores, nor spending their time in gadding about from house to house and in improper company at late hours. Books and musical instruments are now so cheap as to be within the reach of the most humble. By furnishing means of instruction, amusement, and enjoyment at home, parents can. . . . tie their children to them by bonds of affection that can never be broken. In after years those children will think of that home as the brightest and dearest spot in their memories; in their minds it will always be surrounded by a heavenly halo.—Epistle of the First Presidency, March, 1886; MS, 48:321-322 (1886).

Familya-Taylor, JohnTPFAMILY RELATIONS.—Husbands, do you love your wives and treat them right, or do you think that you yourselves are some great moguls who have a right to crowd upon them? They are given to you as a part of yourself, and you ought to treat them with all kindness, with mercy and long suffering, and not be harsh and bitter, or in any way desirous to display your authority. Then, you wives, treat your husbands right, and try to make them happy and comfortable. Endeavor to make your homes a little heaven, and try to cherish the good Spirit of God. Then let us as parents train up our children in the fear of God and teach them the laws of life. If you do, we will have peace in our bosoms, peace in our families, and peace in our surroundings.—JD, 21:118-119, November 28, 1879.

Prayera-Taylor, JohnTPFAMILY PRAYERS.—Do you have prayers in your family?. . . . And when you do, do you go through the operation like the grinding of a piece of machinery, or do you bow in meekness and with a sincere desire to seek the blessing of God upon you and your household? That is the way that we ought to do, and cultivate a spirit of devotion and trust in God, dedicating ourselves to him, and seeking his blessings.—JD, 21:118, November 28, 1879.

UNCHASTITY.—There is another thing which is most grievous, afflicting, and distressing to contemplate. When a man takes to himself a woman that properly belongs to another, and defiles her, it interferes with the fountain of life and corrupts the very source of existence. There is an offspring comes forth as the fruit of that union, and that offspring is an eternal being—how can it be looked upon? To reflect upon it wounds the finest feelings of human nature in time, and will in eternity. For who can gaze upon the degradation of his wife and the corruption of his seed without peculiar sensations? How much more is this feeling enhanced when the wronged man considers that he has been robbed by one who professed to be his friend? This thing is not to be trifled with, but is of the greatest importance; hence the necessity of the sealing powers, that all things may be pure, chastity maintained, and lasciviousness be rooted out from among the saints. Why so? That we may have a holy offspring that shall be great and clothed with the mighty power of God, to rule in his kingdom, and accomplish the work we propose they shall fulfil; and that when we go to sleep, we may sleep in peace, knowing that justice will be administered in righteousness.. . . .—JD, 1:232, April 8, 1853.

Marriagea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RESPONSIBILITY OF HUSBANDS.—God expects you to be true to your vows, to be true to yourselves, and to be true to your wives and children. If you become covenant breakers, you will be dealt with according to the laws of God. And the men presiding over you have no other alternative than to bring the covenant breaker to judgment. If they fail to do their duty, we shall be under the necessity of looking after them, for righteousness and purity must be maintained in our midst.—JD, 24:171-172, May 18, 1883.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This document was published over the official signature, "JOHN TAYLOR, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."
[^2] For use of the word "legitimacy" see the material in Chapter 30.
