John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXVII

THE TEMPLES AND THEIR WORK

UNIVERSAL SALVATION

Dead, Salvation ofa-Taylor, JohnTPREDEMPTION FOR ALL.—There was a great and comprehensive plan designed by the Almighty in his economy connected with the salvation of the human family who are his children, for he is the God and the Father of the spirits of all flesh. It means that he is interested in their welfare, in their prosperity, in their happiness, and in all that pertains to their exaltation in time and throughout the eternities that are to come. Being thus interested, and so little of the gospel having been revealed in the different ages, and so much of the power of darkness and iniquity having prevailed among men, it was necessary that something should be done for the dead as well as the living. God is interested in the dead as well as the living.—JD, 25:181-182, May 18, 1884.

Dead, Salvation ofa-Taylor, JohnTPWe are here to cooperate with God in the salvation of the living, in the redemption of the dead, in the blessings of our ancestors, in the pouring out of blessings upon our children; we are here for the purpose of redeeming and regenerating the earth on which we live, and God has placed his authority and his counsels here upon the earth for that purpose, that men may learn to do the will of God on the earth as it is done in heaven. This is the object of our existence; and it is for us to comprehend the position.—JD, 21:94, April 13, 1879.

WORK FOR THOSE WHO HAVE PASSED AWAY.—It is reserved for us to do a work for those who have passed away, who have not obeyed or had the gospel in their lifetime. We are here to do a work connected with the redemption of the dead. When the temple was commanded to be built in Nauvoo, after the temple had been built in Kirtland, and after so many keys had been turned, and after so many manifestations, visions, and ministrations had been had, yet it was said then that there was not a place upon the earth in which to perform the ordinance of baptism for the dead and Joseph was commanded to build a house for that purpose.. . . . We are all of us indebted to the revelations of God, through the medium of the holy priesthood, for these things.

Temple Ordinancesa-Taylor, JohnTPJOSEPH SMITH AND THE NAUVOO TEMPLE.—Joseph Smith before his death, was much exercised about the completion of the temple in Nauvoo, and the administering of ordinances therein. In his anxiety and for fear he should not live to see the temple completed, he prepared a place over what was known as the brickstore—which many of you who lived in Nauvoo will recollect—where to a chosen few he administered those ordinances that we now have today associated with endowments, so that if anything should happen to him—which he evidently contemplated—he would feel that he had then fulfilled his mission, that he had conferred upon others all the keys given to him by the manifestations of the power of God.

Baptism for the Deada-Taylor, JohnTPAt first these things were only partially made known to him, and as they were partially developed he called upon the twelve that were then living—many of you gray-headed people will remember it—to commence and be baptized for the dead, and they were baptized in the Mississippi River. Immediately after these baptisms, the prophet had a revelation which more clearly developed the order in relation to such baptisms. According to that revelation it appeared that, notwithstanding all the visions, revelations, keys, etc., that had heretofore been given, there was not a place, not even in the Kirtland Temple, wherein those things could be carried out, and hence a font, such as we have in this temple, was built in the temple at Nauvoo, and it was there, under proper circumstances and proper administration, and according to the principles that he had laid down, that those ordinances were administered then, and are administered now.—JD, 25:182-183, May 18, 1884.

Millenniuma-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MILLENNIUM.—We read sometimes about the millennium. But what do we know about it? It is a time when this work will be going on, and temples, thousands of them, will be reared for the accomplishment of the objects designed, in which communications from the heavens will be received in regard to our labors, how we may perform them, and for whom. This is the work devolving upon us.—JD, 25:185, May 18, 1884.

Temple Worka-Taylor, JohnTPSAVIORS ON MOUNT ZION.—God is looking upon us, and has called us to be saviors upon Mount Zion. And what does a savior mean? It means a person who saves somebody. Jesus went and preached to the spirits in prison; and he was a savior to that people. When he came to atone for the sins of the world, he was a savior, was he not? Yes. And we are told in the revelations that saviors should stand upon Mount Zion; and the kingdom shall be the Lord's. Would we be saviors if we did not save somebody? I think not. Could we save anyone if we did not build temples? No, we could not; for God would not accept our offerings and sacrifices. Then we came here to be saviors on Mount Zion, and the kingdom is to be the Lord's. Then what shall we do? We will build temples. And what then? Administer in them, when we get them done. Do we know how? Yes, we do, for God has told us how. And whom shall we save? Our fathers and mothers, our uncles and our aunts, our grandfathers and our grandmothers, and we will look after the interest of all we can trace; we will still go to work, after we have settled individual matters and attended to our family affairs and a few little things among us—for we are a small people comparatively, notwithstanding that we talk about extending our power; we are a few people comparatively, but God has chosen us and selected us and planted us here, and told us what to do. Then after we get through with our own affairs, what next? There are myriads who have died without a knowledge of the gospel, that God and Jesus and the ancient patriarchs and prophets and men of God were interested in as they are in us, and whom we are informed shall have the opportunity of receiving the gospel if they had it not on this earth.—JD, 22:308, August 28, 1881.

WHY BUILD TEMPLE

REVELATION.—Why do we build temples? Because Elijah conferred certain keys which he held upon Joseph Smith. And when he laid his hands upon elders conferring on them the holy priesthood, they carried the principles imparted by Elijah to Joseph to you and to others, and you received it without knowing it. And by and by as the church began to gather together, we began to talk about building temples in which to receive and to administer ordinances which had been revealed unto Joseph Smith, pertaining to the interest of the living and the dead and necessary to our salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of our God, as well as for those for whom we administer. And we have not only talked about it but have done considerable in that direction.—JD, 22:306, August 28, 1881.

Now, I will ask, whoever thought of building temples until God revealed it? Did you? If you did, I wish you would tell us of it. And did you know how to build them? No. And did you know how to administer in them after they were built? No, you did not. We are indebted to the Lord for these things.—JD, 21:95, April 13,1879.

TEMPLES AND THE MISSION OF ELIJAH.—After you received the gospel and the spirit of the same, the great desire of your hearts was to go to zion. And in order to accomplish this you put away your little savings, and you began to contrive how to dispose of your little properties, and many of you were almost ready to sell yourselves to get to zion. You could not tell why you had such feelings, but you did have them, and you could not get rid of them until you were brought here. You would not have come here had it not been for that, would you? I have no idea that you would. When you were told to build temples, what made you build them? Because you had received the gospel in your hearts, associated with which was the mission of Elijah which was to turn the hearts of the children to the fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children.—JD, 21:95-96, April 13, 1879.

TEMPLES COMMANDED.—Now the command is to build temples. For what purpose? That they over whom Satan has had power may be administered for, reaching back, back to the beginning of time, that they may be brought forth and inherit the blessings and privileges of the kingdom of God, and that we, ourselves, may be prepared to live and reign with him for ever. Let us continue to live in humility and meekness before God, seeking in faith and good works to get an increased portion of his Holy Spirit, that we may comprehend the laws of God and live according to the principles of eternal truth. . . .—JD, 18:334-335, December 31, 1876.

BUILDING THE SALT LAKE TEMPLE.—The temple we are now building, in comparison, is no more than a little plaything, but in doing it we shall learn better how to perform temporal things and spiritual things.—JD, 10:149-150, April 6, 1863.

Logan Templea-Taylor, JohnTPCOMMENT AT COMPLETION OF LOGAN TEMPLE.—We have finished our temple. What is it for? Not a building to look at; not a house to brag about; for before we get through we shall have built some temples so much better, that you will not feel to boast about this temple. The temple that the people built in Kirtland was only a small building compared with this one, and they were a very small and poor people who built it, yet it was built in accordance with the commands of God. In Nauvoo, also, the people were very poor. They had just been driven from the land of Missouri, yet they were commanded of God to build it. What was obtained in these temples? In the Kirtland Temple Jesus appeared, and Moses, Elias, and Elijah appeared also, and all these things that I have read to you and spoken about, transpired on that occasion. Communication was opened between the heavens and the earth, between the priesthood in the heavens and the priesthood on the earth, and the keys of that priesthood imparted to Joseph and others on the earth. It was left to those in this world to keep open those communications, to see that the road was clear, and that there was no barrier interposed between earth and the heavens, and to lead forward and progress in other principles yet to be developed.—JD, 25:184-185, May 18, 1884.

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPWHAT ARE TEMPLES FOR?—We have now finished this temple, and some people inquire, what is it for? For many things: that our sealings and ordinances may be performed in a manner that will be acceptable before God and the holy angels; that whatsoever is bound on the earth according to the laws of the eternal priesthood shall be bound in the heavens; that there may be a connecting link between the living and the dead, between those who have lived, all those ancient fathers of which I have spoken who are interested in the welfare of their posterity; that there may be a royal priesthood, a holy people, a pure people, a virtuous people on the earth to officiate and operate in the interests of the living and the dead; not looking so much after themselves, but after God, after the work of God, and after the accomplishment of those things which God has designed to be carried out in the dispensation of the fulness of times when all things are to be united in one, and that they may be prepared to operate with the priesthood in the heavens in the redemption of the inhabitants of this world from the days of Adam unto the present time.

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPTEMPLES INTRODUCE HIGHER BRANCHES OF EDUCATION.—It is also intended to introduce the higher branches of education—literary, scientific, linguistic, philosophical and theological; for we are told to obtain a knowledge of laws, languages, governments, justice, equity, rule, authority, dominion, and all those great cosmopolitan principles exhibited in the laws of nature and among the peoples, by the wisdom, prescience, power and intelligence of "nature's God." That we may thus be acquainted with earthly and heavenly things, in accordance with everlasting laws that have existed in the heavens and on the earth from the beginning; and that all those great and eternal principles by which the worlds are governed may be comprehended by us.—JD, 25:185, May 18, 1884.

SERVICE IN THE TEMPLES

Temple Recommendsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE REQUIREMENTS OF ENTRANCE.—In the first place people desirous to go and attend to ordinances in these houses, must have a recommendation from their bishop. That is one of those—I was going to say—ugly facts. That is, ugly to those who are not prepared to pass through that ordeal, whose lives have been careless, whose actions have been improper, and whose standing perhaps is precarious—that is one of those facts that must be faced. Then when they have obtained this recommendation from the bishop, it must be endorsed by the president of the stake, and after that have the sanction of the president of the church. This is quite an ordeal for many men to go through. For men and women who are upright, virtuous, and honorable, it is very simple matter; there is no difficulty in their way at any time. But to those who have been careless of their duties, who have departed from the laws of God, and who have tampered with, or violated the ordinances of the gospel—to such people it is a critical time.

However, there is something far more difficult than that yet to come. That is only a starting point in these matters. The things that are ahead are a great deal more difficult to accomplish. What are they? The time will come when we shall not only have to pass by those officers whom I have referred to—say, to have the sanction and approval of our bishop, of the president of the stake, and of the president of the church—but we are told in this book (The Doctrine and Covenants) that we shall have to pass by the angels and the Gods. We may have squeezed through the other; we may have got along tolerably well, and been passed and acted upon, and sometimes a "tight squeeze" at that. But how will it be when we get on the other side, and we have the angels and the Gods to pass by before we can enter into our exaltation? If we cannot pass, what then? Well, we cannot, that is all. And if we cannot, shall we be able to enter into our exaltation? I think not. What do you think about it?—JD, 25:161-162, June 15, 1884.

Temple Recommendsa-Taylor, JohnTPUNNATURAL INFAMIES.—No woman murderer, no man murderer can have a place among the Latter-day Saints, and I speak of it that the presidents of stakes and the bishops may be apprised of these things. And some of these people would try to pass by the bishops, and then by the presidents of stakes, and then by the president of the church, and crawl with all their slime and damnable hypocrisy into the temples of the living God. They may pass by these, but they will have to pass by the angels and the Gods, before they get through, and they will never inherit the kingdom of God. Hear it, you sisters! Hear it, you brethren! Hear it, you bishops, and you presidents of stakes! Watch well and know well what you are doing, when you sign recommends for doubtful characters to go into these holy places. We do not want them there. It is not their place, and you will have to account for your acts if you permit these things knowingly. It is necessary that you should be particular about these matters, for you will have to answer for your doings as I have for mine. We cannot, because of relationship, because somebody is a cousin, or an uncle, or an aunt, or a brother, or a sister, or a son or a daughter, or a father or a mother—we cannot admit and will not admit them to any of these holy places unless they are worthy. I call upon you if you know of adulterers or adulteresses, or people that practice these unnatural infamies, to sever them from the church; they shall not have a place in the church and kingdom of God.—JD, 25:316-317, October 6 and 7, 1884.

Temple Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTEMPLE WORKERS.—We will have to fix upon a number of men and women—for the sisters will be required as well as the brethren—that will be needed. These can go along, leaving their farms and their merchandizing, or whatever they may have in hand, and go into the temple of the Lord, on a mission for six months, or twelve months, or two or three years as the case may be, the same as others who go out into the world. If I today were not engaged as I am I should say, "Won't you be kind enough to give me. . . . an opportunity to officiate in the temple?" and I should feel it an honor to be privileged to work in the house of God.—JD, 25:186-187, May 18, 1884.

Temple Ordinancesa-Taylor, JohnTPTEMPLE ORDINANCES ARE ETERNAL.—When Elijah the prophet appeared to Joseph Smith, he committed to him the keys of this dispensation; and hence we are at work building temples; but some of us hardly know why. We go at it the same as we follow plowing, sowing, planting, reaping, and such kinds of pursuits. There are other things behind that. There are ordinances associated behind these things that go back into eternity; and forward unto eternity; that are the offspring of God, that are intended for the welfare, the happiness, and exaltation of mankind; for those who are living and those that are dead and for those that will live hereafter, pertaining both to our progenitors and our posterity. And that is one of those keys that have been turned.—JD, 21:95, April 13, 1879.

A FORWARD LOOK

In looking still forward we find that there are other things ahead of us. One thing is the building of temples, and that is a very important item, and ought to rest with force upon the minds of all good saints.

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPCONVERSATION WITH ROTHSCHILD.—I remember, some time ago, having a conversation with Baron Rothschild, a Jew. I was showing him the temple here, and said he—"Elder Taylor, what do you mean by this temple? What is the object of it? Why are you building it?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPSaid I, "Your fathers had among them prophets, who revealed to them the mind and will of God; we have among us prophets who reveal to us the mind and will of God, as they did. One of your prophets said—The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple, but who may abide the day of his coming? For he shall sit as a refiner's fire and a purifier of silver!" "Now," said I, "sir, will you point me out a place on the face of the earth where God has a temple?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPSaid he, "I do not know of any."

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"You remember the words of your prophet that I have quoted?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPSaid he—"Yes, I know the prophet said that, but I do not know of any temple anywhere. Do you consider that this is that temple?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"No, sir, it is not."

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Well, what is this temple for?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPSaid I, "The Lord has told us to build this temple so that we may administer therein baptisms for our dead (which I explained to him) and also to perform some of the sacred matrimonial alliances and covenants that we believe in, that are rejected by the world generally, but which are among the purest, most exalting and ennobling principles that God ever revealed to man."

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Well, then, this is not our temple?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"No, but," said I, "you will build a temple, for the Lord has shown us, among other things, that you Jews have quite a role to perform in the latter days, and that all the things spoken by your old prophets will be fulfilled, that you will be gathered to old Jerusalem, and that you will build a temple there; and when you build that temple, and the time has arrived, 'the Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to his temple.' Do you believe in the Messiah?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Yes."

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Do you remember reading in your old prophets something like this—'They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn, and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. And one shall say, what are these wounds in thine hands and in thy side? And he will say—These with which I was wounded in the house of my friends?'"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Ah! Is that in our Bible?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Yes, sir, that is in your Bible."

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPI spoke to him then about the Nephites having left Jerusalem and told him that the Book of Mormon represents them as descendants of their people, and that Jesus came among them, and that they, because of their iniquity and departure from the word and law of God, were stricken with blackness.

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPSaid he—"What, as Cain was?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Yes, sir, as Cain was." Said I—"These people, the Lamanites, according to this record," a French copy of which I gave him, he being a Frenchman; "this people are beginning to feel after these things, and they are coming by hundreds and by thousands and demanding baptism at our hands, just as you find recorded in that book that they would do, and that is given there as a sign that God's work had commenced among all nations.

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPSaid he—"What evidence have you of this?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPThis conversation took place in the Townsend House, and when the baron asked me for evidence, said I—"Sir, if you will excuse me a few minutes I will give you some evidence;" and I went to Savage's book stand, in the Townsend House, and obtained a photographic copy of David Cannon baptizing Indians, standing in the midst of a great crowd of them. Said I—"Here is the evidence."

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTP"Well, what shall we do?"

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPSaid I—"You can do nothing unless God directs. You as a people are tied hand and foot, and have been for generations, and you can't move a peg unless God strikes off your fetters. When he says the word the things spoken of by the prophets will be fulfilled. Then, the measuring line will go forth again in Jerusalem, then your Messiah will come, and all those things spoken of by the prophets will be fulfilled."

Templesa-Taylor, JohnTPI mentioned these matters to Baron Rothschild merely to exhibit some ideas pertaining to the work in which we are engaged; and in speaking of the temple—"Well, this is not the temple?" "No, not that you are going to build; this is ours, and we expect to build hundreds of them yet, and to administer in them in carrying out the work of God." I speak of this, that you may reflect a little, you Latter-day Saints.—JD, 18:199-200, April 6, 1876.
