John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

BOOK FIVE

The Kingdom of God and the Kingdoms of Men

"The worst wish we have for the human family is that the principles enunciated in our Constitution may reverberate over the wide earth, and spread from shore to shore until all mankind shall be free."

—JOHN TAYLOR,

JD, 14:267

Dec. 17, 1871,

CHAPTER XXVIII

WORLD PROBLEMS

THE NEED FOR THE STUDY OF POLITICAL PRINCIPLES

THE PROBLEM STATED.—Notwithstanding the opposition we have had to combat, the people not only look upon us as a religious community, but as a great people politically, occupying a desirable position upon this continent. It is true when we have the Spirit upon us we look forward to the time when we shall have the literal kingdom of God established, and when we shall exercise rule and dominion, and when we shall increase, and so continue until the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our God and of Christ. These feelings occupied our breasts in our infancy, in the church, but some ideas of the reality of the vast unborn future were more or less confused; it was very difficult for us to have just conceptions of God's dealings with us and with the nations of the earth. It was thought by many that when Joseph Smith offered himself as a candidate for president of the United States that it was a dangerous and foolish policy, and, in fact, it was quite difficult for many to bring their feelings up to that point.

We have been struggling against the powers of darkness, so far as religion is concerned, from the year 1830; as we have increased in numbers we have naturally assumed a social and political status, and have been obliged to organize a government, and make laws in accordance with those of that nation with which we are associated. We are now struggling and expect to have to struggle for our religious, social, and political rights. . . .

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DUTY TO STUDY CORRECT POLITICAL PRINCIPLES.—In a political point of view we have had doubts whether some systems were not as good as ours, and whether we had not better be governed by the powers of the world than listen to the teachings of God. However, as we have progressed the mist has been removed, and in relation to these matters, the elders of Israel begin to understand that they have something to do with the world politically as well as religiously; that it is as much their duty to study correct political principles as well as religious, and to seek to know and comprehend the social and political interests of man, and to learn and be able to teach that which would be best calculated to promote the interests of the world.—JD, 9:339-340, April 13, 1862.

DESTRUCTION OF THE NATIONS. [^1]—This nation and other nations will be overthrown, not because of their virtue, but because of their corruption and iniquity. The time will come, for the prophecies will be fulfilled, when kingdoms will be destroyed, thrones cast down, and the powers of the earth shaken, and God's wrath will be kindled against the nations of the earth, and it is for us to maintain correct principles, political, religious, and social, and to feel towards all men as God feels.—JD, 17:4, February 1, 1874.

I tell you, my brethren, in the name of God, that right among the nations of Europe, where many of you have come from, there will be some of the bloodiest scenes that you ever read of; and God expects you to assist in warning the nations, and in gathering out the honest in heart. Then when you come back, having accomplished a good mission, you can say, "My garments are clean from the blood of this generation." Many of you cannot say that now, therefore I wish to remind you of these things, that you may reflect upon them, and prepare yourselves for the work that is before you.—JD, 20:47, August 4, 1878.

Libertya-Taylor, JohnTPUNREST IN THE WORLD: THE SAINTS TO SUSTAIN LIBERTY.—we see many signs of weakness which we lament, and we would to god that our rulers would be men of righteousness, and that those who aspire to position would be guided by honorable feelings—to maintain inviolate the Constitution and operate in the interest, happiness, well-being, and protection of the whole community. But we see signs of weakness and vacillation. We see a policy being introduced to listen to the clamor of mobs and of unprincipled men who know not of what they speak, nor whereof they affirm, and when men begin to tear away with impunity one plank after another from our Constitution, by and by we shall find that we are struggling with the wreck and ruin of the system which the forefathers of this nation sought to establish in the interests of humanity.

Libertya-Taylor, JohnTPBut it is for us still to sustain these glorious principles of liberty bequeathed by the founders of this nation, still to rally round the flag of the Union, still to maintain all correct principles, granting the utmost extent of liberty to all people of all grades and of all nations. If other people see fit to violate these sacred principles, we must uphold them in their entirety, in their purity, and be patriotic and law-abiding and act honorably toward our nation and to its rulers.—JD, 22:143-144, July 3, 1881.

THE NATION-STATE SYSTEM

WORLD DISUNITY.—We find the world split up and divided into different nations, having different interests, and different objects, with their religious and political views as dissimilar as light and darkness, all the time jealous of each other, and watching each other as so many thieves. That man at the present day (and it has been the case for ages) is considered the greatest statesman, who, with legislation or diplomacy, can make the most advantageous arrangement with, or coerce by circumstances, other nations into measures that would be for the benefit of the nation with which he is associated, no matter how injurious it might be to the nation or nations concerned. The measure that would yield his nation an advantage might plunge another in irremediable misery, while there is no one to act as father and parent of the whole, and God is lost sight of. What is it that the private ambition of man has not done to satisfy his craving desires for the acquisition of territory and wealth, and what is falsely called "honor" and "fame"?

Those private, jarring interests have kept the world in one continual ferment and commotion from the commencement until the present time; and the history of the world is a history of the rise and fall of nations—of wars, commotions, and bloodshed—of nations depopulated and cities laid waste. Carnage, destruction, and death have stalked through the earth, exhibiting their horrible forms in all their cadaverous shapes, as though they were the only rightful possessors. Deadly jealousy, fiendish hate, mortal combat, and dying groans have filled the earth, and our bulwarks, our chronicles, our histories, all bear testimony to this; and even our most splendid paintings, engravings, and statuary are living memorials of bloodshed, carnage, and destruction. Instead of men being honored who have sought to promote the happiness, peace, and well-being of the human family, and greatness concentrating in that, those have been generally esteemed the most who produced the most misery and distress, and were wholesale robbers, ravagers, and murderers . . . . .

Here is evidently a lack of that consummate wisdom, that moral and physical control, that parental power which balances the universe, and directs the various planets. For let the same recklessness, selfishness, individuality, and nationality there be manifested, and we should see the wildest confusion.—GG, 8-9, 1852.

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PATTERN OF WORLD POLITICS.—When nations and rulers set the pattern, they generally find plenty to follow their example; hence, covetousness, fraud, rapine, bloodshed, and murder prevail to an alarming extent. If a nation is covetous, an individual thinks he may be also; if a nation commits a fraud, it sanctions his acts in a small way; and if a nation engages in wholesale robbery, an individual does not see the impropriety of doing it in retail; if a strong nation oppresses a weak one, he does not see why he may not have the same privilege. Corruption follows corruption, fraud treads on the heels of fraud, and all those noble, honorable, virtuous principles that ought to govern men are lost sight of and chicanery and deception ride rampant through the world. The welfare, happiness, exaltation, and glory of man are sacrificed at the shrine of ambition, pride, covetousness, and lasciviousness. By these means nations are overthrown, kingdoms destroyed, communities broken up, families rendered miserable, and individuals ruined.—GG, 13-14, 1852.

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPThose great national evils of which I have spoken are things which at present seem to be out of the reach of human agency, legislation, or control. They are diseases that have been generating for centuries; that have entered into the vitals of all institutions, religious and political; that have prostrated the powers and energies of all bodies politic, and left the world to groan under them, for they are evils that exist in church and state, at home and abroad; among Jew and gentile, Christian, pagan, and Mohammendan; king, prince, courtier, and peasant; like the deadly simoon, they have paralyzed the energies, broken the spirits, damped the enterprise, corrupted the morals, and crushed the hopes of the world.

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPThousands of men would desire to do good if they only knew how; but they see not the foundation and extent of the evil, and long-established opinions, customs, and doctrines blind their eyes and damp their energies. And if a few should see the evil and try a remedy, what are a few in opposition to the views, power, influence, and corruption of the world?

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPNo power on this side of heaven can correct the evil. It is a world that is degenerated, and it requires a God to put it right.—GG, 14-15, 1852.

WARS AND COMMOTIONS.—Why is it that thrones will be cast down, empires dissolved, nations destroyed, and confusion and distress cover all people, as the prophets have spoken? Because the Spirit of the Lord will be withdrawn from the nations in consequence of their wickedness, and they will be left to their own folly.—JD, 6:24, November 1, 1857.

When the potsherds of the earth strive with the potsherds of the earth, and God does not interfere, they will be more likely to accomplish the destruction of each other.—JD, 9:234, April 28, 1861.

They are all very loyal; they profess to be very patriotic, and they all believe they are fighting for their own, and they pray to the god of battles to give them success; and it is quite common to hear them boast, "We will regulate matters in a short time." But who is this god of battles? Why, the devil, the prince and power of the air, who rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience. He is the god they risk their cause with, and it for him to handle them as he sees fit.—JD, 9:236, April 28, 1861.

A PROPHECY DURING THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.—The world has been full of darkness and wickedness, and has not understood the things of God; but many of the past as well as the present generations have been full of blood-thirstiness, fraud, and oppression, without any correct principles, without the Spirit of the Lord to direct them. It is so now, and hence the wars and turmoils that at present exist in these United States—a war of brother against brother to destroy each other and to bring each other into bondage. This is the condition of things as they exist in this country at the present time, and this state of things will increase throughout the whole world, and all the inhabitants thereof will participate in the very things that are now transpiring in this nation.—JD, 9:341-342, April 13, 1862.

THE NEED FOR CONSTRUCTIVE IDEALISM.—If men and nations, instead of being governed by their unruly passions, covetous desires, and ambitious motives, were governed by the pure principles of philanthropy, virtue, purity, justice, and honor, and were under the guidance of a fatherly and intelligent head, directed by that wisdom which governs the universe and regulates the motions of the planetary systems, there would be no need of so many armies, navies, and police regulations which are now necessary for the protection of those several nations from the aggressions of each other, and internal factions. Let any one examine the position of Europe alone, and he will find this statement abundantly verified.—GG, 11, 1852.

EUROPEAN NATIONALISM.—The continental nations of Europe are very differently constituted to what we are; they are generally a distinct people, but they have more or less become amalgamated years ago, and at present have assumed a degree of nationality, having their own peculiar theories, customs, and ideas of religion and politics, and their own notions and standards of a social system. Their systems have been codified to a certain extent—have been taught in their schools, their lyceums, and their churches, and been discussed in their legislative assemblies, and form what is generally termed idees nationale—they have been written about, thought about, lectured about, and preached about.

There are certain mediums through which the ideas of those nations flow generally, which differ according to the position they occupy politically and religiously, and the kind of government which they are under. These theories and systems are peculiarly influenced and modified by the peculiar languages through which their ideas are conveyed. Those nations are organized under strictly political principles or systems—their organizations are almost exclusively of a political nature, although they have arrangements pertaining to church government which regulate and control in many instances the consciences of their subjects. They have a certain kind of religion in which they generally are, no doubt, conscientious, and which is sustained by law.

THE UNITED STATES AND THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS.—The United States differ from them; for, although organized on political principles, yet, they have no religion which they acknowledge as such nationally, leaving the people free to worship as they please.—JD, 11:51-52, January 18, 1865.

WILL IT EVER BE THE UNITED STATES OF THE WORLD?

News Mediaa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE FACTOR OF THE PRESS AND PUBLIC OPINION.—Through the press we are made aware of the affairs of distant nations, and through the facilities of rapid communication they are brought into our immediate neighborhood. The result is an increased individual interest of all in the affairs of the most distant nations and tribes. We look over the periodicals of the day, as we would go into a museum to look upon the past, present, and future . . . . .

AN ENLIGHTENED PUBLIC OPINION SEEKS FOR IMPROVEMENT.—Will the concentrated intelligence of past ages, with the improvements of the present, advance man in the scale of being, and lead him to seek for improvement in the science of life? We think it will, for man is a progressive being. It is an era of transition, an age of active, busy preparation. It is to the establishment of some vast permanent moral, political, or religious government, or is it to eventuate in a combination, of all in one magnificent structure, under which all the nations of the earth may gather? The idea of a government, extending over the diversified tribes and nations of the earth, classifying, organizing, and controlling the whole, has been considered chimerical, a sort of monomania raving of some besotted Alexander, hair-brained Peter of Russia, or unprincipled fatalism of a Napoleon—some bigoted believer in the Revelation of Patmos—Daniel, or some other old prophet of the dark ages. Changes of circumstances always require change in the administration; this would apply to individual states—why not to the world?

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DREAM OF WORLD GOVERNMENT.—Although the present distracted state of the world might seem to forbid the expectation of an immediate amalgamation, yet the rapid increase of means of communication, the sure and decided commingling of interests, a universal interchange of sentiment, an increasing desire among mankind to shake off the shackles of despotism and enjoy the liberty of speech and conscience all conspire to show that such a combination of circumstances must eventually result in some kind of universal government—moral, religious, and political . . . . .

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPSOME SOCIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS.—The direction taken by inquiring minds is not only to the outward forms of government, but the public eye is turned to its interior arrangements and upon all that has a bearing upon the future prospects of community life. In this connection has public attention been drawn to the subject of family organization, in consideration of its forming the basis of all governments. There are comparatively few who are bold enough at present to risk their reputation in an attack upon the old and long cherished order of family government, although men are convinced there are vast moral, political, and religious evils arising directly or indirectly from the present . . . . order; yet the few, who at this early day venture upon this subject before the public, denote an agitation and a spirit of investigation among the people, that will ultimately result in the only true basis of good domestic and popular government—the ancient and honored patriarchal order, the only one ever sanctioned by heaven . . . . .

The intelligence of the people will soon see the necessity of adopting rules and regulations, which will bring them to a closer acquaintance with long-disused and forgotten laws of God of former days, which, when compared with human laws, will be seen to be so far superior, that the universal vox populi will be for its establishment, as the only permanent and true basis of good and wholesome government, notwithstanding the objections of learned casuists or would-be moralists of the present-day.—The Mormon, November 24, 1855, Vol. 1, No. 40.

NATIONAL OBSTACLES TO WORLD UNITY.—Professedly every good man thinks that it is good to be united in anything that is good. But the great difficulty with the world is to bring this about. The nations of the world are not united, and each nation is divided and split up, and confusion and the spirit of war and animosity and evil abound everywhere. They are not united, but they are full of jealousy, hatred, strife, envy, and malice.

Witness the late European wars. What did they fight for? Who can tell? They fought for nothing, and they made peace for nothing. I have searched the papers diligently, but I must confess that I have been unable to discover what they fought for; and I question very much if . . . . the opposing powers could tell you. Yet one hundred thousand men have been sent into eternity to satisfy the caprice of a few individuals, and for what purpose? I cannot tell, and I do not know anybody else that can. I have not met with a man or with a writer yet that knew what they fought for, or what they made peace for. What are they now doing? France is building extra ships, and England is building extra ships. What for? They do not know.

A nation is afraid its neighboring nations are going to possess a little more power than it possesses, and it must create more power to cope with them. That is all the union I know anything about in the world.—JD, 7:319, October 7, 1859.

HUMAN MEANS AT UNION WILL FAIL.—The great evils that now exist in the world are the consequences of man's departure from God. This has introduced this degeneracy and imbecility, and nothing but a retracing of his steps, and a return to God can bring about a restitution . . . . .

Christianitya-Taylor, JohnTPAnd all human means made use of at the present time to ameliorate the condition of the world must fail, as all human means have always done. There are some who suppose that the influence of Christianity, as it is now preached and administered, will bring about a millennial reign of peace . . . . .

Christianitya-Taylor, JohnTPChristianity has prevailed more or less for eighteen hundred years. If it should still continue and overspread the world in its present form, what would it accomplish? The world's redemption and regeneration? No, verily. Its most staunch supporters and most strenuous advocates would say, No. For like causes always produce like effects: and if it has failed to regenerate the nations where it has had full sway for generations, it must necessarily fail to regenerate the world. If it has failed in a small thing, how can it accomplish a large one? [^2]—GG, 15-16, 18, 1852.

If you examine the philosophy of France and Germany, and other parts of the earth, you will find them to be on a par with the religious world: they are going to ameliorate the condition of mankind and to perform wonders, according to their professions. If you attempt to reason with them about their philosophy, like the paddy's flea, when you attempt to put your finger on them, they are not there.—JD, 5:261-262, September 20, 1857.

THE WORLD'S PROBLEM.—the world, at the present time, is all confused, and it seems to me, sometimes, that even we have made very little improvement indeed, according to the light and intelligence God has communicated to us. But what has the world done? Whether you look at it morally, religiously, philosophically, or politically, or in what way you please, you will find it is all a chaotic mass.—JD, 1:149, 150, June 12, 1853.

THE METHOD OF WORLD PEACE.—The religion of Jesus Christ will develop the plan of putting down the high-handed power of tyranny and oppression which now pervades the earth, and how to establish the principles of peace, righteousness, and virtue upon the earth, and how to place the world of mankind in that position which God has destined they should occupy when his kingdom shall rule upon the earth, and when "every creature in heaven, on earth, and under the earth shall be heard to say, Blessing, honour, and glory, and power be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever." [^3]

The germs of this peace are with us; the intelligence concerning these matters has begun to be developed . . . . .—JD, 6:164, January 17, 1858.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."—From the Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America, 1776.
[^2] The compiler entertains the belief that President Taylor's meaning here was that the Constitution debars political. influence in the field of religion, and not vice-versa, as the words appear. This belief conforms to constitutional practice and to President Taylor's essential meaning elsewhere.
[^3] This was spoken on the eve of the establishment by Congress of the Utah Commission (1882).
