John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXIX

MORMONISM AND THE AMERICAN SYSTEM

THE MORMON POSITION WITH REGARD TO THE AMERICAN NATION

(A Doctrine of Inherent Rights)

Agencya-Taylor, JohnTPINHERENT RIGHTS.—There are certain principles that are inherent in man, that belong to man, and that were enunciated in an early day, before the United States government was formed, and they are principles that rightfully belong to all men everywhere. They are described in the Declaration of Independence as unalienable rights, one of which is that men have a right to live; another is that they have a right to pursue happiness; and another is that they have a right to be free and no man has authority to deprive them of those God-given rights, and none but tyrants would do it. [^1] These principles, I say, are unalienable in man; they belong to him; they existed before any constitutions were framed or any laws made. Men have in various ages striven to strip their fellow men of these rights, and dispossess them of them. And hence the wars, the bloodshed, and carnage that have spread over the earth. We therefore are not indebted to the United States for these rights. We were free as men born into the world, having the right to do as we please, to act as we please, as long as we do not transgress constitutional law nor violate the rights of others.

SOME LEGAL RIGHTS.—Being organized, then, into a government such as it is—that is, the name of a government, the name of a legislature, the name of a free people—being organized as we are, what next? We are necessarily obliged to look after our affairs as men, our political affairs. Our mission to the world is a mission of peace. The gospel proclaims peace on earth and good will to man . . . . .

Religious Freedoma-Taylor, JohnTPTHE POLITICAL MISSION OF THE SAINTS.—Our mission is to call upon this nation and all nations to repent of their sins, of their lasciviousness, adulteries, fornications, murders, blasphemies, and of all dishonest and corrupt practices. But in this we use no force. Having laid these matters before them, they have their free will to receive or reject . . . . . As politicians or statesmen they must at least give us the benefit of the Constitution and laws. These, as a portion of the body politic, we contend for as part of our political rights. We do not claim, nor profess, nor desire to interfere with any man's religion or conscience. We have nothing to do with their religion, nor they with ours. Religious faith or belief is not a political factor. The Constitution has debarred its introduction into the arena of politics; [^2] and every officer of the United States has pledged himself under a solemn oath to abide by and sustain that instrument, and not one of them can interfere with it [religion] without a violation of his oath . . . . .

Agencya-Taylor, JohnTPTO MAINTAIN HUMAN RIGHTS.—Another thing God expects us to do, and that is to maintain the principle of human rights . . . . . We owe it to ourselves as men, we owe it to our families, our children, and to posterity. We owe it to the lovers of freedom in this land, of which there are thousands, yea, millions, who despise acts of oppression and tyranny. We owe it to all liberty-loving men to stand up for human rights and protect human freedom, and in the name of God we will do it . . . . .

Joseph, the despised of his father's house, became their deliverer. Moses, the foundling and outcast of Egypt, became the deliverer and law-giver of Israel. Jesus, the despised Nazarene, introduced principles that revolutionized the moral ideas and ethics of the world. And it may not be among the improbabilities, that the prophecies of Joseph Smith may be fulfilled and that the calumniated and despised Mormons may yet become the protectors of the Constitution and the guardians of religious liberty and human freedom in these United States—JD, 23:262-266, October 8, 1882.

Constitution of the United Statesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.—I will tell you what I think about the Constitution. I have just the same opinion of it that Joseph Smith had, and he said it was given by inspiration of God. The men did not know this who wrote it. The men did not know it who adopted it. Nevertheless it is true. There is an embodiment of principles contained therein calculated to bless and benefit mankind.

United States of Americaa-Taylor, JohnTP"What do you think about the government of the United States as a government?" I think it is a good deal ahead of most governments, but I think the administrators are apostatizing very fast from the principles that the fathers of this nation instituted. [^3] It has become quite a question nowadays, whether men can be preserved in their rights or not, whether men can worship God according to the dictates of their conscience or not, or whether we are living in a land of freedom or not. What is the matter? Why, they are like the religionists. How is it with them? They profess to believe in the Bible. They do believe it shut, but when you open it, they deny it. The people of this nation profess to believe in the Constitution. They do until it comes to be applied to the people, and then they do not. That is perhaps too broad a saying, but I will say there are many who feel like this—not all by a long way. There are thousands and tens of thousands who are imbued with the same principles as were the framers of the Constitution and who desire to see human freedom perpetuated. . . .

Constitution of the United Statesa-Taylor, JohnTPWe would say then in regard to religionists—if you profess a religion be true to it. If you profess to believe in the Bible when shut, believe it when open, and practice its principles. We would say to men who profess so much loyalty and patriotism to the government, be true to your institutions, be true to the Constitution of the United States, as we say to all our people to be true to the same. We expect the Latter-day Saints to be so, and to be subject to law, to avoid lawlessness of every kind and interference with men's rights in any shape.—JD, 22:295-296, October 9, 1881.

THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW AND INHERENT RIGHTS.—There is an inherent principle of right planted in the human bosom, which God has placed there and which man never could, can not now, nor ever will uproot—principles of inherent right which all intelligent men, when they have sought for the truth with unbiased mind and desired sincerely to know, have invariably found. Governed by the principles of right, and uninfluenced by party, power, or wealth, there have always been men inspired by an infallible divine afflatus, who have recognized an innate, inalienable principle of justice and equity, in every age and among all nations, and the records of the Babylonians, the Medo-Persians, the Greeks, Romans, and more modern nations bear ample testimony to this fact. The principle of right is implanted in the human bosom and inherent in the human family, among all governments that have ever existed, and men of virtue, honor, and truth have always arrived at the same conclusions that we have.

Natural Rightsa-Taylor, JohnTPThe founders of our government, under the inspiration of the Almighty, and goaded by an oppressive power, discovered the same elements, the same principles, the same ideas that we have, and enunciated those eternal principles and made them known to the world,—"that all men are born free and equal and have a right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." The founders of the French Republic, about the same time, made a declaration almost verbatim. It is the violation of the natural rights of man that has deluged the earth with blood in all ages. These principles were enunciated by Joseph Smith; he believed in them, so do we, in the right to think, in the right to speak, in the right to act, in the right to do all things that are right and good and proper, but not in the right to interfere with any other man's rights, any other man's religion, any other man's principles. These are our views. . . . The worst wish we have for the human family is that the principles enunciated in our Constitution may reverberate over the wide earth, and spread from shore to shore, until all mankind shall be free.—JD, 14:267, December 17, 1871.

Constitution of the United Statesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE CONSTITUTION: AN ENTERING WEDGE FOR A NEW ERA.—It is true that the founders of this nation, as a preliminary step for the introduction of more correct principles and that liberty and the rights of man might be recognized, and that all men might become equal before the law of the land, had that great palladium of liberty, the Constitution of the United States, framed. This was the entering wedge for the introduction of a new era, and in it were introduced principles for the birth and organization of a new world.

Constitution of the United Statesa-Taylor, JohnTPThe Prophet Joseph Smith said that the Constitution of the United States was given by the inspiration of God. But good, virtuous, and holy principles may be perverted by corrupt and wicked men. The Lord was opposed by Satan; Jesus had his Judas; and this nation abounds with traitors who ignore that sacred palladium of liberty and seek to trample it under foot. Joseph Smith said they would do so, and that when deserted by all, the elders of Israel would rally around its shattered fragments and save and preserve it inviolate. But even this, good as it was, was not a perfect instrument. It was one of those steppingstones to a future development in the progress of man to the intelligence and light, the power and union that God alone can impart to the human family.—JD, 21:31, April 9,1879.

Constitution of the United Statesa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE CONSTITUTION.—We believe that our fathers were inspired to write the Constitution of the United States, and that it is an instrument, full, lucid, and comprehensive; that it was dictated by a wise and foreseeing policy, and does honor to the heads and hearts of its framers; that it is the great bulwark of American liberty; and that the strict and implicit observance of which is the only safeguard of this mighty nation. We therefore rest ourselves under its ample folds.

LEGISLATURES.—We believe that all legislative assemblies should confine themselves to constitutional principles; and that all such laws should be implicitly obeyed by every American.

Agencya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RIGHTS OF MAN.—We believe that all men should have a right to do good; a perfect freedom of action; and be protected in that right; "free trade and sailors' rights" ; but that no man is free, or at liberty to do wrong, or transgress law.

We believe that all men are responsible to God for their religious acts, and therefore ought to have perfect freedom of conscience.

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPPOLICY AND ADMINISTRATION.—We believe that the president, governors, judges, and governmental officers ought to be respected, honored, and sustained in their stations; but that they ought to use their positions and power, not for political emolument, or party purposes; but for the administration of justice, and equity, and for the well being and happiness of the people.

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPPARTIES AND POLITICS.—We believe that legislators ought to be chosen on account of their intelligence, honor, integrity, and virtue ; and not because they belong to some particular party clique.

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPWe believe that the high party strife, logrolling, wirepulling, and political juggling, and spoliation, are a disgrace to any politician; that they are beneath the dignity of an American, and disgraceful and humiliating, alike to the people and statesmen of this great republic.

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPWe believe that legislative enactments ought to be for the good of the whole, and not for any particular location or district; and that anything else is at variance with the spirit and genius of our institutions.

United States of Americaa-Taylor, JohnTPWe believe that although there is much to lament, and room for very great improvement, both in our executive, judiciary, and legislative departments, that we have the most liberal, free, and enlightened government in the world. . . .—The Mormon, February 17, 1855.

Chosen Peoplea-Taylor, JohnTPCALLING OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS.—We are called of God to be an upright people, a virtuous people, an honorable people. We are called upon to maintain correct principles, and to introduce them among the peoples of the earth, and especially among the people of this nation.—JD, 25:93, February 10, 1884.

Constitution of the United Statesa-Taylor, JohnTPBy and by, you will find they will tear the Constitution to shreds, as they have begun now. They have started long ago to rend the Constitution of our country in pieces; and in doing so they are letting loose and encouraging a principle which will react upon themselves with terrible consequences. For if lawmakers and administrators can afford to trample upon justice, equity, and the Constitution of this country, they will find thousands and tens of thousands who are willing to follow in their wake in the demolition of the rights of man, and the destruction of all principles of justice, and the safeguards of the nation. But we will stand by and maintain its principles and the rights of all men of every color, and every clime. We will cleave to the truth, live our religion, and keep the commandments of God, and God will bless us in time and throughout the eternities that are to come.—JD, 26:38-39, December 14, 1884.

United States of Americaa-Taylor, JohnTPAPPEAL FOR AN ENLIGHTENED PUBLIC OPINION.—We have no fault to find with our government. We deem it the best in the world. But we have reason to deplore its maladministration, and I call upon our legislators, our governors and president to pause in their careers and not to tamper with the rights and liberties of American citizens, nor wantonly tear down the bulwarks of American and human liberty. God has given to us glorious institutions. Let us preserve them intact and not pander to the vices, passions, and fanaticism of a depraved public opinion.—JD, 23:65-66, April 9, 1882.

THE BLESSINGS OF AMERICANS.—When I was in Hamburg, there were 30,000 soldiers quartered in the city, and that is called a free city. If you ask any of the inhabitants what they are doing there, they will answer—Ich weiss nicht, (I don't know,) but we have to keep them. They are there because the emperor of Austria placed them there, and he had power to have them there.

In Paris, you would suppose you were in an armed city, for you could not step anywhere without meeting soldiers at every step.

When I was in Hamburg, I had to go and get a permit to authorize me to stay one month, and when that was done, I had to get another to authorize me to stay another month. The only thing we can do in that country at present is to baptize some of the citizens, and set them to preaching, as they have more rights and privileges than a stranger. No man has a right to receive his own son into his own house, if not a citizen, without a card, or a permit from the government; and that is a free city, so called. We cannot know anything about the blessings and privileges we have as Americans, without becoming acquainted with the condition of other nations. This is one of the greatest countries in the world, but they (the Americans) do not appreciate their privileges.—JD, 1:27-28, August 22, 1852.

AMERICA AND ITS DESTINY

United States of Americaa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE AMERICAN DESTINY: ARE WE COMPETENT?—A great destiny lies before the United States. The question is, is she competent for the task? She has outridden the fiery test of revolution, hurled defiance at a despot's power, and grasped the sceptre of liberty with a nervous, powerful grip. She has, out of the chaotic, confused mass of material associated with corrupt governments, organized a system of government and framed a constitution that while it is honorable to its founders, guarantees to all, to the fullest extent, "Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite.". . . . Liberty here is more than a name. Here man is free to speak, free to think, free to write, free to act, free to do good. The very genius of our Constitution and institutions is freedom. If there is a fault, it is the fault of party, sectional strife, or narrow bigotry; it is not in our institutions. . . .

United States of Americaa-Taylor, JohnTPWHO CAN TAKE THE HELM?—Such is America at present. What is her future? Her destiny is evidently onward; for although yet in her youth, she has grown to be a giant among the nations. Again we ask, who can take the helm of state? Whilst new political elements are rising, and our healthy institutions grow, spread, and increase; whilst wave after wave of population strikes our shore and penetrates our territories; whilst demagogues at home, or cabals and intrigants abroad, worry and fret us, who can say to the troubled elements, "peace be still?" With the improvements that are daily progressing, what are her capabilities for using them, for preserving and maintaining them? Is she competent for the task? Is she equal to the emergency?. . . .

United States of Americaa-Taylor, JohnTPWhat might we not do with a firm, pure, stable, reliable government? Our national sins have been small in comparison with other nations. We are at the present time, comparatively, in our infancy. By pursuing a just and honorable course we should soon become the arbiter of nations and the wonder and admiration of the world. . . .

United States of Americaa-Taylor, JohnTPHEMISPHERE SOLIDARITY.—When our government shall be sufficiently strong, pure, and honorable, islands, states, and dynasties will seek shelter under its wings; the Canadas, the Central American States, Mexico, . . . . Bolivia, Peru, Chili, Brazil, and all of South America will naturally follow. They will need no coercion. They will seek to be one with us.—The Mormon, October 6, 1855, Vol. 1, No. 33.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This idea, seemingly arrogant on its face (today as well as in 1853), must be associated with the Christian hope of a Millennium and the ideal of a free, pluralistic, world-society as developed elsewhere by John Taylor and included in this work
[^2] See above
[^3] John Taylor was in Carthage Jail, Illinois, June 27, 1844, when Joseph and Hyrum Smith were murdered. See Chapter 35
