John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXX

THE MORMON THEORY OF LEGITIMACY

THE POLITICAL THEORY OF LEGITIMACY [^1]

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE POLITICAL POSITION OF THE CHURCH.—Let us now notice our political position in the world. What are we going to do? We are going to possess the earth. Why? Because it belongs to Jesus Christ, and he belongs to us, and we to him. We are all one, and will take the kingdom and possess it under the whole heavens, and reign over it for ever and ever. Now, ye kings and emperors, help yourselves, if you can. This is the truth, and it may as well be told at this time as at any other. [^2]—JD, 1:230, April 8, 1853.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPWe began with the power of God, with the government of heaven, and with acknowledging his hand in all things; and God has sustained us, blessed and upheld us to the present time; and it is the only government, rule, and dominion under the heavens that will acknowledge his authority.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPBrethren, if any of you doubt it, go into some of those nations, and get yourselves introduced into the presence of their kings and rulers, and say, "Thus saith the Lord God." They would at once denounce you as a madman, and straightway order you into prison. What is the matter? They do not acknowledge the legitimacy, the rule, and government of God, nor will they inquire into them. They receive not their authority from him. Nations honor their kings, but they do not honor the authority of their God in any instance; neither have they from the first man-made government to the present time. If there has been such a nation, or if there is at this time such a government, it is a thing of which I am ignorant.—JD, 1:225, April 8, 1853.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NECESSITY AND REALITY OF THE PRINCIPLE OF LEGITIMACY.—To do right in our present state, then, we must carry out the principles of legitimacy according to a correct rule, and if we profess to be subjects of the kingdom of God, we must be subject to the dominion, rule, legitimacy, and authority of God. No person can escape from this unless he apostatizes and goes to the devil like a fool. He must be a fool who would barter away eternal life, thrones, principalities, and powers in the eternal world for the paltry trash which exists in the shape of wealth and worldly honor; to let go his chance of heaven and of God, of being a king and priest unto him, of living and reigning forever, and of standing among the chiefs of Israel. I cannot help calling such men fools, for they are damned now in making such a choice, and will be hereafter.—JD, 1:231, April 8, 1853.

THE LEGITIMACY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF GOD: AN INTERPRETATION OF HISTORY.—We will now come to the principle of legitimacy. . . . Paul, when speaking of Jesus Christ, gives us to understand that he is the firstborn of every creature, for by him were all things made that were made, and to him pertains all things; he is the head of all things, he created all things, whether visible or invisible, whether they be principalities, powers, thrones, or dominions. All things were created by him and for him, and without him was not anything made that was made. If all things were created by him and for him, this world on which we stand must have been created by him and for him. If so, he is its legitimate, its rightful owner and proprietor, its lawful sovereign and ruler. We will begin with him, then, in the first place, in treating on the subject of legitimacy.

But has he had the dominion over all nations, kindreds, peoples, and tongues? Have they bowed to his sceptre and acknowledged his sway? Have all people rendered obedience to his laws and submitted to his guidance? Echo answers, no! Has there ever been a kingdom, a government, a nation, a power, or a dominion in this world that has yielded obedience to him in all things? Can you point out one?. . . .

What then has been the position of the world for generations past? They have been governed by rulers not appointed of God. If they were appointed by him it was merely as a scourge to the people for their wickedness, or for temporary rulers in the absence of those whose right it was to govern. They had not the legitimate rule, priesthood, and authority of God on the earth, to act as his representatives in regulating and presiding over the affairs of his kingdom. . . .

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MEANING OF PRIESTHOOD.—The question, "What is priesthood?" has often been asked me. I answer, it is the rule and government of God, whether on earth, or in the heavens; and it is the only legitimate power, the only authority that is acknowledged by him to rule and regulate the affairs of his kingdom. When every wrong thing shall be put right, and all usurpers shall be put down, when he whose right it is to reign shall take the dominion, then nothing but the priesthood will bear rule; it alone will sway the sceptre of authority in heaven and on earth, for this is the legitimacy of God.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RULE OF FORCE.—In the absence of this, what has been the position of the nations? You who have made yourselves acquainted with the political structure and the political intrigues of earthly kingdoms, I ask, whence did they obtain their power? Did they get it from God? Go to the history of Europe, if you please, and examine how the rulers of those nations obtained their authority. Depending upon history for our information, we say those nations have been founded by the sword. If we trace the pages of history still further back to the first nation that existed, still we find that it was founded upon the same principles. Then follow the various revolutions and changes that took place among subsequent nations and power, from the Babylonians through the Medo-Persians, Grecians, Romans, and from that power to all the other powers of Europe, Asia, and Africa of which we have any knowledge. And if we look to America from the first discoveries by Columbus to the present time, where are now the original proprietors of the soil? Go to any power that has existed upon this earth, and you will find that earthly government, earthly rule and dominion, have been obtained by the sword. It was the sword of men that first put them in possession of this power. They have walked up to their thrones through rivers of blood, through the clotted gore and the groans of the dying, and through the tears and lamentations of bereaved widows and helpless orphans; and hence the common saying is, "Thrones won by blood, by blood must be maintained." By the same principle that they have been put in possession of territory, have they sought to sustain themselves—the same violence, the same fraud, and the same oppression have been made use of to sustain their illegitimacy.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPFRAUD AND FORCE INCOMPATIBLE WITH LEGITIMACY.—Some of these powers, dominions, governments, and rulers have had in their possession the laws of God, and the admonitions of Jesus Christ. And what have they done to his servants in different ages of the world, when he has sent them unto them? This question I need not stop to answer, for you are already too familiar with it. This, then, is the position of the world. Authority, dominion, rule, government has been obtained by fraud, and consequently is not legitimate. . . .

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPIt is impossible that there can be any legitimate rule, government, power, or authority, under the face of the heavens, except that which is connected with the kingdom of God, which is established by new revelation from heaven.—JD, 1:223-225, April 8, 1853.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPLEGITIMACY AND RIGHT.—I have, with my own eyes, seen holy prophets expire who were killed by the hands of a murderous gang of bloodthirsty assassins, because they bore the same testimony that the holy prophets did in the days of old. [^3] How many more of their brethren who dared acknowledge the truth have fallen beneath the same influences—have been shot, whipped, imprisoned, and put to death in a variety of ways, while hundreds of others, driven from their homes in the winter, have found their last bed. They were worn out with suffering and fatigue; the weary wheels of life stood still; they were obliged to forsake the world, in which they could no longer remain because of the persecution heaped upon them by the enemies of the truth.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThe reason of all this vile outrage upon innocent men, women, and children is because there is no legitimate rule upon the earth. God's laws and government are not known, and his servants are despised and cast out.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPLegitimacy and right, whether in heaven or on earth, cannot mix with anything that is not true, just, and equitable; and truth is free from oppression and injustice, as is the bosom of Jehovah. Nothing but that will ultimately stand.—JD, 1:227-228, APRIL 8, 1853.

THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NEED FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF GOD.—Everything is disordered and in confusion in the world. The reason is because no legitimate authority has been known or acknowledged on the earth. Others have been trying to build up and establish what they supposed to be the kingdom of God. . . . A change of government changes not the condition of the people, for all are wrong and acting without God.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPOur ideas are that the time has come to favor God's people; a time about which prophets spoke in pathetic strains, and poets sang. These men of God looked through the dark vista of future ages, and being wrapped in prophetic vision, beheld the latter-day glory—the time of the dispensation of the fulness of times, spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began. For they all looked forward with joyful anticipations to the things which have commenced with us. They all had their eyes upon the time when legitimacy would obtain its proper place upon the earth, in the shape of the kingdom of God established in the world, when all false rule and dominion would be put down, and the kingdoms of this world would become subject to God and his Christ. These are the ideas that they had, and these are the things we are seeking to carry out.—JD, 1:228-229, April 8, 1853.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE BASES OF AUTHORITY IN THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—Who have we for our ruling power? Where and how did he obtain his authority? Or how did any in this church and kingdom obtain it? It was first obtained by a revelation from the Lord of the universe, by the opening of the heavens, by the voice of God, and by the ministering of holy angels. It is by the voice of God and the voice of the people that our present president [^4] obtained his authority. . . . He obtains his authority first from God, and secondly from the people; and if a man possesses five grains of common sense, when he has a privilege of voting for or against a man, he will not vote for a man that oppresses the people. He will vote according to the dictates of his conscience for this is the right and duty of this people in the choice of their president and other leading officers of the kingdom of God. While this is being done here, it is being done in every part of the world, wherever the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a footing. Is there a monarch, potentate, or power under the heavens that undergoes a scrutiny as fine as this? No, there is not; and yet this is done twice a year, before all the Saints in the world. Here are legitimacy and rule. You place the power in their hands to govern, dictate, regulate, and put in order the affairs of the kingdom of God. This is, Vox Dei, vox populi. God appoints, the people sustain. You do this by your own act. Very well then, it is legitimate, and must stand, and every man is bound to abide it if it takes the hair off his head. I know there are things sometimes that are hard, tough, and pinching. But if a man is a man of God, he has his eyes upon eternal things and is aiming to accomplish the purposes of God, and all will be well with him in the end.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPWhat advantage is there, then, between this government and others? Why, we have peace, and as eternal beings we have a knowledge of eternal things. While listening to the remarks made on this stand, what have we not heard—what have we not known? The curtains of heaven have been withdrawn, and we have gazed as by vision upon eternal realities, while, in the professing world, doubt and uncertainty throw their dark mantle over every mind.—JD, 1:229-230, April 8, 1853.

SUMMARY: "LEGITIMACY AND ILLEGITIMACY

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPNothing contrary to the authority, rule, and government of heaven will stand in time or in eternity; and if any man wants to be blessed and honored, and to obtain a high place in the eternal world, let him pursue a course of honor, righteousness, and virtue before his God; and if he wants to find himself among usurpers, defrauders, oppressors, and those in possession of illegitimate claims, let him take an opposite course.—JD, 1:233, April 8, 1853.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PRINCIPLE OF "LEGITIMACY."—We hear a good deal about one-man power. I want to examine that power a little, and see how it exists, and how far it extends. We believe in two principles—one is the voice of God, the other is the voice of the people. . . . How does this priesthood stand in relation to the people? It is not thrust upon them as the queens of England, the kings of France, the emperor of Austria, or as the former king, but now emperor of Prussia, are. No, it is not thrust upon the people in any such way. It is precisely in the same way that the Israelites were organized in former times—God gave them certain laws, and the people said "Amen"; then the laws became binding upon Israel.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThe position we occupy is this: the Holy Ghost, which has been given to all who have obeyed the gospel, and have lived faithful to its precepts, takes of the things of God and shows them forth through a living priesthood to a people enlightened and instructed by the spirit of revelation from God. And the people thus enlightened, instructed and blessed by the spirit of light, voluntarily and gladly sustain the priesthood who minister unto them. When Joseph Smith was upon the earth, he did not force himself upon the people as these kings and emperors do, but he presented himself before them every six months, at the annual or semi-annual conference, and the people had a chance to lift up their hands to receive or reject him. That was the position occupied by Joseph Smith, and those associated with him, in guiding the affairs of the church and kingdom of God upon the earth, and it is precisely so with President Young. He stands here as the representative of God to the people, as the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He is, or ought to be, full of light, life, revelation, and the power of God, and he is, and bears testimony to it. He ought to be able to lead the people in the paths of life, and he is. He is the choice of God, and what more? He is the choice of the people of God. Has he a right to say, "I am chosen, I am elected, I am president, and I will do as I please, and help yourselves?" No, he presents himself before you, and if there is any man who has aught against him, he has the privilege of holding up his hand to signify the same. That is the position of our president. He is brought to a test every six months, as it rolls around, before the assembled conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is the same with the twelve, the president of the stake, the high council, the presidents of seventies, and with all the leading officers of the Church. They are all put to this test twice a year, and the people have the privilege of voting for or against them, just as they please.

Here then, on one hand, there is the voice of God. . . . What next? Then comes the freedom of man. On the one hand the guidance of God, on the other the freedom of man. We ask God to dictate us and he does. He has given us a president, apostles, prophets, bishops. He has organized his Church in the most perfect and harmonious manner.

DESPOTISM: ONLY IF THE PEOPLE WILL IT.—What next? God having given us a president inspired by his holy Spirit, we are required to vote for him—will we have him or will we reject him? We lift up our hands and say, "Yes, we will receive him." The world say this is despotism, being governed by one man. Is it despotism for every man and every woman to have a voice in the selection of those who rule over them? Is that despotism, tyranny, or oppression? If it is, I do not know what the terms mean. There are no people on the face of the earth today who have to undergo so severe a criticism as the president and priesthood of this Church before the people, and why is it that the people vote unanimously for them? "Well," say the world, "there is a kind of influence, we hardly know what, we wish it did not exist, for we do not like this one-man power." I know you do not, for it is one thousand men, ten thousand men power; it is the power of the kingdom of God on the earth, and the power of God united with it, that is what it is. As I have already said, it is not only the president of the Church who has to undergo this test, but the twelve, the seventies, and all the presiding officers of the Church have to go through the same ordeal.—JD, 15:215-218, October 7, 1872.

Peacea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PEACE OF CHRIST.—Jesus Christ says, "my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you." (John 14:27.) Wherever this peace exists, it leaves an influence that is comforting and refreshing to the souls of those who partake of it. It is like the morning dew to the thirsty plant. This peace is the gift of God alone, and it can be received only from him through obedience to his laws. If any man wishes to introduce peace into his family or among his friends, let him cultivate it in his own bosom; for sterling peace can only be had according to the legitimate rule and authority of heaven, and obedience to its laws.—JD, 1:228, April 8, 1853.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] An editorial in the Times and Seasons, March 15, 1844.
[^2] President Taylor appears to accept Aristotle's usage of the term "democracy" (or rule by the demos) on its face, then interprets it for himself in drawing the distinctions made.
[^3] Many have compared Mormon political theory with the movement called Utopian Socialism, often identifying both as parts of a whole upsurge in recent thought. President Taylor distinguishes them, q. v.
[^4] The reader should note that the word, "communism," underwent much popular change after the Marxist manifesto of 1848, and more especially since the Russian Revolution of 1917.
