John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXXI

FRAGMENTS ON POLITICAL AND SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY

RELIGION AND POLITICS [^1]

Church and State, Relationship ofa-Taylor, JohnTPFREEDOM MUST BE PRESERVED.—There are peculiar notions extant in relation to the propriety or impropriety of mixing religion with politics, many of which we consider to be wild and visionary. Having witnessed in the proceedings of some of our old European nations a policy that was dangerous, hurtful, and oppressive in the union of church and state, and seen in them an overgrown oligarchy, proud and arrogant, with a disposition to crush everything that opposed its mandate, we have looked with abhorrence upon the monster, and shrink from the idea of introducing anything that would in the least deprive us of our freedom, or reduce us to a state of religious vassalage. Living under a free republican form of government, sheltered by the rich foliage of the tree of liberty, breathing a pure atmosphere of religious toleration, and basking in the sunbeams of prosperity, we have felt jealous of our rights, and have been always fearful lest some of those eastern blasts should cross the great Atlantic, wither our brightest hopes, nip the tree of liberty in the bud, and that our youthful republic should be prostrated and the funeral dirge be chanted in the "land of the free, and the home of the brave," in consequence of a union between church and state. . . .

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPFITNESS FOR POLITICAL LIFE A DETERMINANT OF RELIGION.—Certainly if any person ought to interfere in political matters, it should be those whose minds and judgments are influenced by correct principles—religious as well as political. Otherwise those persons professing religion would have to be governed by those who make no professions; be subject to their rule; have the law and word of God trampled under foot, and become as wicked as Sodom and as corrupt as Gomorrah, and be prepared for final destruction. We are told "when the wicked rule the people mourn." (D. & C. 98:9.) This we have abundantly proved in the state of Missouri, and having had our fingers once burned, we dread the fire. The cause of humanity, the cause of justice, the cause of freedom, the cause of patriotism, and the cause of God requires us to use our endeavors to put in righteous rulers. Our revelations tell us to seek diligently for good and for wise men. (D. & C. 85:2.)

Politicsa-Taylor, JohnTPLet every man then that hates oppression, and loves the cause of right, not only vote himself but use his influence to obtain the votes of others, that we may by every legal means support that man whose election will secure the greatest amount of good to the nation at large.—TS, 5:470-471, March 15, 1844.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MORMON PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT AND DEMOCRACY [^2]

Democracya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE NEED FOR THE ALMIGHTY.—There is a little difference between our principles, or, I should say, the principles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and what are called democratic principles. Democracy governs by the people alone; and . . . . where the people are pure and living under the influence of correct principles, and are seeking to do right, it is one of the best governments on the earth. But where the people are wicked and corrupt, that alters the case very materially. . . .

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPThere have been a variety of governments on the earth, and very powerful ones too have existed in different ages of the world. Those governments have generally been established and maintained by force of arms—by power. Thus many submit to the few, and the majority have had very little to say in the matter. We have generally been in the habit of supposing that our republican institutions are the most perfect of anything that can exist among men—the ne plus ultra of human government; and hence we have had a very favorite motto ready always upon our tongue's end—Vox populi, vox Dei. I do not believe that the voice of the people is the voice of God, but would ask, is it the northern or southern states that are governed by the Almighty? We have one of the best human governments upon the earth governed by the voice of the people, and yet we are divided, torn asunder, and confused, and appear to be on the eve of having two governments, and both republican in their form. But which of them is governed by God? . . . . The proper mode of government is this—God first speaks, and then the people have their action. It is for them to say whether they will have his dictation or not. They are free; they are independent under God. The government of God is not a species of priestcraft . . . . where one man dictates and everybody obeys without having a voice in it. We have our voice and agency, and act with the most perfect freedom. Still we believe there is a correct order—some wisdom and knowledge somewhere that is superior to ours; that wisdom and knowledge proceeds from God through the medium of the holy priesthood. We believe that no man or set of men, of their own wisdom and by their own talents, are capable of governing the human family aright.—JD, 9:9, April 6, 1861.

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPA THEORY OF THE ORIGIN OF THE SECULAR STATE.—If we look at the very foundation of government, we may inquire, how were governments formed? Who organized them, and whence did they obtain their power? It is a subject for deep thought and reflection, and one that very few have understood; nor is it very easy to define, definitely, the rights of man politically, socially, and nationally.

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPNow, I will suppose there was no government in the world, but that we were thrown right back into the primitive state, and that we had to form a government to regulate ourselves; what would be the position? Why, the strong man would intrude upon the weak, even as a strong animal intrudes upon a weaker, taking from it its rights; for that is a natural animal propensity that exists in all the creatures, as well as in man.

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPHow was society organized? Upon natural principles. I am not now speaking about God and his government, but upon the rights of man. If there were a few bullies in the land, and we had to organize the government anew, the people would combine to protect themselves against them—to protect themselves against those who had injured them, that would rob them of their labor, of their cattle, of their grain, or of anything they might have.

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPWhat would be the result of this course? It would be that a combination would exist that would organize to protect themselves, that the weak might be protected in his rights, that the feeble might not be trampled underfoot. This would be the natural construction and organization of society.

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPVery well; when society became large and extensive, and could not convene in a general assembly to represent themselves, they would send their representatives, who would combine to represent their interests by delegation, or proxy.

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPWho would those individuals represent? They would represent the parties of that neighborhood, of that state, of that country, or district of country that sent them, would they not? And what would you think of those men that were sent if they attempted to rule over those who sent them? Why, you would say, "Come back here, you rascals, and we will send others; we sent you to represent us, and now you are combining to put your feet upon our necks."

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPThis has been the case ever since governments were organized; and hence have arisen governors, kings, and emperors. They have generally contrived to get the reins of power into their own hands; and, through the cunning of priestcraft and kingcraft, they have generally managed to bring the people under their feet and to trample upon their rights. Such has been the case in the nations of Europe and Asia. It is, in fact, the history of the world.—JD, 5:182-183, August 30, 1857.

Governments, Civila-Taylor, JohnTPTHE METHOD OF GOVERNMENT.—What is it that will enable one man to govern his fellows aright? It is just as Joseph Smith said to a certain man who asked him, "How do you govern such a vast people as this?" "Oh," says Joseph, "it is very easy." "Why," says the man, "but we find it very difficult." "But," said Joseph, "it is very easy, for I teach the people correct principles, and they govern themselves." And if correct principles will do this in one family, they will in ten, in a hundred, and in ten hundred thousand. How easy it is to govern the people in this way! It is just like the streams from City Creek; they spread through the valleys and through every lot and piece of lot. So it is with the government of God; the streams of life flow from the Great Fountain through the various channels which the Almighty has opened up, and they spread not only throughout this city but throughout the world, wherever there are any Saints that have yielded obedience to the commandments of God. The fountain is inexhaustible, and the rivers of life flow from the fountain unto the people.—JD, 10:57-58, May 18, 1862.

Agencya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PRINCIPLE OF FREEDOM.—There are two things I have always said I would do, and I mean to carry them out, living or dying. One is to vote for whom I please and the other to worship God as I please. There is a principle of freedom planted in the human mind that has always existed there, and no man nor any power has yet been able to obliterate it.—JD, 14:338, March 3, 1872.

And if we have presidents or apostles or anybody that we don't like, let us vote them out, and be free men, and cultivate and cherish in our bosoms the principles of liberty. But let us be careful that we do not grieve the Spirit of the Lord, and while we are looking at these things let us look at our own eternal interests and lean upon God for wisdom and instruction.—JD, 15:219, October 7, 1872.

EQUAL RIGHTS.—Pursue your own course, worship as you please, do as you please, follow your own inclinations in any other way, only do not interfere with the rights of men nor violate the laws of the land. That is all we ask, and you have full liberty to carry out any views and feelings you please. I remember reading a few lines of some very zealous Protestant who wrote over some public building: "In this place may enter Greek, Jew, or atheist, anything but a papist." Now I say let the papist come in too, the Moslem, the Greek, the Jew, the pagan—believer and unbeliever—the whole world.—JD, 14:341, March 3, 1872.

THE ECONOMIC MOTIVE.—The earth was made for our possession. The lands, water, mountains, valleys, the trees, the minerals, vegetation of all kinds, plants, shrubs, and flowers—all these things were made for the use of man, and it is for us to appropriate them to their proper use, to estimate them to their proper value, and as rational, intelligent, immortal beings, to comprehend the object of the creation of these things, as well as the object of our creation, and why and how, and under what circumstances we can enjoy them, and how long we can retain possession of them. In examining the human mind you will find many correct feelings and instincts planted there, if men would be governed by them. I do not know but it is this the Prophet Job has reference to when he says, "there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8.) Another scripture says, "But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal." (I Cor. 12:7.) But then, many men do not profit by it; and although they have this light or intuition within themselves, they are not governed by it. There is a party of religionists called Quakers, so strongly impregnated with this idea, that they think this inward monitor is sufficient to guide men in all their acts in life. . . .

Who is it that will possess the earth? Is it those ancient monarchs who fought, conquered, subdued, and slew their thousands, waded through seas of blood to gain empire? No, not at all. Is it the man, who, by fraud, deception, trickery, dishonesty, and chicanery, took advantage of those around him, and so amassed large wealth and possessions? Verily no. Who will, then? Let Jesus speak. Says he, "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth." (Matthew 5:5.) They are the ones who will rejoice before God in the possession of the blessings of earth, and not the kings and other characters to whom I have referred.—JD, 15:267-270, January 5, 1873.

A COMPARATIVE APPROACH: MORMONISM AND THE UTOPIAN SOCIALISTS [^3]

It is rather a strange anomaly, particularly in the estimation of the world, that a people so numerous as the Latter-day Saints should be gathered together in one place, having the one faith, and believing in the same doctrines. It is the more strange because there have been various social and political movements, aided by philosophy, established among men in various ages of the world; and almost, if not all of these, have signally failed.

ROBERT D. OWEN.—Among the number of social movements in our day, there is that of Robert Dale Owen, who thought he could ameliorate the condition of mankind by a sort of communism, having a fellowship of goods among them—a sort of common stock principle. Everything pertaining to this speculation, however, has flattened out; and in all his schemes and movements, whether in England or in this country, they have signally failed.

CHARLES FOURIER.—It is so also with Fourierism—a species of French philosophy, established by one Fourier, a Frenchman, and advocated by Greeley of the New York Tribune. They had tried it in France, and then came over to this country; and not far from New York a society of this kind was established. They had a good deal of property, and I am informed they established something of the nature of what is called the free love principle. But within twelve months back, while I was residing in New York, everything they had was sold under the hammer.

ETTIENE CABET.—Mr. Cabet commenced lecturing in France, and had very extensive societies there. About the time we left Nauvoo to come to this land, Mr. Cabet, with a company of his men (the Icarians) came there. This is a species of communism. They are called "communists," believing, with Mr. Owen, in a community of goods. [^4] They published a newspaper in Nauvoo, and one or more in France. I baptized one of their editors while in Paris on my mission—a man who is now in this valley, by the name of Bertrand.

A CONVERSATION WITH AN ICARIAN.—Mr. Krolokoski, who was also an editor of the same paper with Mr. Bertrand, came to me to have a conversation about the first principles of the gospel. After a long conversation, he said, "Mr. Taylor, do you propose no other plan to ameliorate the condition of mankind than that of baptism for the remission of sins?"

I replied—"This is all I propose about the matter."

"Well," he said, "I wish you every success; but I am afraid you will not succeed."

Said I, "Mr. Krolokoski, you sent, some time ago, Mr. Cabet to Nauvoo. He was considered your leader—the most talented man you had. He went to Nauvoo when it was deserted—when houses and lands were at a mere nominal value. He went there with his community at the time we left. Rich farms were deserted, and thousands of us had left our houses and furniture in them, and there was everything that was calculated to promote the happiness of human beings there. Never could a person go to a place under more happy circumstances. Mr. Cabet, to try his experiment, had also the selection in France of whom he pleased. He and his company went to Nauvoo, and what is the result? You have seen the published account in the papers. We were banished from civilized society into the valleys of the Rocky Mountains to seek for that protection among savages which Christian civilization denied us—among the peau rouges, or red skins, as they call them. There our people have built houses, enclosed lands, cultivated gardens, built schoolhouses, opened farms, and have organized a government, and are prospering in all the blessings and immunities of civilized life. Not only this, but they have sent thousands and thousands of dollars over to Europe to assist the suffering poor to go to America, where they might find an asylum. You, on the other hand, that went to our empty houses and farms—you, I say, went there under most favorable circumstances. Now, what is the result? I read in all of your reports from there, published in your own paper in Paris, a continued cry for help. The cry is to you for money, money: 'We want money to help us to carry out our designs.' The society that I represent comes with the fear of God—the worship of the great Elohim. They offer the simple plan ordained of God—viz., repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Our people have not been seeking the influence of the world, nor the power of government, but they have obtained both; whilst you, with your philosophy independent of God, have been seeking to build up a system of communism and a government which is, according to your own accounts, the way to introduce the millennial reign. Now, which is the best—our religion, or your philosophy?"

"Well," said he, "I cannot say anything."

He could not, because these were facts that he was familiar with.

What has become of that society? There are very few of them left. [^5] They have had dissensions, bickerings, trouble, and desertions, until they are nearly dwindled to nothing.

I might enumerate many societies of a similar nature, commenced in different parts of the world and at various times. The results, however, would be proved to be the same: they commenced in the wisdom of man, and ended as speculative bubbles. Truth, based on eternal principles, alone can stand the test.

If Owen, Fourier, Cabet, and other philosophers have failed,—if all the varied schemes of communism have failed—if human philosophy is found to be at fault, and all its plans incompetent, and we have not failed, it shows there is something associated with this people and with Mormonism that there is not with them.—JD, 5:237-238, September 13, 1857.

SOME SOCIAL ETHICS

A PLEA FOR LIBERTY.—We cannot afford to follow after the ways of the gentiles, nor to copy after their illiberality. We want the principles of liberty to extend and to expand so that all men can worship God as they please, without any one to interrupt them.—JD, 26:113, October 20, 1881.

MORALS AND ETHICAL STANDARDS.—We talk sometimes about the world, we Latter-day Saints, and we are very flippant in referring to their follies and foibles. We have enough follies of our own; and I often very much question whether they do not live as near to their religion as we do to ours. "How is that," says one. "We are a much more moral people than they are." We ought to be. We make greater professions than they do. They do not talk about having revelation. They do not talk about having any special mission to the nations of the earth, and we do. They do not talk about any celestial glory, and know nothing about it. We profess to know a little about it. They do not aim at a celestial glory, for they do not know what it is; and we understand a very little about it.

Celestial Lawa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MORMON STANDARD.—One thing we do know; one thing is clearly told us, and that is if we are not governed by the celestial law and cannot abide a celestial law, we cannot inherit a celestial kingdom. What is it to obey a celestial law? Where does the celestial law come from to begin with? From the heavens. Very well. What have the people here to do with it generally—that is, outsiders? Nothing. They do not say they have had any revelation. They have had no principle of that kind unfolded to them. They are living under what might be termed a terrestrial law; and many of them, I think, under the circumstances, do quite as well as we do under our circumstances. We profess to be moving on a more elevated plane than they are. We profess to have come out from the world; to have separated from the ungodly. We profess to be under the guidance of apostles and prophets, pastors and teachers, etc., and to be living under the inspiration of the Most High. They do not profess anything of the kind.

Tolerancea-Taylor, JohnTPTOLERANCE.—These are some of the things we profess to believe in, and some of the things that the world do not believe in. We have, however, enough to do in attending to the duties of our priesthood and calling without troubling ourselves with the follies and foibles of those who are not of us. As I have already said they do not profess what we do. We profess to be governed by high principles and nobler motives, and by more exalted ideas. Let us try and live up to our profession.—JD, 26:324-325, July 20, 1884.

Libertya-Taylor, JohnTPLIBERTY: THE SOCIAL IDEAL.—I say unto you, continue to cherish those principles [of liberty]. Let them expand. And if the tree of liberty has been blasted in this nation—if it has been gnawed by worms, and already blight has overspread it, we will stand up in defense of our liberties, and proclaim ourselves free in time and in eternity.—DHC, 6:296, Nauvoo, April Conference, 1844.

Libertya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MORMON DOCTRINE OF GROUP RIGHTS OR POLITICALRELIGIOUS PLURALISM. [^6]—I want to talk about a principle here. We get up sometimes a very rash feeling against people who do not think as we do. They have a right to think as they please; and so have we. Therefore, if a man does not believe as I do, that is none of my business. And if I do not believe as he does, that is none of his business. Would you protect a man that did not believe as you do? Yes, to the last bat's end. He should have equal justice with me; and then I would expect to be protected in my rights. We have in Salt Lake City, Methodists, Presbyterians, Baptists, Roman Catholics, and all kinds. Do we interfere with them? No, not at all. . . . I would not wish to interfere with their political rights, nor have them interfere with mine. I think that is correct doctrine. It is good democracy and good republicanism which we can all subscribe to.—JD, 26:111, October 20, 1881.

Libertya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE RIGHT TO PROSELYTE. [^7]—But what have we to do with the people of the world? We complain sometimes that they do not treat us exactly right. Well, they do not in all respects, and I do not think this is very difficult to understand. But there is nothing new about that; God has revealed unto us his law, and they do not comprehend it, neither do they want to; nor did the antediluvians. They were very wicked, very corrupt, and very depraved, very immoral, and very dishonest. But that was a matter between them and the Lord, and he dealt with them. And it is his business to deal with the nations of the earth at the present time and not ours, further than we are directed by him. What is the mission that we have to perform to this nation? It is to preach the gospel.—JD, 23:260, October 8, 1882.

Ziona-Taylor, JohnTPI repeat, our mission is to preach the gospel, and then to gather the people who embrace it. And why? That there might be a nucleus formed, a people gathered who would be under the inspiration of the Almighty, and who would be willing to listen to the voice of God, a people who would receive and obey his word when it was made known to them. And this people in their gathered condition are called Zion, or the pure in heart.—JD, 23:260-262, October 8, 1882.

Children of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPWHO ARE THE WORLD?—Who are the world, as we sometimes denominate those that are not of our Church? The children of our Heavenly Father, for God, we are told, "has made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;

Children of Goda-Taylor, JohnTP"That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us." (Acts 17:26, 27.)—JD, 23:369-370, February 11, 1883.

Tolerancea-Taylor, JohnTP"A MAN'S HOUSE IS HIS CASTLE."—"But do you not allow liberty of conscience?" Yes. You can worship what you please—a donkey or a red dog—but you must not bring that worship into my house. I do not believe in your gods; I believe in the God of Israel, in the Holy Ghost, in the spirit of truth and intelligence, and all good principles and if you want to worship your gods, worship them somewhere else. And if anybody else wants to worship them, he can do so. You can go on to one of those mountains and worship your gods, or if you are living in a house here, you can be a worshipper of Buddha if you please; but I do not want it in my house, and I do not want the spirit that you have—the spirit of those gods, visible or invisible. I do not want their teachings, spirit, nor influences. . . . I want to know who dances with my . . . . daughters, and whether they have a reputation or not, and if they have reputation, what kind of people they are. This I have a right to do in a social capacity, independent of all religion, and I mean to do it.

Tolerancea-Taylor, JohnTPSOME PRACTICAL ETHICS.—I will now turn the tables another way round. Did you ever see any of the elders of this church out abroad among the nations try to crowd themselves upon any people, and seek to go into their balls and assemblies, or families, contrary to rule and to the principles laid down? No, never. Did you ever hear of them wanting to take their daughters to balls and parties, etc. No, never. We claim the same kind of treatment. . . .—JD, 11:58-59, January 18, 1865.

Religiona-Taylor, JohnTPRELIGION AND INDIVIDUAL TESTIMONY.—If it was not for the religion I profess, which gives me to know something about the matter, by revelation, for myself, I would not have anything to do with religion at all. I would worship God the best way I knew how, and act justly and honorably with my neighbor; which I believe thousands of that class of men called infidels do at the present day. But I never would submit to be gulled with the nonsense that exists in the world, under the name of religion.—JD, 1:150, 151, June 12, 1853.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] An editorial in the Times and Seasons, March 15, 1844.
[^2] President Taylor appears to accept Aristotle's usage of the term "democracy" (or rule by the demos) on its face, then interprets it for himself in drawing the distinctions made.
[^3] Many have compared Mormon political theory with the movement called Utopian Socialism, often identifying both as parts of a whole upsurge in recent thought. President Taylor distinguishes them, q. v.
[^4] The reader should note that the word, "communism," underwent much popular change after the Marxist manifesto of 1848, and more especially since the Russian Revolution of 1917.
[^5] 5. The last Icarian community expired in Iowa in 1895. See C. C. Maxey, Political Philosophies, (N. Y., MacMillan Co., 1938) p. 528. See his Chapter 28 for an account of the Utopian Socialists.
[^6] 6. Political philosophers could call this a doctrine of "pluarlism," hence the heading above. Pluralism is the peculiar development and inheritance of the American political tradition. President Taylor expressed and developed this theory, throughout his entire life. He deserves a permanent place among American political theorists. The entire defense of the Mormon position resolves itself into the advocacy of a liberal doctrine of pluralism. Otherwise it becomes a stilted separatism.
[^7] 7. In the development of American pluralism, the freedom for groups to organize developed first, its history commencing roughly with Roger Williams' exile from Massachusetts. The continuing process was to see the slow recognition accorded organized groups, to proselyte their views freely and attract membership. Like the former, this right, as witnessed by the experience of Mormons, Quakers, Catholics, Jehovah's Witnesses, women, labor, negroes—is still in process of development.
