John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXXII

FAITH, TRIALS, AND PERSECUTION

THE POWER OF FAITH

Hopea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE HOPE BUOYANT.—Good men have had to endure affliction, privations, trials, and sorrow, it is true. Abraham had to pass through afflictions that were harrowing to his feelings. Men of God have had to wander about in sheep skins and goatskins, and been considered the scum and offscourings of society by men who understood not their relationship to God. They appeared destitute, but were, in reality, not. They had a hope that was buoyant, and looked for a city that had foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Events of a similar kind have transpired among us.—JD, 8:97, June 17, 1860.

Work of the LordFaitha-Taylor, JohnTPIF MEN WOULD BE VALIANT.—Don't you know how men will twist and pick and cringe to get hold of a dollar or two? If men would be as valiant in trying to pray to God to give them wisdom and power to control themselves and their thoughts and passions, then in all their business transactions, they would feel that they know themselves to be accepted of the Almighty. They would feel and know that they had ears to hear and hearts to understand and comprehend the mind and will of God. They would then feel ten thousand times more interest in the kingdom and to work for the spread of true and holy principles, and in all things pertaining to the great work in which they are engaged, than in those little temporal matters.—JD, 10:55, May 18, 1862.

Faitha-Taylor, JohnTPFAITH, THE GIFT AND FIRST PRINCIPLE OF GOD.—We are informed in scripture that faith is the gift of God, and we have endeavored to show . . . . that all and every species of the animal creation share in this inestimable gift or blessing. Well, says one, we have always been taught by our fathers and ministers to have faith, and we should be saved; but according to your reasoning, not only mankind, whether good or bad, but all the animal creation, will be saved.

Faitha-Taylor, JohnTPYes, this would be true, if faith alone was required, and that, too, unqualified. But if we examine the scriptures with reference to this, we will find that neither is the case. If we examine the plan of salvation, taught by Jesus and his apostles, as recorded in the New Testament, we shall find that faith is the first principle in that plan instituted by the Almighty for all who should come up to its requirements. And if we examine still further, we find that faith essentially qualified. Instead of faith to accomplish any of those objects we have named, unqualifiedly, we are pointed directly to Jesus Christ as the only object through which our faith will avail us in the least towards being saved in the celestial kingdom of God. . . . Here, then, is the line of distinction drawn between those who have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, on the one hand, and the unbelieving among mankind, and the inferior brute creation which are not capable of receiving the gospel, on the other. This faith, then, is a different kind, if you please, a qualified faith, while the other is unqualified. Of the latter there is an abundance, and of the former there is very little lack, if we judge by the professions of men, but judging by their fruits, which is the scripture rule, there is much room for improvement.

HOW FAITH COMES.—The Savior told his apostles on one occasion, when they had not faith sufficient to cast out devils, that that kind by which he accomplished it came only by fasting and prayer. How does the faith required as the first principle in the plan of salvation or gospel come? Let Paul answer: "So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Romans 10:17.) It is not the letter then that bringeth faith, but hearing the word of God dispensed by a living oracle or minister of God, clothed upon with power from on high. It is not a recorded gospel, but the preached word which emanates with power from a man of God inspired by the Holy Ghost. . . .

Faith and Worksa-Taylor, JohnTPFaith without works being dead, it is evident that living faith and that which is acceptable to God, is that which not only believes in God, but acts upon that belief. It is not only the cause of action, but includes both cause and action. Or in other words it is belief or faith made perfect by works. . . .—The Mormon, New York, August 25, 1855, Vol. 1, No. 27.

TRIALS AND PERSECUTIONS

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPBETTER TO SUFFER WRONG THAN TO DO WRONG.—Remember that it is a great deal better to suffer wrong than to do wrong. We have enlisted in this kingdom for the purpose of working righteousness, growing up in righteousness and in purity that we might have a heaven in our families, in our city and neighborhoods, a Zion right in our midst, live in it ourselves, and persuade everybody else to abide its holy laws.—JD, 10:56, May 18, 1862.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPA PHILOSOPHY FOR TRIALS.—So far as I am concerned, I say, let everything come as God has ordained it. I do not desire trials. I do not desire affliction. I would pray to God to "lead me not in temptation, and deliver me from evil; for thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory." But if the earthquake bellows, the lightnings flash, the thunders roll, and the powers of darkness are let loose, and the spirit of evil is permitted to rage, and an evil influence is brought to bear on the Saints, and my life with theirs is put to the test, let it come, for we are the Saints of the most High God, and all is well, all is peace, all is right, and will be, both in time and in eternity.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPBut I do not want trials. I do not want to put a straw in anybody's way; and, if I know my own feelings, I do not want to hurt any man under the heavens, nor injure the hair of any person's head. I would like to do every man good. These are the feelings, the spirit which the gospel has implanted in my bosom, and that the Spirit of God implants in the bosoms of my brethren. And if men will pursue an improper course, the evil of course, must be on their own heads.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPI used to think, if I were the Lord, I would not suffer people to be tried as they are. But I have changed my mind on that subject. Now I think I would, if I were the Lord, because it purges out the meanness and corruption that stick around the Saints, like flies around molasses.—JD, 5:114-115, August 9, 1857.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SPIRIT OF JOB.—I remember hearing a woman say in Missouri, "I'll be damned if I will stand it any longer; for this is the fifth house the mob have burned down for me in less than two years." Job did not feel so. He was indeed severely tried, but when he came down to sober reflection, he said in his heart: the Sabeans may take my asses, and the Chaldeans may fall upon my servants and kill them and steal my sheep, and my house be thrown down with the storm, and I may lie in the ashes, and men that I would not associate with the dogs of my flocks may wear away my life, and my body may go to dust; yet, though worms prey upon it, in my flesh shall I see God. Naked I came into the world, and naked I shall go out: blessed be the name of the Lord.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPWas not this a good feeling to manifest? Let us try to imitate it and acknowledge the chastening rod of the Almighty.—JD, 7:198, November 13, 1859.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPI have seen men tempted so sorely that finally they would say, "I'll be damned if I'll stand it any longer." Well, you will be damned if you do not. So you had better bear it and go to the Lord and say, O God, I am sorely tempted; Satan is trying to destroy me, and things seem to be combined against me. O Lord, help me! Deliver me from the power and grasp of the devil. Let thy Spirit descend upon me that I may be enabled to surmount this temptation and to ride above the vanities of this world. This would be far better than giving way to sin, and proving yourself unworthy of the association of the good and pure.—JD, 22:318, October 19, 1881.

PURPOSE OF ORDEAL.—There are many of our good Latter-day Saints who are grasping and covetous and who take advantage of one another, and who frequently act dishonorably and who say things that are improper and wrong, and that are contrary to the principles of justice and equity; and sometimes it is necessary that men should be shaken up a little. God in his wisdom has handled us from time to time. I can see men around me tonight whom I have seen and known for forty years—do you remember, brethren, when we had to leave the state of Missouri, "all hands and the cook?" And did we cry about it? I think not. I felt as happy then as I do now, and I feel quite comfortable tonight. . . .

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPWe have learned many things through suffering. We call it suffering. I call it a school of experience. I never did bother my head much about these things. I do not today. What are these things for? Why is it that good men should be tried? Why is it, in fact, that we should have a devil? Why did not the Lord kill him long ago? Because he could not do without him. He needed the devil and a great many of those who do his bidding just to keep men straight, that we may learn to place our dependence upon God, and trust in him, and to observe his laws, and keep his commandments. When he destroyed the inhabitants of the antediluvian world, he suffered a descendant of Cain to come through the flood in order that he might be properly represented upon the earth. And Satan keeps busy all the time, and he will until he is bound; and I expect they will then have good times until he is loose again. The time will be when he will be cast into the bottomless pit, and he will not be able to deceive the nations any more until the thousand years have expired. I have never looked at these things in any other light than trials for the purpose of purifying the Saints of God, that they may be, as the scriptures say, as gold that has been seven times purified by the fire.—JD, 23:336, October 29, 1882.

Apostasy of Individualsa-Taylor, JohnTPAPOSTASY.—We have met on the road a great many apostates. I do not want to say much about them. If they can be happy, all right. But they do not exhibit it. When a man deserts from the gospel, from the ordinances, from the priesthood and its authority, from the revelations of the Spirit of God, from the spirit of prophecy, from that sweet, calm influence that broods over the upright man in all his acts, he loses the blessing of God and falls back into error; and, as the scripture says, the last state of that man is worse than the first. (Compare Matthew 12:45.)

It has become proverbial, where apostate Mormons live, to say, "Oh, he is only an apostate Mormon." They look upon them as ten times meaner than a Mormon.

I happened to go into a barber's shop, one day, to get shaved. A man came in, and when he went out again the inquiry was made, "Who is that man?" "Oh, he is only an apostate Mormon." Their mouths are full of cursing; and you will find them chewing tobacco and getting drunk, thinking that, by so doing, they will recommend themselves to the people. But they have not learned the art very well. They can't swear and degrade themselves so naturally as others, and the people find them out and repudiate them. . . . Where is their hope of salvation?—JD, 5:115, August 9, 1857.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPGOD WILL HAVE A CONTROVERSY WITH THE NATIONS.—We complain sometimes about our trials. We need not do that. These are things that are necessary for our perfection. We think sometimes that we are not rightly treated, and I think we think correctly about some of these things. We think there are plots set on foot to entrap us; and I think we think so very correctly. At the same time we need not be astonished at these things. We need not be amazed at a feeling of hatred and animosity. Why? Because we are living in a peculiar day and age of the world, which is distinctively called the latter days, wherein it is said that God will have a controversy with the nations of the earth.—JD, 25:344, October 19, 1884.

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTP"LET THE CONSEQUENCE FOLLOW."—If you have got a religion that is different from that of other people, won't they persecute you? Yes, but what of that? We dare to have a religion of our own. Years ago we dared to have faith for ourselves, and to come forth amongst the contumely of the world and to say we were Saints, and that we had taken upon us the name of Jesus Christ, and were resolved to fulfil the obligations which the Church of Christ had imposed upon us. This we felt years and years ago. Did we experience it? Certainly. Men would persecute us, laugh at us, and deprive us of our happiness if they could. A great many influences were brought to bear against us. Well, now, is it consistent that all the churches that are spoken of in the Book of Mormon as well as in the Bible, that have been and still are being built up to get gain, and for the purpose of keeping hordes of men living upon the people in comparative idleness—I ask is it reasonable that all these systems and organizations of men will give up without a struggle? I tell you, nay. If such be the position of the religious world, I would further ask, is it reasonable that the political powers of the earth will give up without a struggle? It would be at variance with history, with scripture and prophecy, and human nature, and contrary to anything we ever heard of. The question may be asked, then, what shall we do; yield to the prejudices and diction of men or to the laws of God? The poet says:—"Do what is right, let the consequence follow." This is the duty of the Latter-day Saints in their attempts and endeavors to build up Zion, and not to ask any questions as to what men may think of us or our acts, that we, as a people, this nation and the world, are in the hands of God.—JD, 9:340-341, April 13, 1862.
