John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXXIII

SOME PRACTICAL ADVICE

SOME ETHICS OF "THE KINGDOM"

"THE MYSTERIES."—I have never said much about the beasts, etc., in my preaching. When I have done it, it has been to attract attention and keep the people from running after a greater fool than myself.—DHC, 5:345, April 8, 1843.

"THE ELEVENTH COMMANDMENT."—There are more people attending to the eleventh commandment in the city of Nauvoo than in any other place of the same size on the globe—that is they mind their own business in Nauvoo, without interfering with others.—Nauvoo Neighbor, April 7, 1845.

Agencya-Taylor, JohnTPFREE AGENCY.—Would you allow everybody to worship as he pleases? Certainly. What? If you knew he was in error? Certainly. I would not wish to control the human mind. I would not control the actions of men. God does not do it, he leaves them to their own agency to combat with the trials, temptations, adversities, and evils of every kind that are in the world, to which humanity is, or can be incident. He puts within their reach, however, certain principles and would like to lead them to himself if they would be led. If not, he then does the very best with them that he can.—JD, 21:16, February 8, 1880.

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPSUPREMACY OF GOD'S LAWS.—We have been brought up in the world, and have imbibed many ideas in common with mankind generally pertaining to commerce, trade, and manufactures. But we need the inspiration of the Almighty in all of the affairs of life, for we profess emphatically to be the people of God, and as it is with us in our religion so it ought to be with our politics, our trade, and manufactures. They ought, in all things, to be subservient to one grand principle, and that is the acknowledgment of God and his laws.—JD, 21:30, April 9, 1879.

Dependencea-Taylor, JohnTPDEPENDENCE ON THE LORD.—I desire your faith and prayers, for we are all dependent upon the Lord; none of us can do or say anything that is good or useful or beneficial to society unless we are under the aid, guidance, and control of the Lord. A man cannot speak aright unless he speaks under the inspiration of the Almighty; and then the people cannot hear aright, nor understand aright unless they have a portion of the same Spirit.—JD, 21:91-92, April 13, 1879.

Judging Othersa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE USES OF CRITICISM.—Suppose there are some who do not do exactly right in some places, what of that? There are many things that are not right. Never mind. Everything that is wrong will in due time be righted. Permit me to bring a figure before you. A year ago last winter there was a very severe frost, and it injured the fruit trees. Some who professed to be judges thought it best to cut down the peach trees. Some thought that if left alone they would still grow, and therefore they left them alone to see how many would live. There was quite a difference of opinion upon the subject, and some adopted one plan, and some another. The general impression was, I believe, that it would be best to cut off those limbs that were frost-bitten and that did not appear to have much sap in them.

Judging Othersa-Taylor, JohnTPNow, my doctrine is, prune the trees, or, in other words, the branches of the great tree to which we are connected, just at the time when it will do the least injury. It requires great wisdom, however, to prune and regulate the Church of Christ. There were a great many of our people got frost-bitten—a kind of dead in their spirits, and some were for going right to work and pruning. But hold on. Said Jesus, the wheat and tares must grow together until harvest. Perhaps you would pull up the wheat with the tares, if you were to do it when you think best. If there is nothing good in a man, he will by and by develop the evil that is in him, and then everybody will agree that the pruning ought to be done, and the branch ought to be cut off. But if the good preponderates, it would be wrong, because of prejudice or ignorance, to destroy the good. It is best to leave it to the husbandman, and then all the congregation will say Amen.—JD, 9:13-14, April 6, 1861.

Contentiona-Taylor, JohnTPFELLOWSHIP AND FORGIVENESS.—Talking about people giving away to passion and giving expression to hard words. Such things do not belong to the gospel, to no part of it. They come from beneath. This has been pointed out and made very plain to us. Every spirit, says one, that tends to good is of God; and every spirit that tends to evil is of the wicked one and comes from beneath. I hear a man say sometimes, "I hate such a man." Why, I do not know of a person that I hate in the world. The command is to love one another. When Jesus was about to leave his disciples, the burden of his prayer was, "Father, I pray for these whom thou hast given me; thine they were, and thou gavest them me. I pray for them, Father, that they may be one, even as I and thou art one, that they may be one in us." (Compare John 17:20-23.) What, a sister or brother, a citizen of the kingdom of God, a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one who has received peradventure of the ordinances of the house of God, and who expects to associate with the Saints of God, quarrels with his brother about peanuts and baby toys and then talk about your honor being infringed upon! I tell you if you take care of yourselves, your honor will take care of itself and you need not be concerned about it.

Restitutiona-Taylor, JohnTPTreat one another aright. Have you sinned one against another? Then go and make restitution. Have you defrauded one another? Go and make it right. Have you spoken unkindly to your brother or sister? Then go and acknowledge your wrong and ask to be forgiven, promising to do better in the future. And then he or she might say, on the other hand, "Yes, and I said so and so the other day, won't you please forgive me?" How much better and how much more in keeping with the calling of a saint of God such a course would be than to harbor hard feelings in the heart.—JD, 21:98-99, April 13, 1879.

Gospel Livinga-Taylor, JohnTPSOME ADVICE IN 1871.—I will tell you what we have to do as Latter-day Saints—live our religion, keep the commandments of God, and be virtuous. . . . Remember your prayers, be true and faithful to each other and to your covenants, keep the commandments of the Almighty, and the blessings of Israel's God will rest upon you, and no power this side of hell or the other side either shall harm you.—JD, 14:269, December 17, 1871.

Tolerancea-Taylor, JohnTPA LESSON IN TOLERANCE.—We talk sometimes about Babylon—"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." (Revelation 18:4.) We need not say too much about those people, for we came out from them ourselves and it would not be becoming on our part to speak badly about our former status.—JD, 23:262, October 8, 1882.

Sabbath Daya-Taylor, JohnTPSABBATH OBSERVANCE.—I call upon you, ye Latter-day Saints, to repent of your iniquities, and keep the Sabbath day holy, set it aside as a day of rest, a day of meeting together to perform your sacraments and listen to the words of life, and thus be found keeping the commandments, and setting a good example before your children.—JD, 20:23-24, July 7, 1878.

Enjoymenta-Taylor, JohnTPAMUSEMENTS.—We have given the religious world a lesson upon this point. We have shown that social enjoyment and amusements are not incompatible with correct conduct and true religion. Instead of forbidding the theatre and placing it under ban, it has been the aim of the Latter-day Saints to control it and keep it free from impure influences, and to preserve it as a place where all could meet for the purpose of healthful enjoyment.—Epistle of the First Presidency, April 8, 1887.

Tobaccoa-Taylor, JohnTPCIGARETS.—There is a tendency, almost amounting to an epidemic in some places, among the young people to indulge in cigaret smoking. The habit is filthy, and pernicious generally. God has spoken so plainly on this subject that there is no room to question the impropriety of this practice. The teachers should make it their especial business in all kindness and in a mild instructive spirit to reason and remonstrate with young people upon this habit. Every effort should be made to check its growth among us.—Epistle of the First Presidency, April 8, 1887.

WHAT SHOULD MEN SEEK?

Worldlinessa-Taylor, JohnTPSEEK YE FIRST THE KINGDOM OF GOD.—I think it foolishness in men to seek after the things of this world and place their affections on them. I see men, and I have seen a great many men in my time, grasping after the world, and they sometimes will succeed in gathering considerable together; and when they have gathered it, they would fold their arms and say, Soul, take thine ease; eat, drink and be merry, for I have much good laid up in store; I am not dependent on any man, soul, take thine ease. That man hears a little whisper; the finger of God is laid upon him, and this whisper says, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and then, whose shall these things be that thou possessest? Who shall have them then? O, I will leave them to my children! But somebody may cheat them out of it.

Worldlinessa-Taylor, JohnTPIt is a very difficult thing for people to leave things for their children, and have things done just as they wish, there being so many people to interrupt and grasp after this world's goods, righteously or unrighteously. What a fool to gather large possessions, and now only to occupy a few feet of mother earth. . . . While it is proper for us to seek after everything that is right and honorable, on the other hand it is quite as right and very proper that we should set God before us all the time and render obedience to his law, so that we may acquire an eternal inheritance in the kingdom of God. God is now establishing his kingdom upon the earth. If it is the kingdom of God, and he is establishing it, he expects us to be subject to his law, and to be governed by it, and to keep his commandments.—JD, 5:112, August 9, 1857.

Peacea-Taylor, JohnTPPEACE.—Peace is the gift of God. Do you want peace? Go to God. Do you want peace in your families? . . . . If you do, live your religion, and the very peace of God will dwell and abide with you, for that is where peace comes from and it doesn't dwell anywhere else. We had peace societies in the world, it is true, for many years, but what have they done? Simply nothing. But peace is good, and I say seek for it, cherish it in your bosoms, in your neighborhoods, and wherever you go among your friends and associates, for they are good principles and dwell in the bosom of God, and if we only get that peace that dwells in the bosom of God all will be right.—JD, 10:56, May 18, 1862.

Union, virtue, and perseverance, will prepare the way for the millennium.—TS, 6:840, March 15, 1845.

Work of the Lorda-Taylor, JohnTPPROMOTE HAPPINESS.—Then, lay aside your covetousness. That is idolatry. And while laboring to be industrious, do not covet any man's house, nor his farm, nor anything that is his; nor defraud one another, nor bite nor devour one another. But love one another, and work the works of righteousness, and look after the welfare of all, and seek to promote the happiness of all. That is what God is doing. That is why he has told us to go to the nations of the earth—and many of us have been hundreds and thousands of miles without purse or scrip.—JD, 26:113, October 20, 1881.

Destinya-Taylor, JohnTPDESTINY AND WILL.—Are we not the framers of our own destiny? Are we not the arbitrators of our fate? This is another part of my text, and I argue from it that it is our privilege to determine our own exaltation or degradation. It is our privilege to determine our own happiness or misery in the world to come. What is it that brings happiness now—that makes us so joyous in our assembling together? It is not wealth; for you may pour wealth, honor, influence, and all the luxuries of this world into the lap of man; and, destitute of the Spirit of God, he will not be happy, for that is the only source from which true happiness and comfort can come.

Destinya-Taylor, JohnTPIf I am doing right, I am preparing for thrones, principalities, and dominions, resolved by the help of God that no man shall rob me of my crown. With this view of the subject, all the outward circumstances of this life do not trouble me.

Desiresa-Taylor, JohnTPI know it is the case that many men would like to have everything they can desire or think of. And I used to think, if I were the Lord, I would give the people everything they wanted—all the money, all the honor, all the riches, and all the splendor their hearts could desire. But experience and observation have caused me to change my mind, for I know that such policy would not be good for the human family.—JD, 8:100, June 17, 1860.

Rightsa-Taylor, JohnTPRIGHTS.—There was a time when I thought I had a great many rights of my own, but now I have got to understand that I have all the rights that God will give me, and I don't want to have any more. I want to live in the light of his countenance, to ask him to give me his Spirit, and then I know I shall prosper. When you feel like talking about your rights, let me advise you to go into your closet, forget your imaginary rights, and ask the Lord to give you wisdom to guide you aright, that you may act before him as children of the light, and not be the means of throwing a stumbling block in the way of others. By pursuing this course, you will get along much easier, and there will not be nearly so much of that spirit of grumbling and complaining.—JD, 9:13, April 6, 1861.

Virtuea-Taylor, JohnTPVIRTUE.—Virtue does not consist simply in being prevented from committing evils, but in having temptations presented before us and then governing our passions and appetites.—JD, 22:339, January 1, 1882.

Wisdoma-Taylor, JohnTPHe that makes a pin, does more than he who commands armies; and he that invents a new thing for the benefit of man, should be honored more than a king. Wisdom is better than wealth. To be great, be good; to be rich, be contented; and to be respected, respect yourself.—Nauvoo Neighbor, August 21, 1844.

Happinessa-Taylor, JohnTPA PHILOSOPHY OF HAPPINESS.—As we travel along through what is sometimes called this "vale of tears," there are many thoughts that occupy our minds and many subjects for reflection present themselves, sometimes concerning the living and sometimes concerning the dead. However, it is with the living that we have to do at the present time, and it is "life and the pursuit of happiness" that ought to occupy the attention of all intellectual beings. Mankind have various views and ideas in relation to the attainment of happiness upon the earth, and also after we leave the earth, and those views and ideas that are entertained by us in relation to these matters influence, to a greater or less extent, our actions and proceedings in life.

Happinessa-Taylor, JohnTPWe look at things through another medium, and judge of them from another standpoint, than which they are generally viewed by the inhabitants of the earth. We look upon it that the greatest happiness that we can attain to is in securing the approbation of our Heavenly Father, in fearing God, in being made acquainted with his laws—with the principles of eternal truth, and with those things that we consider will best promote not only our temporal, but our eternal happiness.—JD, 11:87, March 5, 1865.

SOME FAVORITE SAYINGS [^1]

Money is of little importance where truth is concerned.

If a thing is done well, no one will ask how long it took to do it, but, who did it?

I would rather have God for my friend than all other influences and powers outside.

Never do an act that you would be ashamed of man knowing, for God sees us always, both day and night, and if we expect to live and reign with him in eternity, we ought to do nothing that will disgrace us in time.

Man, Potential of, to Become Like Heavenly Fathera-Taylor, JohnTPIt is the crowns, the principalities, the powers, the thrones, the dominions, and the associations with the Gods that we are after, and we are here to prepare ourselves for these things—this is the main object of existence.

I would rather trust in the living God than in any other power on earth.

We should be strictly honest, one with another, and with all men; let our word always be as good as our bond; avoid all ostentation of pride and vanity; and be meek, lowly, and humble; be full of integrity and honor; and deal justly and righteously with all men; and have the fear and love of God continually before us, and seek for the comforting influence of the Holy Ghost to dwell with us.

Eternal Lifea-Taylor, JohnTPI pray God the Eternal Father that when we have all finished our probation here, we may be presented to the Lord without spot or blemish, as pure and honorable representatives of the church and kingdom of God on the earth, and then inherit a celestial glory in the kingdom of our God, and enjoy everlasting felicity with the pure and just in the realms of eternal day, through the merits and atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, in worlds without end.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These were all contemporary groups, associated in the public mind with violent methods.
