John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXXIV

THE PROSPECT AND THE FUTURE

THE CONTEMPORARY SCENE

HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF.—We have noticed some things . . . . wherein the world are at fault, because of their lack of experience. Take, for instance, one half of the world, I mean China, and the great majority in Europe. Notice their position at the present time, and can any of you point out a remedy that will restore amity and peace among them? Is there a master mind, or spirit—a man possessed of sufficient intelligence to walk forth among the nations of Europe and say to the hydra-headed monster, "War, lie still and be thou quiet?" Is there a man who can go into China and do the same thing, and straighten out the snarled condition of the world?

Let us come nearer home. Can any of you regulate the affairs of this nation and put them right? I do not believe you can; and if you cannot do such small things that are associated with time, things that we can see, know, and understand, how are you going to put in order the things of God? How are you going to order ends that are to come? To know what will be the best course to pursue when the nations shall be convulsed, thrones cast down, and empires destroyed; when nation shall rusb madly upon nation, and human blood shall flow as rivers of water? What would we do in such circumstances? Some people have thought we were in a dreadful condition when the Indian difficulties were among us in these mountains, and our distant neighbors have been surprised how we have existed; but what would you think if you were in some of the European nations at the present time? Suppose you were one of the kings of those nations, or one of the counselors, and some of the largest nations should undertake to command you to supply a number of men to help fight their battles, and you would say, "We wish to remain neutral." The reply would be, "But we will make you fight, and if you do not do it we will exterminate you to begin with." Suppose you were in a position like that.

I think we are no worse off in these mountains, than the world are. We may be in some circumstances, but in many other respects we are much better off than they. I think our young men, for instance, would think it very hard if they were obliged to spend from three to five years in soldiering in times of peace, which they have to do in many nations of Europe, or bring a substitute to go in their place. I think sometimes we might be a great deal worse off than we are, and I think it is necessary men should be tried in order that they may be proved, and that they may know themselves; and that some should be destroyed, as they have been on this continent, or on the other. It is all in the wise providence of God; life and death are of little moment to him. It is a matter of great importance to know the truth, and obey it, to have the privilege of learning his will, at the mouths of the servants of God, and then to have the privilege of doing it unmolested, no matter what it is, whether to live or die, or whatever course we may have to pursue. I think it is a great privilege for us to be associated with the kingdom of God.—JD, 1:373-374, April 19, 1854.

A SURVEY, FORECAST, AND PROPHECY OF 1882.—We have peacefully, legally, and honorably possessed our lands in these valleys of the mountains, and we have purchased and paid for them. We do not revel in any ill-gotten gain. These lands are ours. We have complied with all the requisitions of law pertaining thereto, and we expect to possess and inhabit them. We covet no man's silver or gold, or apparel, or wife, or servants, or flocks, or herds, or horses, or carriages, or lands, or possessions. But we expect to maintain our own rights. If we are crowded upon by unprincipled men or inimical legislation, we shall not take the course pursued by the lawless, the dissolute, and the unprincipled. We shall not have recourse to the dynamite of the Russian nihilists, the secret plans and machinations of the communists, the boycotting and threats of the Fenians, the force and disorder of the Jayhawkeers, the regulators or the Molly Maguires, [^1] nor any other secret or illegal combination; but we still expect to possess and maintain our rights, but to obtain them in a legal, peaceful, and maintain our rights, but to obtain them in a legal, peaceful, and constitutional manner. . . .

A terrible day of reckoning is approaching the nations of the earth; the Lord is coming out of his hiding place to vex the inhabitants thereof; and the destroyer of the gentiles, as prophesied of, is already on his way. Already the monarchs of the earth are trembling from conspiracies among their own people. . . . Already have two of the presidents of this republic been laid low by the hands of the assassin; and the spirit of insubordination, misrule, lynching, and mobocracy of every kind is beginning to ride rampant through the land. Already combinations are being entered into which are very ominous for the future prosperity, welfare, and happiness of this great republic. The volcanic fires of disordered and anarchical elements are beginning to manifest themselves and exhibit the internal forces that are at work among the turbulent and unthinking masses of the people.—JD, 23:61-63, April 9, 1882.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ORDER OF GOD.—There may be circumstances arise in this world to pervert for a season the order of God, to change the designs of the Most High, apparently, for the time being. Yet they will ultimately roll back into their proper place—justice will have its place, and so will mercy, and every man and woman will yet stand in their true position before God. . . .—JD, 1:222-223, April 8, 1853.

Trialsa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE JUDGMENTS BEGIN AT THE HOUSE OF GOD.—We have received his guidance and instruction. It is for us now to go on from truth to truth, from intelligence to intelligence, and from wisdom to wisdom. And while nations shall crumble and thrones be cast down, and the God of heaven arise and shake terribly the earth, while the elements melt with fervent heat in fulfilment of ancient as well as modern prophecy; while these things are going on he will whisper, peace to Zion. But the judgments will begin at the house of God. We have to pass through some of these things, but it will only be a very little compared with the terrible destruction, the misery, and suffering that will overtake the world who are doomed to suffer the wrath of God. It behooves us, as the saints of God, to stand firm and faithful in the observance of his laws, that we may be worthy of his preserving care and blessing.—JD, 21:100, April 13, 1879.

Eternal Lifea-Taylor, JohnTPTHE KINGDOM IS ONWARD.—God is with us and will be with us, and will sustain us, and no power on earth or in hell can stop the progress of this work; for it is onward according to the decree of Almighty God, and will be from this time henceforth and forever. And as the prophets have said, so say I, woe to those men and woe to that nation or to those nations that lift up their hands against Zion, for God will destroy them. I prophesy that in the name of the Lord God of hosts. And he will be with his Israel, and will sustain his people and bring them off victorious; and if faithful to the end, we shall obtain thrones, principalities, powers, dominions, exaltations, and eternal lives in the kingdom of our God.—JD, 23:179-180, July 24, 1882.

FUTURE EVENTS

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Taylor, JohnTPTHE COMING SCENE.—In relation to the events to come, they will be developed just as fast as we are prepared for them, and I fear faster. Will God operate upon the Lamanites, and fulfil his word to the Jews? Yes. Will he gather the ten tribes? Yes.

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Taylor, JohnTPWill he establish his name and kingdom in the earth? Yes. Will he overthrow the wicked nations that fight against him? Yes, and he will continue to extend his principles and power until "the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ." (Revelation 11:15.) God will have his laws honored, and in his time his decrees must be consummated, until every tongue confess and every knee bow to him who is the Lord of all. These are things which will most assuredly be accomplished.—JD, 18:286, November 5, 1876.

THE LORD'S WORK.—Do you think we are going to fail? Do you think the Lord is going to back down? I think not. Men may combine against us ignorantly, for many of them are very ignorant. I do not cherish the least feeling of wrath in my heart when I see the courts, legislators, or Congress take steps inimical to us. They do not know what they do, hence we should feel charitably disposed to those who seek our injury.—JD, 21:98, April 13, 1879.

Persecutiona-Taylor, JohnTPMen will not always entertain towards us the feelings they do today. When they find that we are not the people the world has held us up to be, when we shall have proven to the world that we are not what they have believed us to be, but that we are a virtuous and law-abiding people, the honorable among men will acknowledge our worth. And the day will come when it will be said of our children as the old prophets have prophesied, that such and such a one was born in Zion. It will be considered a great blessing and one of the greatest honors that could have been inherited by our children to have been born in Zion among the people of God.—JD, 22:317, October 19, 1881.

A PROPHECY.—We have got to put our trust in God, let the consequences be as they may. And as long as we do this, and as long as we keep the holy covenants we have entered into with him and with one another, Zion will triumph; and the wicked will waste away until there will be no place found for them; and the man or the nation that lifts up his hand against Zion will wither before Almighty God. I will prophesy that in the name of Jesus Christ, and I will meet the consequences of what I say.

Self-Improvementa-Taylor, JohnTPBut I will tell you what we have to do, my brethren and sisters, we must fear God in our hearts; we must lay aside our covetousness and our waywardness, our self-will and foolishness of every kind. As brethren, we must humble ourselves before the Lord, repenting of our sins, and henceforth preserve our bodies and spirits pure, that we may be fit receptacles for the Spirit of the living God, and be guided by him in all our labors both for the living and the dead. Our desires must be for God and his righteousness, until we shall exclaim with one of old: O God, search me, and try me, and if there be any way of wickedness in me, bid it depart. It is for us, as fathers and mothers, to go before the Lord in all humility and call upon him that his peace may be in our hearts; and wherein we may have done wrong, confess that wrong and repair it as far as we possibly can; and in this way let every man and woman in Israel begin to set their houses in order, and forever cultivate the spirit of peace, the spirit of union and love.

Self-Improvementa-Taylor, JohnTPAnd if the families of Israel do this throughout all the land of Zion, all fearing God and working righteousness, cherishing the spirit of humility and meekness, and putting our trust in him, there is no power in existence that can injure us.—JD, 23:337, October 29, 1882.

Government of Goda-Taylor, JohnTPTHE PLATFORM OF PROPHECY.—Nothing but the Spirit of God can enlighten men's minds. Standing on this platform, we view all things of a political and religious nature associated with the earth we are living on as being very uncertain, intangible, and unphilosophical. We expect to see the nations waste, crumble, and decay. We expect to see a universal chaos of religious and political sentiment, and an uncertainty much more serious than anything that exists at the present time. We look forward to the time, and try to help it on, when God will assert his own right with regard to the government of the earth; when, as in religious matters so in political matters, he will enlighten the minds of those that bear rule, he will teach the kings wisdom and instruct the senators by the Spirit of eternal truth; when to him "every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ." Then "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." (Isaiah 11:9.) Then shall the mists of darkness be swept away by the light of eternal truth. Then will the intelligence of heaven beam forth on the human mind, and by it they will comprehend everything that is great, and good, and glorious.—JD, 11:94, March 5, 1865.

Wickednessa-Taylor, JohnTPLEAVE THE WICKED TO GOD.—We will leave the wicked in the hands of God. He will deal with them in his own way. We are told that the wicked shall slay the wicked; and one thing that I am sorry over in this nation is this: that they are striking at the tree of liberty and trying to fetter humanity and bring men into bondage; they are laying the axe at the root of this government, and unless they speedily turn round and repent and follow the principles they have sworn to sustain—the principles contained in the Constitution of the United States—they will be overthrown, they will be split up and divided, be disintegrated, and become weak as water; for the Lord will handle them in his own way. I say these things in sorrow. But as sure as God lives, unless there is a change of policy these things will most assuredly take place. [^2]—JD, 23:270, October 8, 1882.

Last Daysa-Taylor, JohnTPThere seem to be some hard-hearted people in the world trying to fire the indignation of ungodly men against the Latterday Saints. But he that sits in the heavens puts hooks in their noses and leads them into the pit they had dug for their neighbor. So, knowing that there are other judgments in store for the whole earth, we will venture a prediction, and that shall be storm and hail enough to cause a famine, and show the whole of the earth that Jesus Christ, and not the Mormons, vexes the nation. Enough of the present generation shall see, hear, and feel it, to be witnesses that the servants of God tell the truth.

Last Daysa-Taylor, JohnTPWatch, for you know not the hour, nor the day; and you cannot accuse the Mormons of making hail, so, watch! for the hail, the earthquakes, and war shall come and vex all nations.—Nauvoo Neighbor, August 6, 1845.

Last Daysa-Taylor, JohnTPROLE OF THE JEWS.—Nor are we alone in the dealings of God with the people in this dispensation. The Jews will have to perform quite a role in these last times. They also will have to endure a large amount of trials, persecutions, and difficulties which have yet to come upon them. They will in due time be gathered together to their own lands as we are gathered here; and nations will go up against them, and then too will certain nations come against us. But we have not yet got through with the United States. In relation to events that will yet take place, and the kind of trials, troubles, and sufferings which we shall have to cope with, it is to me a matter of very little moment. These things are in the hands of God. He dictates the affairs of the human family, and directs and controls our affairs; and the great thing that we, as a people, have to do is to seek after and cleave unto our God, to be in close affinity with him, and to seek for his guidance, and his blessing and Holy Spirit to lead and guide us in the right path. Then it matters not what it is nor who it is that we have to contend with, God will give us strength according to our day.—JD, 18:281, November 5, 1876.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These were all contemporary groups, associated in the public mind with violent methods.
[^2] Mention here and frequently in this work of the threat to liberty, usually refers to the special legislation leveled against "The Mormon Menace" by Congress, 1862-1887.
