John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

CHAPTER XXXVI

SOME PERSONAL REFLECTIONS

JOHN TAYLOR'S CONVERSION TO MORMONISM

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE STATE OF MIND.—I . . . . allude to an incident in my personal experience to show the state of the world religiously some forty or fifty years ago. Not being then acquainted with this church, a number of us met together for the purpose of searching the scriptures and we found that certain doctrines were taught by Jesus and the apostles, which neither the Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, nor any of the religious sects taught. We concluded that if the Bible was true, the doctrines of modern Christendom were not true; or if they were true, the Bible was false. Our investigations were impartially made, and our search for truth was extended. We examined every religious principle that came under our notice, and probed the various systems as taught by the sects, to ascertain if there were any that were in accordance with the word of God. But we failed to find any.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPIn addition to our researches and investigations, we prayed and fasted before God, and the substance of our prayers was that if he had a people upon the earth anywhere, and ministers who were authorized to preach the gospel, that he would send us one. This was the condition we were in. . . .

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE ANSWER TO THE QUEST.—We prayed earnestly, and in answer to our prayers the Lord sent us Elder Parley P. Pratt. . . . Brother Pratt, in relating the circumstances, says that Brother Heber C. Kimball came to his house one night after he had retired; that Brother Kimball requested him to get up, which he did, and then began to prophesy to him. He told him there was a people in Canada who were seeking for a knowledge of the gospel, and they were praying to God to send them a minister who should reveal to them the truth. Brother Kimball then commissioned him to repair to Canada, telling him that the Lord would bless him and open up his way.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPJust previous to that time the saints had been engaged in building the temple in Kirtland, Ohio, and were all very much embarrassed as to means, Brother Pratt with the balance, having devoted everything he had to spare for that purpose. Among other things that Brother Kimball told him was, that where he was going he would find means to relieve himself, and that many of the people would embrace the gospel, and that it would be the means of introducing the gospel to England. And furthermore, said he, your wife who is now childless shall have a son. In the course of time she did have a son, and they named him Parley. I do not know but that he may be present; but I was going to say, I knew him before he was born. (Laughter.)

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPI speak of this to show that there was at that time nobody, of whom we had any knowledge, from whom we could obtain any information with regard to the gospel of the Son of God, or that could teach us the doctrines Jesus and his apostles taught, as contained in the scriptures. Brother Pratt came and found us, and he came in answer to our prayer; at least, that is my faith in regard to the matter.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPMEANS OF INTRODUCING MORMONISM TO GREAT BRITAIN.—And were all these things accomplished? Yes. I was baptized, myself and others. And I baptized many others in that country; and it was the means also of sending the gospel to England. John Goodson, who apostatized long ago, John Snyder, a good faithful man who was one of the committee of the Nauvoo House, and who died in the Seventeenth Ward of this city, Isaac Russell, and Joseph Fielding, uncle to Brother Joseph F. Smith, were of our number, embraced the gospel, and were afterwards called to accompany Brother Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde to England for the purpose of opening up the work in that land; and I was the first person that wrote a letter to England on the subject of the gospel. I did it at the request of Brother Fielding, who got me to write for him to a brother and brother-in-law of his who were ministers in England. These were the men that helped to introduce the gospel into England in the early day. I speak of this for the information of many of you.—JD, 23:30-31, March 5, 1882.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE DETAIL OF P. P. PRATT'S VISIT.—I was living in the city of Toronto, Upper Canada. I was associated with a number of gentlemen in searching the scriptures. Many of us were connected with the Methodist Society; we did not believe their doctrines because they did not accord with scripture. Nevertheless we did not interfere with them; we considered them as near correct as others. We rejected every man's word or writing, and took the Word of God alone. We had continued diligently at this for two years. We made it a rule to receive no doctrine until we could bring no scriptural testimony against it. The gentlemen with whom I associated were, many of them, learned and intelligent.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPWe gathered from the scriptures many important truths. We believed in the gathering of Israel, and in the restoration of the ten tribes. We believed that Jesus would come to reign personally on the earth. We gathered from the scriptures that just judgment would overtake the churches of the world, because of their iniquity. We believed that the gospel which was preached by the apostles was true, and that any departure from that was a departure from the order of God, and that churches having thus departed were consequently corrupt and fallen. We believed that there ought to be apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers as in former days, and that the gifts of healing and the power of God ought to be associated with the church. We, of course, believed that where these things did not exist there could not be a true church. But we believed that we had no authority ourselves to teach these principles. We were praying men, and asked our Heavenly Father to show us the truth, and we fasted and prayed that if God had a true church on the earth he would send us a messenger.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPAbout this time Parley P. Pratt called on me with a letter of introduction from a merchant of my acquaintance. I had peculiar feelings on seeing him. I had heard a great many stories of a similar kind to those that you have heard, and I must say that I thought my friend had imposed upon me a little in sending a man of this persuasion to me. I, however, received him courteously as I was bound to do. I told him, however, plainly, my feelings, and that in our researches I wanted no fables. I wished him to confine himself to the scriptures. We talked for three hours or upwards, and he bound me as close to the scriptures as I desired, proving everything he said therefrom. I afterwards wrote down eight sermons that he preached, in order that I might compare them with the work of God. I found nothing contrary.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPI then examined the Book of Mormon, and the prophecies concerning that. That was also correct. I then read the Doctrine and Covenants; found nothing unscriptural there. He called upon us to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, and we should receive the Holy Ghost. But what is that we inquired. The same, he answered, as it was in the apostles' days, or nothing. A number of others and myself were baptized, and we realized those blessings according to his word. The gifts and power of God were in the church, the gift of tongues and prophecy; the sick were healed, and we rejoiced in the blessings and gifts of the Holy Ghost.—PD, 17-20, 1850.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPTHE BASIS OF SCRIPTURE.—The first thing that I heard from a priest, after hearing this gospel preached by Parley P. Pratt, some twenty years ago, was the cry, "Delusion!" I was immediately informed that "Joe Smith was a money-digger," that he tried to deceive people by walking on planks laid under the water, and that he was a wicked and corrupt man, a deceiver, and one of the biggest fools in creation, and so forth. I heard every kind of story; and the priests have kept up the same things, pretty much, to the present day.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPI remember, when I first had an elder introduced to me, I said to him, "I do not know what to think about you Mormons. I do not believe any kind of fanaticism. I profess to be acquainted with the Bible; and, 'Sir," said I, "in any conversation we may have, I wish you to confine yourself to the Bible, for I tell you I shall not listen to anything in opposition to that word."

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPFrom the report which I had heard of Mormonism, I thought it was anything but a religious system. I was told about the French prophets. I was told about Mattias, Johanna Southcote, and of all the follies that had existed for centuries; and then they put Mormonism at the end of them all.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPIn my researches, I examined things very carefully and critically . . . . in order that I might compare them with the Bible, and I could not find any difference. I could easily controvert any other doctrine, but I could not overturn one principle of Mormonism.—JD, 5:239, September 13, 1857.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPMY FEELINGS UPON ENTERING THE CHURCH.—I will now tell you about some of my feelings when I first came into this church. It is a long while ago. When I first heard the gospel, I was compelled to admit there was something reasonable about it. I almost hoped it was not true. "If it is true," said I, "as an honest man I shall be obliged to obey it, or else I cannot have any confidence in myself." When I had investigated the subject, and became convinced that it was true, I said, "I am in for it; I must embrace it; I cannot reject the principles of eternal truth." And I will say, moreover, I don't know of a time in my life when, if anybody presented a truth that could not be controverted, but I was ready to obey it and I am today. If any person in the religious world, or the political world, or the scientific world, will present to me a principle that is true, I am prepared to receive it, no matter where it comes from. Well, says one, you believe the Bible? Yes. You believe in the Book of Mormon? Yes. You believe the Book of Doctrine and Covenants? Yes. I believe all that God has ever written or spoken, everything that we have on record, and I am prepared to believe everything that he will communicate to the human family. We profess to believe in all truth, and to be governed by all truth.—JD, 25:90, February 10, 1884.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPI expected when I came into this church, that I should be persecuted and proscribed. I expected that the people would be persecuted. But I believed that God had spoken, that the eternal principles of truth had been revealed, and that God had a work to accomplish which was in opposition to the ideas, views, and notions of men, and I did not know but it would cost me my life before I got through. It came pretty near it at one time; yes, at many times. I have had to "stand the racket" in a way that many of you folks don't know much about. More than once I have had to face large crowds of people in the shape of armies, expecting to come into contact every moment—no father off, perhaps, than the length of this hall. That is not a very pleasant position to be in.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPBut I was in a worse scrape in Carthage jail, when Joseph and Hyrum were killed—penned up in a room and attacked by a blackened mob. I had to stand at the door and ward off the guns while they were trying to shoot us, and we without arms, and under the protection of the governor of the state. Dr. Bernhisel and myself were sent by Joseph Smith to wait upon the governor, and lay before him the facts of the case. We told him we were competent to take care of ourselves, and did not require any of his aid, for we had an organized body of militia that were quite competent to protect us from their mobs, and asked his advice. He thereupon stated it would be better for us not to bring an armed force, and pledged his faith and the faith of the state, as governor, for our protection. We consented. This he said to Dr. Bernhisel and myself; and that pledge was violated by the murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in Carthage jail, and I myself received four balls in my person; but then I am here yet.

Taylor, JohnConversiona-Taylor, JohnTPWas there anything surprising in all this? No. If they killed Jesus in former times, would not the same feeling and influence bring about the same results in these times? I had counted the cost when I first started out, and stood prepared to meet it.—JD, 25:91-92, February 10, 1884.

Laws, Divinea-Taylor, JohnTPWHAT MY RELIGION MEANT.—Now, if I understand my religion aright, if I understand the scriptures and the operations of the Spirit of God, we have got, as a people, to come to this—let us know the will of God, and we will do it, no matter where it strikes, what interest it may come in contact with, or whose views it may overturn. That is my idea of Mormonism, as I have learned it. I consider that God is at the helm. We have not dictated or found out anything belonging to the problem we are working, not a man among us. All we have received comes from God. If I understand anything concerning these things, it is that the word of God is law and must be obeyed.—JD, 18:282-283, November 5, 1876.

THE GOSPEL TO THE NATIONS

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Taylor, JohnTPSIDELIGHT ON THE 1840 MISSION OF THE TWELVE TO ENGLAND.—I told you about our coming to Liverpool. The first time I preached ten came forward (for baptism). We have been baptizing since; last week we baptized nine; we are to baptize tomorrow, but how many I know not. The little stone is rolling forth. One of the brethren dreamed he saw two men come to Liverpool. They cast a net into the sea and pulled it out full of fishes. He was surprised to see them pick the small fish out first and then the large. Well, if we get all the fish I shall be satisfied.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Taylor, JohnTPBrother Woodruff has lately left the Potteries and has gone to another neighborhood, and is making Methodist preachers scarce. He baptized thirty-two persons in one week—thirteen of them were Methodist preachers. Elder Clark is preaching and baptizing in and about Manchester. The latest account from Elder Turley, he was well, preaching and baptizing in the Potteries. Elder Willard Richards is very busy at this period, in visiting and setting in order the branches of the church in Preston, Clithero, and all the regions round about, and holding correspondence with the elders abroad.—DHC, 4:96, March 16, 1840.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPINTRODUCTION OF THE GOSPEL TO FRANCE.—I will here give a short history of some of my proceedings. I was appointed to go to France some years ago, in company with some of the twelve, who were appointed to go to other places. The First Presidency asked us if we would go. Yes, was the reply; we can go anywhere, for if we cannot do little things like these, I don't know what else we can do. Some people talk about doing great things; but it is not a great thing to travel a little, or to preach a little. I hear some of our elders saying, sometimes, that they are going to do great things—to be rulers in the kingdom of God, kings and priests to the Most High, and are again to exalt thousands of others to thrones, principalities, and powers, in the eternal worlds. But we cannot get them out of their nests to travel a few miles here. If they cannot do this, how will they ever learn to go from world to world?

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPWe went, and were blessed in our journeying. We had a pretty hard time in crossing the plains, and I should not recommend people to go so late in the season as we did. We should have lost all our horses, but the hand of God was over us for our good. He delivered us out of all our dangers, and took us through safely. When we got to the Missouri River, the ice was running very strong, so that it was impossible to ferry; but in one night the river froze over, and we passed over as on a bridge, in perfect safety. But as soon as the last team was over, the ice again removed. Thus the Lord favored us in our extremities.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPYou may inquire, how did you get along preaching? The best way that we could, the same as we always do. We went to work (at least I did). I went into the city of Boulogne, and I obtained permission there from the mayor to preach. This I was under the necessity of doing. . . .

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPI went from there right into the city of Paris, and commenced translating the Book of Mormon, with Brother Bolton to assist me. We baptized a few, some of them men of intelligence and education, and capable of assisting us in the work. Brother Pack went to Calais, and raised a small church there. We afterwards united some English branches, Boulogne en France, to it, called the Jersey Islands. There the people speak half English, half French; and Brother Pack went to preside over them. Brother Bolton and I remained principally in Paris, and in that neighborhood, we there organized a church. Before I came away, we held a conference, at which four hundred members were represented, including those branches that were added to the branch in Calais. . . .

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPWe found many difficulties to combat, for it is not an easy thing to go into France and learn to talk French well. But at the same time, if a man sets to work in good earnest, he can do it. I have scratched the word "can't" out of my vocabulary long since, and I have not got it in my French one. . . .

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPWhen you get into France, Germany, or any of the foreign nations, where the language is different from ours, the spirit of the people is different, and it appears to me that a different spirit is carried along with these languages, which is peculiar to them. . . .

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPI had thought, after having completed the translation of the Book of Mormon into the French language, in which I was assisted by Brother Bolton, of returning home last year, but I met with the epistle of the First Presidency, from which I could learn their desire that we should stay another year. I, therefore, thought I would alter my course immediately, and follow the directions of the Spirit of God—for I wished all the time, as Paul says, to be obedient to the heavenly calling. I wished at all times to pursue the course the Spirit of the Lord should dictate.. . . .

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPTO GERMANY.—As it stated in the epistle that it was better for the brethren to extend their labors to other nations, it immediately occurred to my mind to go to Germany. So I made a plan before I got up in the morning, for thought flows quickly, you know. The plan was—to publish the Book of Mormon there. I wrote to Brother Hyde to send me out some brother that was acquainted with the German language, and my letter got there about the time he left for the Valley, and he did not get it. I said to Brother Bolton, and Brother De La Mere, who was from the island of Jersey, that there was one man in the Valley I wished was here, and that was Brother Carn. There was one brother in France, who was a German, and was well acquainted with the languages, both German and French. I engaged him to go with me to Germany, that is, to translate. However, I went over to England, and thought we would hunt in England to find some person qualified to go and preach in Germany. I found many Germans, but none with sufficient experience in the Church. Finally, I thought I would start by myself. When I got to London, I met with Brother Dykes. He had said something about going to Germany, but he concluded he had better be with Brother Snow, as he was acquainted with the Danish language. He had got his discharge from that engagement, and was on his way home when I met him. This placed things in another position. He said he would like to go if his family could be provided for, but I could not say anything particular about his family.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPI finally had him go for a month or two, for I did not wish to put a thing upon him I would not do myself. He felt a desire to go, and said he would do as I said, so I told him to go for two months. I made an appointment to meet him in Germany, as I had to go through France.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPWhen we arrived there, we started the translation of the Book of Mormon, and it was half completed before I came away. We also started to publish a paper in Germany, called Zions Panier, (Zion's Banner.) I wished to be perfectly satisfied that the translation was right. Brother Richards and I heard some of it read in Boulogne, and we thought it was very good, but still it had to be altered. I, therefore, got some of the best professors in the city of Hamburg to look over it. Some few alterations were necessary, but not many. Also, with regard to the paper, one of the professors said he would not have known it was written in English and translated; he should, if not told to the contrary, have supposed it written originally in German.—JD, 1:19-24, August 22, 1852.

TRIBUTE TO BRIGHAM YOUNG

Young, Brighama-Taylor, JohnTPBrigham Young needs no fictitious aid to perpetuate his memory. His labors have been exhibited during the last forty-five years in his preaching, in his writing, in his counsels, in the wisdom and intelligence he has displayed, in our exodus from Nauvoo; in the building of cities throughout the length and breadth of this territory, in his opposition to vice and his protection of virtue, purity, and right. These things are well known and understood by the Latter-day Saints, and also by thousands and millions of others. But, as with his predecessor, Joseph Smith, who had to leave, while we are called upon to mourn a president dead, angels announce a president born in the eternal worlds. He has only gone to move in another state of existence. But then in speaking of these things we would not eulogize only the man, for Brigham Young, although so great a man, could have done nothing towards developing the purposes of God unless aided and sustained by him. Joseph Smith could have done nothing. Neither, as I have already said, can the twelve apostles accomplish anything unless they receive the same divine support.—JD, 19:123, October 7, 1877.

THE EXODUS FROM NAUVOO

Nauvooa-Taylor, JohnTP"FEBRUARY, 1846."—All things are in preparation for a commencement of the great move of the Saints out of the United States. (We had like to have said, beyond the power of Christianity.) But we will soften the expression, by merely saying, and back to their "primitive possessions," as in the enjoyment of Israel. It is reduced to a solemn reality, that the rights and property, as well as the lives and common religious belief of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, cannot be protected in the realms of the United States, and, of course, from one to two hundred thousand souls must quit their freedom among freemen and go where the land, the elements, and the worship of God are free.

Nauvooa-Taylor, JohnTPAbout two thousand are ready and crossing the Mississippi to pioneer the way, and make arrangements for summer crops at some point between this and the Pacific, where the biggest crowd of good people, will be the old settlers.

Nauvooa-Taylor, JohnTPTo see such a large body of men, women, and children, compelled by the inefficiency of the law, and potency of mobocracy, to leave a great city in the month of February, for the sake of the enjoyment of pure religion, fills the soul with astonishment, and gives the world a sample of fidelity and faith, brilliant as the sun, and forcible as a tempest, and as enduring as eternity.

Nauvooa-Taylor, JohnTPMay God continue the spirit of fleeing from false freedom, and false dignity, till every saint is removed to where "he can sit under his own vine and fig tree" without having any to molest or make afraid. Let us go—let us go.—TS, 6:1114, Nauvoo, February 1, 1846.

Nauvooa-Taylor, JohnTPNAUVOO: "ONE GREAT WAGON SHOP."—The twelve, the high council, and about four hundred families left the city of Nauvoo in the month of February (1846) last, and launched forth, in an American winter, braving the frost, the snow, and the chilling winds, and commenced their journey to the far distant West. We left at that time for the purpose of assuaging the anger of an infuriated mob, and to preserve the peace, lives, and property of our brethren whom we left behind; and as most of their indignation was kindled against the leaders of the Church, this step had a tendency to cool their wrath and give the brethren whom we left behind a better opportunity to dispose of their property, settle up their business, and prepare their wagons and teams for a removal in the spring. To this all their energies were directed, all other business subsided, and Nauvoo was converted into one great wagon shop. In fact, nothing else seemed to be spoken or thought of but making wagons, purchasing teams, and preparing for a removal. Those who had left the city were very much exposed, living in tents and wagons. But as there is an abundance of timber in that country, we made large fires in the woods, and thus were enabled to preserve ourselves from the cold. As there was no grass, we were necessitated to purchase corn and hay to feed our horses and cattle, although we had left an immense amount behind. This, however, was mostly obtained for labor, which in that country is high, while produce is very low. MS, 8:113, November 15, 1846.

Nauvooa-Taylor, JohnTPNAUVOO IN RETROSPECT.—It is a number of years now since we left the city of Nauvoo; it was a large city then, and surrounded by a rich country that we cultivated. In consequence of our religious views we could not stay there. We were persecuted and driven, and had to go into the wilderness, had to carry with us our husbandry utensils, seed, grain, tools of every kind, and provisions a distance of over thirteen hundred miles by land, with ox-teams, into an unknown and unexplored country, among the savages of the desert. . . .

Nauvooa-Taylor, JohnTPWe expect still to continue to progress and to advance in religious intelligence, in political intelligence, in religious power, and in political power. We are still expecting to carry out our social principles, which differ very materially from others.—JD, 11:53-54, January 18, 1865.

SOME WESTERN HISTORY

SCENE: CROSSING THE PLAINS (1852).—It gave me great joy, on my way home, to find the Saints leaving Kanesville. It seemed as though they were swept out with a besom almost. [^1] When I was there, I rode out in my carriage one day to a place called Council Point. I thought I would go and visit some of the folks there. But, when I got there, behold, there were no folks to see. I hunted round, and finally found a place with something like "grocery" written upon it. I alighted, and went into the house, and asked a person who presented himself at the door if he was a stranger there. Yes, says he, I have only just come. And the people have all left, have they? Yes, was the answer. I next saw a few goods standing at the side of a house, but the house was empty; these were waiting to be taken away. I went into another house, and there were two or three waiting for a boat to take them down the river, and these were all the inhabitants I saw there.

When I first reflected upon this removal, my heart felt pained. I well knew the disposition of many of the men in those frontier countries, and I thought that some miserable wretches might come upon them after the main body of the saints had removed, and abuse, rob, and plunder the widow, the orphan, the lame, halt, blind, and destitute, who might be left as they did in Nauvoo; and thus the old, decrepit, and infirm would be abused, insulted, and preyed upon by wretches in human shape, who never have courage to meet men, but are cruel and relentless with the old, infirm, the widow, orphan, and destitute. But, thank God, they are coming, nearly all, old and young, rich and poor.—JD, 1:18, August 22, 1852.

THE FOUNDING OF UTAH AND MORMON COLONIZATION

Utaha-Taylor, JohnTPWe are quite a long distance from the outside world. It is true there are railroads, and more are being made; and it is right there should be. That is their part of the business. In this way, and in many instances, they are assisting us to build up the kingdom of God, but they don't know it. If they did, they would not like to do it.

Utaha-Taylor, JohnTPWHY SALT LAKE CITY?—The position that we occupy in these valleys of the mountains is a very peculiar one. When we came up here, the first place that was designated was Salt Lake City. President Young said that he had a manifestation that that was the place. There was a valley, a very good valley, a comparatively rich valley, a valley that was well watered, a valley that could be irrigated without much labor, where the streams were quite easy of access and where a small community could easily raise their sustenance. And this we did. Now, had we landed in a place like this [St. George] at first, it would have been more difficult. People would have become more discouraged and some of them felt very much discouraged as it was—some going to California because everything looked so forbidding. Yet others thought it would be a pleasant place to reside in, a place where a living could be as easily obtained as in most other places, except we go to some of the rich lands of Missouri, Illinois, Iowa, etc. But there were other circumstances associated with these things that would have made it difficult for us to sustain ourselves even in those places.

Missouria-Taylor, JohnTPTHE MISSOURI PERIOD.—For instance, we lived in rich land back in Missouri. Everything there seemed to grow at a very rapid rate; everything increased very fast. I have heard some people tell such big stories about the productiveness of that country that I have sometimes been afraid to tell what I myself knew of it, for fear that people would not believe me; for instance, I have seen fields of corn that a regiment of soldiers could ride into and they would be out of sight; and I have seen beans grow where corn has been planted, where the cornstalks have served as bean poles; and I have seen pumpkins and squash grow among them, three crops growing the same year and at the same time. That country, nevertheless, has many drawbacks. In that country we were very unhealthy. We were subject to what is called fever and ague every year. In fact, in the spring we used to think we did well if we didn't happen to die off in the fall.

Missouria-Taylor, JohnTPWhy could we not stop there? Because the land was too good, and we were easy of access to men desirous to possess our property, and they told us to move on, and we had to go. We had to leave Missouri, and I suppose God intended to try the saints, to let them pass through certain kinds of experience and place them in a position that they would have to lean on him. Some of the people rebelled against these things in their feelings. Among the rest, I remember being much shocked at the remarks of Sidney Rigdon after he had been imprisoned with the Prophet Joseph in Richmond jail, as well as many others. I visited them in jail, and Sidney Rigdon made a remark soon after he got out, to the effect that if God did not care anything more about us than he seemed to do, that if he allowed us to be hauled around as we had been, he did not care about serving such a God. That is, he found the trials were heavier for him than he was capable of bearing, notwithstanding that he had seen the Lord and had had visions pertaining to the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial kingdoms, in which he had seen the position of men in the future, and the purposes of God regarding the nations of the earth, and had borne testimony of it in connection with Joseph Smith, as we find recorded in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. Yet when trials came, his knees faltered, and the knees of many others have faltered in the same way.

Missouria-Taylor, JohnTPNow, we talk about lands, good rich land. Why did we not stay in Missouri? Because people would not let us. It was just so in Illinois. Why did we leave there? Because, as I have heard George A. Smith say, we left because we could not help ourselves; at least, that was the purport of his saying.

Salt Lake Valleya-Taylor, JohnTPSALT LAKE VALLEY THE RIGHT PLACE.—I think the Lord was very merciful to us in Salt Lake Valley. I believe we landed just in the right place. The people commenced to establish themselves. They began to find that they could raise crops there, and that the land was very productive. We stayed there for a while and began to make little settlements and little excursions out into the surrounding country. The people had all kinds of difficulties. I remember once, in Bountiful, there were three or four families went up to settle there, and they felt that there was not enough water, and that they could hardly get along. They got to quarreling about water rights, as we do sometimes. I do not know of much quarreling down here. I do not think you have as much water to quarrel over as they had.

THE SETTLEMENTS EXPAND.—Afterwards President Young was moved upon to begin to make settlements in other places. We had now obtained a foothold. We had a place where we could raise all the grain necessary for our sustenance, where we could raise sheep, cattle, etc. We pushed out to Ogden on the one hand and to Provo on the other, and then occupied some of the best places in Salt Lake Valley, in Utah Valley, and on the Weber. We began to increase. More immigrants came in, and others began to come from above.

SALT LAKE TEMPLE.—Things went on. A temple was started [in Salt Lake City] but it seemed to progress very slowly; as well it might when we consider the substantial nature of the building. When we started, we had nothing but wagons to haul the rock on, and they were very big rock, if you remember. Those rocks had to be hauled about seventeen miles in those wagons, and owing to the liability of the wagons to break down, this work gave us a great deal of trouble. Today, and right along for a number of years past, since the railroad has been built, it is not uncommon to bring in some three or four carloads at a time, delivering the rock in the temple yard.

THE SOUTHERN SETTLEMENTS.—Then it was thought best to commence down here. [St. George.] Why? Let me tell you some other things, and show you about the settlements north and south, and especially south. If you remember, Brother George A. Smith, as much as twenty-five years ago—I don't remember exactly how long—came down and made a settlement at Parowan in 1851, and another at Cedar—and here is Brother Henry Lunt present, who was one of that number. He came to Cedar at that time, and they tried to start iron works at that place. And then Brother Joseph Horne and some others were sent down to see if cotton could not be raised in this district of country in the hope that something could be done whereby we might produce the raw material for the manufacture of our clothes. And they stayed a little while somewhere not far from here, some five miles south on the Santa Clara, I am told. There was a rich little settlement up there. Some time after, a great deal of it was washed away.

I remember the struggles Brother George A. used to have. He labored under difficulties, being so very heavy, and not as active as most men. But he was a man of great energy. He would come down here and bring a few men, and would settle them down and go back again. By and by he would bring some more down, all that he could pick up that would volunteer. By the time he came down again, he would find half of the others had gone. They did not want to stop. They thought the land was set up on edge and had never been finished, and they had all kinds of notions. Then he would return to the city, and drum up a few more recruits, and take them down; and by the time he got here, he would find that a good many of those he left had also gone. Finally, they became weeded out and left, until he got many folks who, if they had considered it a duty to go on to a barren rock and stay there until they should be instructed to leave, would have done it. It needed just such an element to come to this country. What Brother Snow said here, referring to the sad fact of there being such a number of widows in this place whose husbands had gone to their graves through having worked themselves to death, was perfectly true. But then, we don't want to cry about it. We may as well laugh as cry about the past. You have done a great deal of hard work. In coming down from Pine Valley we found immense dugways in the most forbidding places, and it has required all the perseverance, energy, intelligence, and faith of even those men who were capable of living on a dry rock—it required the combined energy of the whole to accomplish these things, and a good deal of faith too.

Saint George Templea-Taylor, JohnTPBUILDING OF THE ST. GEORGE TEMPLE.—Still President Young urged forward the people. Brother George A. Smith and Brother Erastus Snow urged them forward, and others urged them forward, and there was a general feeling to build up this southern country. Finally it was found that our temple in Salt Lake City would take such a long time to build, it was thought best to erect one down here. Why? Because there was a people living here who were more worthy than any others. Who were more worthy of the blessings of a temple than those who had displayed the self-abnegation exhibited by the pioneers of the south? God inspired President Young to build a temple here because of the fidelity and self-abnegation of the people; and, furthermore, that there might be an asylum here for those living further south to be administered to in the holy ordinances of God. I speak this for your credit—not that all of you are of that class, but let those that are worthy take the credit, and those that are not need not take it.. . . .

Salt Lake Valleya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE STRATEGY OF MORMON COLONIZATION.—But we will look at this matter again. Could we be in a better place? I think not. Let me show you the reason for that. We are a very small people, and we are in the midst of a very large people. We occupy these valleys among these rugged mountains, and we dwell in deserts, and in many of the most forbidding places. We see people living in little places, on little streams of water trickling along, and perhaps all of it would go through an inch pipe without much pressure, and they are professing to farm and raise fruits, vegetables, and vines in such places, wrenching their living from the barren desert soil. And they do live, but it is hard sledding, and there is a great deal of it here.. . . . But wherever there is a habitable place, Latter-day Saints are living on it, and consequently living in these little places they control the mountains and the country. Is not that a fact?

Salt Lake Valleya-Taylor, JohnTPAnd suppose we did not have these little, forbidding, barren places, the little springs and little rivulets that come along, reminding one of oases in the deserts—if we did not have them we could not have the country. But we have them and God has given us possession of them. If we had not possessed these narrow valleys and defiles, they would have been in the possession of bands of Gadianton robbers, who would have preyed upon the people and their property, as "cowboys" and guerillas are now doing in Arizona. But our possessing them gave strength and protection to our more important settlements.—JD, 23:11-18, November 9, 1881.

DEALING WITH JOHNSTON'S ARMY.—I do not remember having read in any history, or had related to me any circumstance, where an army has been subjugated so easily, and their power wasted away so effectually without bloodshed, as this in our borders. If this is not the manifestation of the power of God to us, I do not know what is. Has any man's life been lost in it? No—not one. It is true our brethren have been fired upon; but the balls failed of doing the injury that was expected. Our brethren were told not to retaliate, and they did not do it. Where is there such a manifestation of the power of God?

Suppose you or I had the dictation of this matter; we should have been firing clear away on the Sweetwater, and killed a lot of them before they got here. It was not we, then, that directed this matter. No. Who was it? Why, it was those who are placed over us; and those very things that seemed hard for us to do at that time have really accomplished one of the greatest things that history has yet developed. The power of God never was made more manifest.. . . . But God does not see as man; he see as man; he reasons not as man. Although we may partially comprehend our individual duties, we do not understand how to regulate the church of God. It needs the regular organization and the Spirit to direct through the proper channels; and hence the result of these events that are manifest now before our eyes.

Would you like the soldiers away? I do not know that I would; I do not care anything about it. Perhaps the Lord may have hung them up there, like the mother hangs up the rod and points to it.. . . .

Suppose Uncle Sam should rise up in his red-hot wrath, and send fifty thousand men here . . . . who of us can tell the result? I speak of these things that we may reflect. Who can tell what will come next? . . . .

What if we should be driven to the mountains? Let us be driven. What if we have to burn our houses? Why, set fire to them with a good grace, and dance a jig round them while they are burning. What do I care about these things? We are in the hands of God, and all is right, Brother Brigham says we are used to it, and we shall not feel it hard.—JD, 6:112-114, December 6, 1857.

HORACE GREELEY ON GOVERNING UTAH (1859).—Horace Greeley says it is nonsense for the United States to send any public officers here, and advises the government to appoint President Young governor of the Territory of Utah; for he says he carries the "keys of the territory in his breeches pocket" anyway.—JD, 7:320, Salt Lake City, October 7, 1859.

A MISSION OF PEACE AND SALVATION.—I have traveled abroad myself quite extensively among the nations of the earth. Did I ever interfere with them? No, not in the least particular. Did I see things that were wrong? Yes, but it was not for me to right them. That was not my mission. I had no command of the kind. My mission was to preach the gospel of salvation to the nations of the earth, and I have traveled hundreds of thousands of miles to do this, without purse or scrip, trusting in God.—JD, 22:142-143, July 3, 1881.

Footnotes

1943 1943

---
Notas:
[^1] A "besom" is a broom of twigs or heather.
