John Taylor, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Kingdom: Selections from the Writings and Discourses of John Taylor ( 1943)

APPENDIX

POEMS BY JOHN TAYLOR

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPGO, YE MESSENGERS OF HEAVEN

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPGo, ye messengers of heaven, Chosen by divine command; Go and publish free salvation To a dark, benighted land. Go to island, vale, and mountain, To fulfil the great command; Gather out the sons of Jacob; To possess the promised land. When your thousands all are gathered, And their pray'rs for you ascend, And the Lord has crown'd with blessings All the labors on your hand, Then the song of joy and transport Will from ev'ry land resound; Then the heathen, long in darkness, By the Savior will be crown'd.

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE GLORIOUS PLAN

Plan of Salvationa-Taylor, JohnTPThe glorious plan which God has given To bring a ruined world to heaven, Was framed in Christ ere time had birth. Was sealed in heaven ere known on earth. As in the heavens they all agree, The records given there by Three, On earth three witnesses are given, To lead the sons of men to heaven. Our God, the Father, is the one, Another, His Eternal Son, The Spirit does with them agree, The witnesses in heaven are three. Nor are we in the second birth Left without witnesses on earth, To grope, as in eternal night. About the way to endless light. But buried 'neath the liquid wave To know the Spirit's power to save, To feel the virtue of His blood, Are witnesses ordained of God. In heaven they all agree in One, The Father, Spirit, and the Son, On earth these witnesses agree: The water, blood, and Spirit three. One great connecting link is given Between the sons of earth and heaven: The Spirit seals us here on earth, In heaven records our second birth. If we on earth possess these three, Mysterious, saving unity, The Book of Life will record bear, Our names are surely written there.

Salt Lake Valleya-Taylor, JohnTPTHE VALLEY

Salt Lake Valleya-Taylor, JohnTPLet me go to the Valley far off in the west To my kindred and brethren whom I love best; Where love and affection our hearts will o'erflow, To my home in the mountains—oh! there let me go. Let me go to the Valley, and find me a rest, And live with the righteous and dwell with the best, Where contentment and peace, like the rivers do flow; To the beautiful Valley—oh! there let me go. Let me go, for my friends and my brethren are there, With whom I'm united in praise and in prayer, Who like gold have been tried and are pure as the snow; To the faithful in Zion—oh! there let me go. Let me go to my lov'd ones, who've long been oppress'd Who have fled to the Valley far off in the west, Where no feuds can assail nor foul mobs overthrow; To the lovely and virtuous—oh! there let me go. Let me go to the saints that in Zion do dwell, Let me roam in the valley and rest in the dell; Let me share in their joys, or partake in their woe, To the home of the righteous—oh! there let me go. Let me go to the Zion, which God hath prepared As the hope of the saints—as rest and reward, Where the fountains and rivers in purity flow, And the earth teems with plenty—oh! there let me go. Let me go, for the light of eternity's there, And join with the faithful in praise and in prayer; Where celestial streams from Jehovah do flow, To the pure and the just ones—oh! there let me go. Let me go where the banner of freedom's unfurled To all creeds and professions throughout the wide world; Where all tribes, hues, and nations in safety may flow, And be free from oppression—oh! there let me go.

Millennial Star 12:208.

Libertya-Taylor, JohnTPSONG

Libertya-Taylor, JohnTPO! this is the land of the free! And this is the home of the brave, Where rulers and mobbers agree 'Tis the home of the tyrant and slave. Chorus: For this is the land of the free! And this is the home of the brave, Where rulers and mobbers agree, 'Tis the home of the tyrant and slave. Here liberty's poles pierce the sky With her cup gaily hung on the vane; The gods may its glories espy, But, poor mortals, it's out of your ken. The eagle soars proudly aloft, And covers the land with her wings, But oppression and bloodshed abound, She can't deign to look down on such things. Here the stars and the stripes proudly float, And glitter in every breeze, But the patriot who reared it's forgot, And is robbed of his freedom and peace. No monarch or autocrat reigns,— No kingly dominion is here, But the modest vox populi deigns To take what he wants without fear.

Composed by Elder John Taylor, while reflecting on American freedom and liberty, on his way from England to the camp.

Millennial Star, Vol. 9, p. 351.

Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smitha-Taylor, JohnTPO, GIVE ME BACK MY PROPHET DEAR

Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smitha-Taylor, JohnTPO, give me back my Prophet dear, And Patriarch, O give them back, The saints of Latter-days to cheer, And lead them in the gospel track! But, O, they're gone from my embrace, From earthly scenes their spirits fled, Two of the best of Adam's race, Now lie entombed among the dead. Ye men of wisdom, tell me why— No guilt, no crime in them were found— Their blood doth now so loudly cry, From prison walls and Carthage ground? Your tongues are mute, but pray attend, The secret I will now relate, Why those whom God to earth did lead, Have met the suffering martyrs' fate. It is because they strove to gain, Beyond the grave a heav'n of bliss, Because they made the gospel plain, And led the saints to righteousness; It is because God called them forth, And led them by his own right hand, Christ's coming to proclaim on earth, And gather Israel to their land. It is because the priests of Baal Were desperate their craft to save, And when they saw it doomed to fall, They sent the prophets to their grave. Like scenes the ancient prophets saw, Like these the ancient prophets fell, And, till the resurrection dawn, Prophet and Patriarch farewell.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Taylor, JohnTPTHE SEER

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Taylor, JohnTPThe Seer, the Seer, Joseph the Seer! I'll sing of the Prophet ever dear; His equal now cannot be found, By searching the wide world around. With Gods he soared in the realms of day, And men he taught the heavenly way. The earthly Seer! the heavenly Seer! I love to dwell on his memory dear; The chosen of God and the friend of man, He brought the priesthood back again; He gazed on the past, and the future too, And opened the heavenly world to view. Of noble seed, of heavenly birth, He came to bless the sons of earth; With keys by the Almighty given, He opened the full rich stores of heaven; O'er the world that was wrapped in sable night, Like the sun, he spread his golden light; He strove, O, how he strove to stay The stream of crime in its reckless way! With a mighty mind and a noble aim, He urged the wayward to reclaim; 'Mid foaming billows of angry strife He stood at the helm of the ship of life. The saints, the saints, his only pride! For them he lived, for them he died! Their joys were his, their sorrows too, He loved the saints, he loved Nauvoo. Unchanged in death, with a Savior's love, He pleads their cause in the courts above, The Seer, the Seer! Joseph the Seer! O, how I love his memory dear! The just and wise, the pure and free, A father he was and is to me. Let fiends now rage in their dark hour— No matter, he is beyond their power. He's free! he's free! the Prophet's free! He is where he will ever be, Beyond the reach of mobs and strife, He rests unharmed in endless life. His home's in the sky, he dwells with the Gods. Far from the furious rage of mobs. He died! he died for those he loved, He reigns, he reigns in the realms above. He waits with the just who have gone before, To welcome the saints to Zion's shore. Shout, shout, ye saints, this boon is given: We'll meet our martyred Seer in heaven.

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPGO, YE MESSENGERS OF GLORY

Missionary Worka-Taylor, JohnTPGo, ye messengers of glory; Run, ye legates of the skies; Go and tell the pleasing story, That a glorious angel flies, Great and mighty. With a message from the skies. Go to every tribe and nation; Visit every land and clime; Sound to all the proclamation Tell to all the truth sublime: That the gospel Does in ancient glory shine. Go! to all the gospel carry, Let the joyful news abound; Go till every nation hear you, Jew and gentile greet the sound; Let the gospel, Echo all the earth around. Bearing seed of heavenly virtue, Scatter it o'er all the earth; Go! Jehovah will support you, Gather all the sheaves of worth, Then, with Jesus, Reign in glory on the earth.

Eternal Lifea-Taylor, JohnTPLINES

Eternal Lifea-Taylor, JohnTPWritten in the Album of Miss Abby Jane Hart, of New York City

Eternal Lifea-Taylor, JohnTPAbby: Knowest thou whence thou camest? Thine Origin? Who thou art? What? and whither Thou art bound? A chrysalis of yesterday: Today a gaudy fluttering butterfly— A moth; tomorrow crushed, and then an end Of thee. Is this so? And must thou perish Thus, and die ingloriously without a Hope? Ah, no; thou'rt no such thing. Thou in the Bosom of thy Father bask'd, and liv'd, and Mov'd thousands of years ago. Yes, e'er this Mundane sphere from chaos sprung, or sun, or Moon, or stars, or world was fram'd: before the Sons of God for joy did shout, or e'er the Morning stars together sung—thou liv'dst. Thou liv'dst to live again. Ah, no! thou liv'd But to continue life eternal—to Live, and move, and act eternally. Yes; Long as a spirit, God, or world exists; From everlasting, eternal, without end. And whilst thou dwelt in thy paternal home, And with thy brethren shar'd ecstatic bliss, All that a spirit could not cloth'd in flesh, Thou through the vista of unnumbered years Saw'st through the glimmering veil that thou would'st Dwell in flesh—just as the Gods. Tread in the Footsteps of thine elder brother, Jesus— The "Prince of Peace," for whom a body was Prepared. Thou hop'd for this. At length it came; and thou Appear'd on this terraqueous ball, Body and spirit; a living soul, forth From the hands of Elohim—eternal As himself—part of thy God. A small spark Of Deity struck from the fire of his Eternal blaze. Thou came! thou came to live! Of life thou art A living monument; to it thou still Dost cling eternal life. To thee all else Are straw and chaff and bubbles, light as air; And will be all, until thou gain once more Thy Father's breast; rais'd, quicken'd, immortal; Body, spirit, all: a God among the Gods forever bles't. Abby: and hast thou dared to launch thy Fragile barque on truth's tempestuous sea; To meet the pelting storm, and proudly brave The dangers of the raging main; and through The rocks, and shoals, and yawning gulfs, pursue The nearest way to life, in hopes that thou Would'st speedy gain a seat among the Gods? A living monument; to it thou still Seest thou the multitudes who sail in Gilded barques, and gently float along the Silvery stream? Downward they go with sweet Luxurious ease, and scarce a zephyr moves The tranquil bosom of the placid stream. Unconscious of the greatness of the prize They might obtain, they glide along in peace; And as they never soar aloft, nor mount On eagle's wings, nor draw aside the veil Of other worlds, they know none else than this— No other joys. They dream away their life, And die forgot. Just as the butterfly They gaily flutter on: today they live— Tomorrow are no more. And though, like thee, In them is the eternal spark, thousands Of weary years must roll along e'er they Regain the prize they might with thee have shar'd. Regain it? Never! No! They may come where Thou wert, but never can they with thee share Ecstatic bliss. For whilst in heaven's progressive Science skill'd, thou soared'st from world to world, clad In the robes of bright seraphic light; and With thy God, eternal—onward goest, a Priestess and a queen—reigning and ruling in The realms of light—unlike the imbeciles Who dared not brook the scorn of men, and knew not How to prize eternal life. Abby: the cup's within thy reach; drink thou The vital balm and live.

New York, September 5th, 1846.

—Millennial Star 8:178-179.

Revelation Given Through President John Taylor

At Salt Lake City, Utah Territory,

October 13, 1882

Thus saith the Lord to the Twelve, and to the priesthood and people of my Church: Let my servants George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant be appointed to fill the vacancies in the Twelve, that you may be fully organized and prepared for the labors devolving upon you, for you have a great work to perform; and then proceed to fill up the presiding quorum of Seventies, and assist in organizing that body of my priesthood who are your co-laborers in the ministry. You may appoint Seymour B. Young to fill up the vacancy in the presiding quorum of Seventies, if he will conform to my law; for it is not meet that men who will not abide my law shall preside over my priesthood; and then proceed forthwith and call to your aid any assistance that you may require from among the Seventies to assist you in your labors in introducing and maintaining the gospel among the Lamanites throughout the land. And then let High Priests be selected, under the direction of the First Presidency, to preside over the various organizations that shall exist among this people; that those who receive the gospel may be taught in the doctrines of my church and in the ordinances and laws thereof, and also in the things pertaining to my Zion and my kingdom, saith the Lord, that they may be one with you in my Church and my kingdom.

Let the Presidency of my Church be one in all things; and let the Twelve also be one in all things; and let them all be one with me as I am one with the Father.

And let the High Priests organize themselves, and purify themselves, and prepare themselves for this labor, and for all other labors that they may be called upon to fulfill.

And let the Presidents of Stakes also purify themselves, and the priesthood and people of the Stakes over which they preside, and organize the priesthood in their various Stakes according to my law, in all the various departments thereof, in the High Councils, in the Elders' quorums, and in the Bishops and their councils, and in the quorums of Priests, Teachers and Deacons, that every quorum may be fully organized according to the order of my Church; and, then, let them inquire into the standing and fellowship of all that hold my holy priesthood in their several Stakes; and if they find those that are unworthy let them remove them, except they repent; for my priesthood, whom I have called and whom I have sustained and honored, shall honor me and obey my laws, and the laws of my holy priesthood, or they shall not be considered worthy to hold my priesthood, saith the Lord. And let my priesthood humble themselves before me, and seek not their own will but my will; for if my priesthood, whom I have chosen, and called, and endowed with the spirit and gifts of their several callings, and with the powers thereof, do not acknowledge me I will not acknowledge them, saith the Lord; for I will be honored and obeyed by my priesthood.
