Various authors, Testimonies of Book of Mormon Witnesses

Martin Harris' Early Experiences with Mormonism As Related by the New York Press, 1831

Source: "Golden Bible," Painesville Telegraph, 1831, p. 3.

"Golden Bible."—The Palmyra. Freeman Says, the greatest piece of superstition that has ever come within our knowledge, now occupies the attention of a few individuals of this quarter. It is generally known and spoke of as the "Golden Bible." Its proselytes give the following account of it: In the fall of 1827, a person by the name of Joseph Smith of Manchester, Ontario County, reported that he had been visited in a dream by the spirit of the Mighty, and informed that in a certain hill in that town, was deposited this Golden Bible, containing an ancient record of a divine nature and origin. After having been thence thus visited, as he states he proceeded to the spot and after having proceeded to the spot and after having penetrated "mother earth a short distance, the Bible was found together with a huge pair of spectacles! He had directed, however, not to let any mortal being examine them, under no less penalty than instant death! They were therefore nicely wrapped up and excluded from the vulgar gaze of poor wicked mortals!" It was said that the leaves of the Bible were plates of gold about eight inches long, six wide and one eighth of an inch thick, on which were engraved characters or hieroglyphics by placing the spectacles in a hat, and looking into, Smith could (he said so at least) interpret the characters.

An account of this discovery was soon circulated. The subject was almost invariably treated as it should have been with contempt. A few however believed the "Golden" story, among whom was Martin Harris, an honest and industrious farmer of the town of Palmyra. So blindly enthusiastic was Harris, that he took some of the characters interpreted by Smith, and went in search of some one; besides the interpreter, who was learned enough to English them; but to all whom he applied (among the number was Professor Mitchell, of New York,) happened not to be possessed of sufficient knowledge to give satisfaction! Harris returned, and set Smith to work at interpreting the Bible. He has at length performed the task, and the work is soon to be put to press in Palmyra. Its language and doctrines are said to be far superior to the book of life!

A NEGATIVE ACCOUNT OF MARTIN HARRIS' CONVICTIONS, 1831 Source: "Golden Bible," Painesville Telegraph, 15 Mar 1831, p. 3.

Martin Harris, another chief of the Mormon impostors, arrived here last Saturday from the bible quarry in New York. He immediately planted himself in the bar-room of the hotel, where he soon commenced reading and explaining the Mormon hoax, and all the dark passages from Genesis to Revelations. He told all about the gold plates, angels, spirits, and Jo Smith. He had seen and handled them all, by the power of God! Curiosity soon drew around thirty or forty spectators, and all who presumed to question his blasphemous pretentions, were pronounced infidels. He was very flippant, talking fast and loud, in order that others could not interpose an opinion counter to his. Every idea that he advanced, he knew to be absolutely true, as he said, by the spirit and power of God. . . . [He] had a fair specimen of the Mormon slang, in this display of one of their headmen. The meeting was closed, by a request of the landlord that the prophet should remove his quarters, which he did, after declaring, that all who believed the new bible would see Christ within fifteen years, and all who did not would absolutely be destroyed and damned.

SELECTION FROM JAMES GORDON BENNETT'S REPORT ON MORMONISM, 1831 Source: James G. Bennett, "History of Mormonism," Hillsborough Gazette (Ohio), 29 Oct 1831.

[For additional information on this article see Leonard J. Arrington, "James Gordon Bennett's 1831 Report on `The Mormonites'," BYU Studies 10 (Spring 1970):353-64. Arrington includes in his work the same article cited above which appeared in the Morning Courier and Enquirer, 1 Sep 1831.]

It is probable that Joe Smith is well acquainted with the trick, but Harris the farmer and the recent converts, are true believers.—Harris was the first man who gave credit to the story of Smith and the ex-preacher. He was their maiden convert - the Ali of the Ontario Mahomet, who believed without a reason and without a murmur. They attempted to get the Book printed, but could not raise the means till Harris stepped [sic] forward, and raised money on his farm for that purpose. Harris with several manuscripts in his pocket, went to the city of New York, and called upon one of the professors of Columbia College for the purpose of showing them to him. Harris says that the professor thought them very curious, but admitted that he could not decipher them. Said he to Harris, "Mr. Harris you had better go to the celebrated Doctor Mitchell and shew them to him. He is very learned in these ancient languages, and I have no doubt will be able to give you some satisfaction." "Where does he live?" asked Harris. He was told, and off he posted with the engravings from the golden plates to submit to Doctor Mitchell - Harris says that the Doctor received him very["politely,"[?] looked at his engravings - made a learned dissertation on them - compared them with the hieroglyphics discovered by Champollion in Egypt - and set them down as the language of a people formerly in existence in the East, but now no more.
