I know that President Russell M. Nelson is a prophet of God, and I am grateful that God speaks to him. President Nelson’s love for us is one manifestation of God’s love. I love President Nelson. The promises he pronounces are of God.

  Justine Hinautan, Philippines

  President Nelson teaches me that the most important thing today is to choose Christ by cherishing and honoring covenants.

  Ryan Hulme, New Zealand

  I am so grateful for the prophet, Russell M. Nelson. I bear my testimony that he is a man called by God to guide and strengthen us in the last days. If we follow his counsel, all will be well.

  Nelson Almeida, Cabo Verde

  Thank you, President Nelson, from the bottom of our hearts for giving us words of wisdom from our Heavenly Father. God bless you, our dear prophet!

  Brenda Boyle, Scotland

  Thank you, President Nelson, for your inspiring and uplifting teachings. We love you.

  Thaong Putheary, Cambodia

  I am so grateful for the love and insights President Nelson offers as a prophet. His talk on the temple ushered me towards getting my endowment, his devotional to the young adults has reminded me to recognize my chief identity as a child of God, and his push for gathering scattered Israel has been a constant topic amongst my family and ward community. Most importantly, he has helped me draw closer to my Savior.

  Grace Burt, United States

  I have deeply pondered the teachings of our beloved prophet, Russell M. Nelson. His teachings have inspired my life. His prophetic words have motivated me to keep going forward and to live the gospel more fully in this chaotic and conflicted world. I feel so safe to know that we have a prophet in our day who exhorts us to have a spirit of peace, to avoid contention with our peers. I value his great teachings.

  Ana Montoya, Honduras

  I have a firm testimony that President Russell M. Nelson is God’s prophet for the latter days. I’ve had the privilege of witnessing up close his humility, his simplicity, and the love he feels for people. Indeed, he is the chosen man to lead God’s kingdom on earth in this unique time. I’ve listened to and followed his counsel, which has guided me to live a righteous life and face the challenges of mortality. I feel immense love for President Nelson, and I’m aware of his extraordinary contribution to the advancement of God’s kingdom and the gathering of Israel through his inspirations and announcements for temple construction worldwide.

  David G. Fernandes, Brazil

  On August 24, 2019, the prophet spoke in Spanish and instructed us on keeping the commandments of the Lord. I felt very strongly the love of Jesus Christ for the effort of the prophet in learning our language. I know that through the living prophet, God encourages, instructs, protects, guides, and blesses us.

  Saúl Alfredo Rojas de León, Guatemala
