In the book of Helaman, the prophet Samuel the Lamanite testifies of Jesus Christ and gives warnings and invitations to the Nephites (see Helaman 13–14). In our day we also have the opportunity to listen to timely warnings from our prophet and other Church leaders. Heeding their invitations helps us follow the covenant path.

General conference is a perfect chance to hear the latest words from our inspired leaders and draw closer to Jesus Christ. Here are some ways you might consider using general conference to enhance your testimony of living prophets:

1.  Before general conference, prayerfully ponder why having a prophet is important to you. Consider praying to receive confirmation from the Spirit that the current President of the Church is God’s prophet, seer, and revelator on the earth today. “Knowing by revelation that there is a living prophet on the earth changes everything.”

2.  Research what it means to support and sustain the prophet and General Authorities. As their names are presented in general conference for a sustaining vote, you can participate in sustaining them.

3.  “By the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things” (Moroni 10:5). As you listen to the messages from Church leaders, pay attention to the Spirit testifying that their words are true.

4.  One of the prophet’s main roles is to testify of Jesus Christ and teach us to “look upon the Son of God with faith” (see Helaman 8:13–16). You might want to note what the prophet and the other speakers teach about the Savior.

5.  “Through [President Russell M. Nelson], we have received countless invitations and have been promised glorious blessings if we will center our lives on our Savior.” Consider making a list of the invitations extended by the prophet and other speakers during conference. Refer back to that list to help you strive to become more like Christ.

6.  Remember President Nelson’s invitation: “I exhort you to study the messages of this conference frequently–even repeatedly–during the next six months.” As you listen to or read the messages again, mark things that stand out to you.

7.  President Nelson invites us to “seek and expect miracles.” As you obey the prophet’s counsel and make changes in your life, pay attention to the blessings you receive and the miracles you see (see Helaman 16:4–5).

As you follow these steps to develop your testimony of a prophet, seer, and revelator, draw on your faith in Jesus Christ and a loving Heavenly Father. God has lovingly given us prophets to guide us back to Him—prophets who act as His mouthpiece to reveal His will to the world. (See Doctrine and Covenants 1:38; 21:5–6.) If we choose to follow His servants’ counsel, we choose to follow Him.
