When the COVID-19 pandemic hit, I was serving as a missionary in the Dominican Republic. My first three transfers as a missionary hadn’t been easy, but I felt grateful for all I had learned and was excited to continue growing as a disciple of Jesus Christ.

So when I was sent home for three months, I was confused and heartbroken. My life felt uncertain and stagnant. I eventually received my reassignment to Iowa City, Iowa, USA. Although I immediately loved Iowa and the people there, I felt like I was starting over. The adjustment was difficult, and I struggled with feelings of inadequacy, anxiety, and loneliness.

I prayed every day for some kind of relief. My feelings were heavy, and I was struggling to bear them on my own.

During my personal study, I read a quote by President Gordon B. Hinckley (1910–2008) that helped my heart feel lighter. He shared:

“The Lord said: ‘Wherefore, lift up thy heart and rejoice, and cleave unto the covenants which thou hast made.’ (Doctrine and Covenants 25:13.)

“I believe he is saying to each of us, be happy. The gospel is a thing of joy. It provides us with a reason for gladness.”

I began to look at the word rejoice in the scriptures in a new light. It was an invitation from the Lord to be happy. Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ know better than anyone of the challenges, pains, and hardships we face—and still They invite us to be happy.

I resolved to accept that invitation. Even though my circumstances didn’t change and my sad feelings didn’t magically disappear, I felt a deeper, underlying sense of gratitude and joy for the blessings and promises of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Examples from the scriptures show us how Saints from the past have found joy even in the most difficult circumstances. In Helaman, we see members of the Church who turned to the gospel to find joy even while being persecuted by others:

“Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God” (Helaman 3:35).

When we look to the Savior in our trials, our souls can be filled with joy and comfort. In doing so, we learn to better align our hearts with the Lord.

As I’ve continued to practice rejoicing, I’ve found a greater sense of strength in the face of difficulties. I recently faced a disappointment that left me with a sad pit in my stomach. But as I reflected on how I was feeling, I could see how much I had grown since my time as a missionary.

My sadness didn’t feel derailing, because I’ve come to realize that true happiness is living the gospel of Jesus Christ. It doesn’t mean we’ll never experience hardships or that we’ll face every challenge with perfect grace.

Elder Neil L. Andersen of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught:

“We search for happiness. We long for peace. We hope for love. And the Lord showers us with an amazing abundance of blessings. But intermingled with the joy and happiness, one thing is certain: there will be moments, hours, days, sometimes years when your soul will be wounded.

“The scriptures teach that we will taste the bitter and the sweet and that there will be ‘opposition in all things’ [2 Nephi 2:11].”

Sadness and joy can coexist. Grief and gratitude. Pain and positivity. In fact, my experiences with the negatives in life expand my ability to feel and allow me to develop a greater capacity to enjoy the good. The beautiful truths of the gospel cushion my pains. They still hurt but are surrounded with a deep love for the Savior, an appreciation for the lovely miracles that fill my life, a trust that all will work together for my good, and a profound sense of joy.
