The focus of the Africa Central Area Presidency is to encourage us to become better disciples of Jesus Christ as we do all in our power to live according to the covenants we made with Our Heavenly Father at baptism and in the temple. These ordinances yoke us to our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ.

The prophet Mormon in the Book of Mormon described himself as a disciple of Christ (See 3 Nephi 5:13). The word disciple comes from the Latin word meaning learner. A disciple of Jesus Christ is one who has made the covenant to take upon himself the name of Jesus Christ, always remember Him and keep His commandments. A disciple is the one who is learning and trying daily to become more like the Savior Jesus Christ. A disciple is one who tries to learn, think, feel, and act as the Savior Jesus Christ does. One of my favorite primary songs is “I’m trying to be like Jesus” because the words remind me what it means to be a disciple.

I will never forget a lesson that my dear wife, Sister Mutombo, taught me on the first day of our marriage. I remember that Sunday as if it was yesterday. We had no food in our home and no money to buy food. As a newly married husband, I truly wanted to provide for my new wife, but I had no means to do so. I felt very alone.

I looked at my wife lying on the mattress that we had put on the floor because we had no money for a bed. She was exhausted and hungry. I decided to visit a good friend of mine to find a solution to my trial. I left my wife alone in our small two-square-meter room and went to see my friend. He told me that he had no money to help me but gave me one dollar to use for transportation to get home. I saw this as an answer to many sincere prayers to my Heavenly Father, asking for His help and support. I decided to walk home and use the dollar to buy food for my wife because that is the only money I had.

On the way back home, I used the dollar to buy a small piece of meat and some bread and put it in a black plastic bag. I was so excited that I now had food to give to my wife and walked home quickly. It was after 9 p.m. when I got home, and my dear Nathalie was tired, exhausted, hungry, and probably wondering about her future. Can you imagine going without food on your first day of married life? When I arrived home, I proudly presented food to my wife, saying, “darling, I got some food for you, please wake up.”

She woke up and took the plastic bag and saw the piece of meat and bread. She asked, “where did you find the money to buy this food?”

I told her. She looked at me and asked an unexpected question. “Have you paid tithing on the one dollar you received?”

I replied, “Nathalie, this is just one dollar, do you think we need to pay tithing on it?”

She took the piece of meat and bread that I brought home to her, put it back in the bag and said that she would not eat the bread of a man who does not remember his covenant with God. I weep when I remember this experience. I repented immediately and promised my wife that never ever again would I make such a poor choice. She taught me what it means to be a true disciple of Jesus Christ who keeps his covenants with God. I have since found great joy in paying an honest and full tithing. As President Russell M. Nelson said, the Church was not any different because I paid a full tithe, however becoming a full-tithe payer changed me as my faith in my Savior Jesus Christ increased.

Being a disciple of Jesus Christ brings joy and peace despite the challenges of this mortal journey. It is about giving it all and not holding back. Giving it all does not mean that all will always be a successful experience, but it means that we will have joy that the world cannot provide. Joy is enduring and can be found only in our daily efforts being accepted by the Lord. (See Doctrine and Covenants 52:15.)

At the beginning of the Church, when the Saints were driven from Kirtland, Ohio, USA, Oliver Granger was left behind to sell all their properties for what little he could. There was not much chance that he could succeed, and really, he did not. The assignment that he was given by the First Presidency of the Church during that time was very difficult, if not impossible. But the Lord commended him for his apparently unsuccessful efforts, saying about him:

‘’I remember my servant, Oliver Granger; behold, verily I say unto him that his name shall be had in sacred remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord” (Doctrine and Covenants 117:12).

What really matters the most for the Lord is not our success but rather our sacrifice and efforts as we keep trying to be better and do better. (See Doctrine and Covenants 97:8–9.)

Like King Lamoni’s father in the Book of Mormon, who, fearing for his life when Ammon had his sword to his throat, said, “If thou wilt spare me I will grant unto thee whatsoever thou wilt ask, even to half of the kingdom” (Alma 20:23).

But, later after receiving and understanding the blessing of the Atonement of Jesus Christ and His gospel, the blessing of having a Savior, he declared, ‘’What shall I do that I may have this eternal life of which thou hast spoken? Yea, what shall I do that I may be born of God, having this wicked spirit rooted out of my breast, and receive his spirit, that I may be filled with joy, that I may not be cast off at the last day? Behold, I will give up all that I possess, yea, I will forsake my kingdom, that I may receive this great joy” (Alma 22:15).

As true disciples of Jesus Christ let us be willing to give it all unto Him as He gave it all unto us. I know that He lives and is my Savior and Redeemer. I know that His Atonement, His tender mercies, His grace, and His desire is to help us receive eternal joy. I invite you my beloved brothers, sisters, and friends that no matter what, choose Jesus Christ in your life and your homes, so that we all and our children may know to what source we may look for a remission of our sins.
