Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 1

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, during a special conference of Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, held at Hiram, Ohio, November 1, 1831. Many revelations had been received from the Lord prior to this time; and the compilation of these for publication in book form was one of the principal subjects passed upon at the conference. See History of the Church, vol. 1, page 222. This Section constitutes the Lord's Preface to the doctrines, covenants, and commandments given in this dispensation.—Proclamation of warning and commandment to the Church and to the inhabitants of the earth at large—The authority of the Priesthood in this dispensation attested—Second advent of the Lord Jesus Christ foretold—Authenticity of the Book of Mormon affirmed.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

I returned from the conference at Orange, to Hiram; and as Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were to start for Independence, Missouri, a special conference was appointed for the first of November, at which I received the following: [Section 1, quoted.] (HC 1:221-22; Hiram, Ohio.)

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3D&C 1 4D&C 1 5Ezra Taft Benson: 1-5

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3D&C 1 4D&C 1 5A hundred and thirty years ago, when the elders were assembled in conference to determine whether the revelations should be published to the world, the Lord saw fit to give revelation to his Church, which was also directed to the world. He referred to it as his "Preface" or his '"Introduction to His Book of Commandments," and it is the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants from which I quote these words: (Note them carefully.) [Sec. 1:1-2, 4-5, quoted.]

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3D&C 1 4D&C 1 5So our message is a world message. It is intended for all of our Father's children. When God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ saw fit to come here to earth and appear to a boy prophet, surely such a visitation was intended to bless all of our Father's children. (CR, April 1961, pp. 113-14.)

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3D&C 1 4D&C 1 5Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-5

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3D&C 1 4D&C 1 5We may wonder how that will come to pass [Sec. 1:1-5] because we understand that with the best efforts we can make in sending forth and publishing this word there are many who do not hear it. Our two thousand missionaries who are scattered over the face of the earth preaching the Gospel are very few in comparison with the millions unto whom this Gospel is to be proclaimed. But the Lord will reach the hearts of the people, his word will not fail. And I do not understand even from this wording that it is necessary that every heart be penetrated and every ear hear in this life. But if they have not heard, if this opportunity has not come to them through the preaching of the elders and through the things that have been published in the word of the Lord that has gone forth by revelation, the opportunity is going to come to them and they must hear it in the spirit world.

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3D&C 1 4D&C 1 5And so the Lord in his kindness and mercy intends to bring these truths of this restored Gospel to every soul, living or dead. In this manner every heart shall be penetrated and every ear shall hear. (CR, October 1931, p. 16.)

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-3

SCD&C 1 1D&C 1 2D&C 1 3The Lord has given so many revelations in our own day. We have this Doctrine and Covenants full of them, all pertaining unto the Latter-day Saints and to the world. For this is not our book alone. This Doctrine and Covenants is my book and your book; but more than that, it belongs to all the infidels, to the Catholics; to the Presbyterians, to the Methodists, to the infidel, to the non-believer. It is his book if he will accept it, if he will receive it. The Lord has given it unto the world for their salvation. If you do not believe it, you read the first section in this book, the preface, and you will find that the Lord has sent this book and the things which it contains unto the people afar off, on the islands of the sea, in foreign lands, and his voice is unto all people, that all may hear. (CR, October 1919, p. 146.)

D&C 1 2Joseph Smith: 2

There is none to escape

D&C 1 2You cannot go anywhere but where God can find you out. All men are born to die, and all men must rise; all must enter eternity. (HC 6:366, May 13, 1844.)

George Albert Smith: 6

D&C 1 6This is mine authority

D&C 1 6This preface [Section 1] is worthy of your earnest consideration. It is the admonition of the Father of all of us. It is the living advice of a tender parent who knows what we require, as he said in the chapter [Sec. 1] just read, that knowing what was about to come upon the inhabitants of the earth, he gave these commandments. The Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price do not contain the wisdom of men alone, but of God. While they do not find their way into the homes, of many people, they contain the word of the Lord. What mattereth it though we understand Homer and Shakespeare and Milton, and I might enumerate all the great writers of the world; if we have failed to read the scriptures we have missed the better part of this world's literature. (CR, October 1917, p. 43-44.)

D&C 1 7Wilford Woodruff: 7

D&C 1 7Far what I. . . have decreed in them shall be fulfilled

D&C 1 7We live in a very important age and generation; we live in the day and time when God has set his hand to fulfill a measure of prophecy and revelation to man, in the great dispensation of all dispensations. . . . I also believe that the saying of every Prophet or Apostle spoken under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost will have its fulfillment, and as Paul said, no prophecy of Scripture hath any private interpretation, but holy men of old spake as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost. [2 Pet. 1:20-21.] They spake the mind and word of the Lord, and none of their sayings will fail to be fulfilled, for the Lord hath said—"Though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not fail, but shall be fulfilled." That is the way I read prophecy and revelation.

(JD, June 27, 1875, 18:38.)

D&C 1 10Joseph F. Smith: 10

D&C 1 10Every man according to his work

D&C 1 10Every man will be judged according to his works, whether they be good or whether they be evil, and that is a doctrine that was advanced and taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith in plainness that cannot be ignored; every man will be judged according to his works, whether they be good or whether they be evil. [Sec. 76:110-111.] Anything short of that would not and could not be of God, if God is just, if God is righteous, if God is impartial; then this principle of justice is a righteous principle, and it certainly has emanated from God, and not from Joseph Smith, nor from man. (CR, October 1911, pp. 8-9.)

D&C 1 13Joseph Smith: 13

D&C 1 13And the anger of the Lord is kindled

D&C 1 13I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God of Israel, anguish and wrath and tribulation and the withdrawing of the Spirit of God from the earth await this generation, until they are visited with utter desolation. This generation is as corrupt as the generation of the Jews that crucified Christ; and if he were here today, and should preach the same doctrine He did then they would put Him to death. (HC 6:58, October 15, 1843.)

D&C 1 14Joseph F. Smith: 14

D&C 1 14Obedience is a requirement of heaven and is therefore a principle of the Gospel. [Sec. 82:10; 130:20-21.] Are all required to be obedient? Yes, all. What, against their will? O no, not by any means. There is no power given to man nor means lawful to be used to compel men to obey the will of God, against their wish, except persuasion and good advice, but there is a penalty attached to disobedience which all must suffer who will not obey the obvious truths or laws of heaven. (JD, September 30, 1877, 19:193.)

D&C 1 16D&C 1 14James E. Talmage: 16

D&C 1 16Every man walketh. . . after the image of his own God

D&C 1 16The great trouble with the world today, as I understand it, is that it has become idolatrous. We read of idolatry and think of it as a practice or series of practices in the past. This is an idolatrous generation, defying the commandment written by the finger of God—"Thou shalt have no other Gods before me" [Ex. 20:3], and an idolatrous generation is an adulterous generation. . . . Men are praising the gods of silver and of gold and of all the other valuable commodities that make up wealth, and the God in whose hand their breath is and whose are all their ways they will not recognize. Do you wonder that wickedness and crime have increased to terrifying proportions under those conditions? The prophets of old foresaw it. They spoke of the days of wickedness and vengeance immediately precedent to the second coming of the Lord, which I reiterate, for it has been spoken before, is near at hand. [2 Tim. 3:1-6; Matt. 24:36, 39.]

D&C 1 16The Israelites were distinguished in the first place as worshipers of a living God, a personal God, in whose image they had been created and made. [Gen. 1:26-27; Ex. 33:21-23.] No other nation on the face of the earth recognized the living God. That was a sign by which the covenant people, descendants of Abraham, through Isaac and Jacob, were known. Another sign was this: they observed every seventh day as the Sabbath of the Lord their God [Ex. 20:8-11]; and the Lord has said: This shall be a sign between thee and the nations: They shall know that ye are my people because ye observed my Sabbath. [Ex. 31:12-18.] And the third sign I mention is that they were tithed of all they possessed. [Lev. 27:30; Matt 3:8] Those were set forth prominently as the banners of Israel, by which all nations should know that they were covenant people of God. . . .

D&C 1 16Where do we stand with respect to those signs? Are we worshipping the true and living God, or are we going idolatrously after the gods of gold and silver, of iron and wood, and brass, diamonds and other idols of wealth? Are we worshipping our farms, our cattle and sheep? Who is our God? To whom are we yielding homage, allegiance and worship? Not worship by means of words only, in ritualistic form, but worship in action, devotion, and sacrificial service? (CR, October 1930, pp. 71, 73.)

D&C 1 16First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards): 17-23

D&C 1 16The first light of the morning of this age, and the time referred to by the Savior, was the Angel who had the everlasting Gospel, which was to be preached to all people, preaching and ministering to Joseph Smith, Jun., and commanding Joseph to preach and administer to others even as he had received of the Angel; and the light continued to shine and spread, as others believed, on the testimony of Joseph; for they repented of their sins, were baptized by him, and he, having received the Holy Priesthood from the Angels, conferred the same Priesthood on the believers; and they in turn went forth proclaiming the same Gospel, administering the same ordinances, calling on all the faithful to gather themselves together, to the upholding of Zion, until the light has already been seen in the four quarters of the earth, and is fast being reflected over every nation and people; and this, the Gospel, the plan of salvation, is the true light that must shine from the East to the West—that is, to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people on the earth, before the end will come; and the faithful, the Saints, must be gathered together in holy places and build Temples and do all necessary works to open up the way of life and salvation to the dead as well as the living, before they can complete the work which is given them to do in this dispensation and probation. (MS, January 15, 1852, 14:17-25.)

SCD&C 1 17D&C 1 18D&C 1 19D&C 1 20D&C 1 21D&C 1 22D&C 1 23Wilford Woodruff: 17-23

SCD&C 1 17D&C 1 18D&C 1 19D&C 1 20D&C 1 21D&C 1 22D&C 1 23At the commencement of the Church, the Lord gave revelations to the Church and to individuals, through the Prophet, to tell them what to do—be baptized, ordained, go on missions, and anything that was required at their hands; and hence you can see in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants revelations given to Martin Harris [Sec. 19], Parley P. Pratt [Sec. 32; 50:37], Orson Pratt [Sec. 34], the Whitmers [Sec. 14, 15, 16], and many others, calling them to go forth and preach the Gospel to the world. In those revelations are promised many great and glorious things, and the pattern is given and the foundation laid for a great and mighty work—a work not to be accomplished in ten, twenty, thirty, forty or fifty years, but a work that embraces the gathering together of all things which are to be saved, both in heaven and on earth, and the establishing of the kingdom of God, to remain forever; and the Lord said, You are laying the foundations for a great and mighty work. [Sec. 64:33.] But we did not understand or comprehend its extent. He called upon us to go forth and warn the world of the judgments to come, and to call upon them to learn the ways of righteousness, and to walk therein; and what has been the result?

SCD&C 1 17D&C 1 18D&C 1 19D&C 1 20D&C 1 21D&C 1 22D&C 1 23Every man that has embraced it, whose heart was honest before God, has been inspired by the Spirit of God; he has been ready to engage in the work to shoulder the knapsack, and go forth and preach this Gospel to all people whenever an opportunity presented itself; and the first Elders of this Church did preach diligently and faithfully, and many received the word with gladness and rejoiced in the truth. (JD, January 10, 1858, 7:102.)

SCD&C 1 17D&C 1 18Melvin J. Ballard: 17-18

SCD&C 1 17D&C 1 18I understand from this [Sec. 1:17-18, 22-24] that the Lord plainly knew the condition of the world, what it was in 1830, and what it would be today in the year 1923. Knowing the calamities that were coming to his children, unless they changed their course, knowing their disposition that there would be no repentance in their hearts, and yet with a great desire to save them, he called upon his servant, Joseph Smith, to warn men, to call repentance, and others to join in this great proclamation to all men: "Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand." [Sec. 33:10; 42:7.] And not only to warn men that there was peril and danger ahead, but to offer the means of escape from the perils that would come. . . . He has always in ample time given his sons and daughters full and complete warning of the perils and dangers that are ahead of them, and has, in that connection, clearly pointed out the way of escape. That has been true in this dispensation, and the warning has been proclaimed on the islands of the sea, in the continents of the world, and through the states of the United States, and among even Pagan nations, the warning voice of the servants of the Lord has been heard, for nearly one hundred years, and it is a warning voice that also comes with a kind of invitation to all the Father's children, showing the means of escape, which is the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, restored again among men. . . .The law must take its course, and when men refuse the offer and tender the Lord has given by which they may be saved, they cannot blame the Lord if calamities, judgments and destructions come upon them. The Lord cannot avert it, it must take its course, and yet our Father in his kindness and mercy has offered the way and the means of escape. [Sec. 5:18-19; 133:16.] (CR, October 1923, pp. 30-31.)

D&C 1 17Stephen L Richards: 17

D&C 1 17I rebuke the members of the Church who cast aspersion upon the honored name of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and who in any manner disparage his noble work. By doing so they destroy faith, their own and that of others, and the Lord will hold them accountable.

D&C 1 17I repeat what I have said on this pulpit before: My grandfather [Willard Richards; Sec. 135:2] was a close friend and companion of this man. He knew him as intimately as one man may know another. He had abundant opportunity to detect any flaws in his character and discover any deceit in his work. He found none, and he has left his testimony to his family and to all the world that this man was true, that he was divinely commissioned for the work he had to do, and that he gave his life to the fulfillment of his mission. I have complete assurance that Willard Richards did not lie about his friend, and on my own account, independent of my grandfather's testimony, borne out of the spirit within me, I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God, and the work he was instrumental in setting upon the earth is the veritable kingdom of our Father in heaven.

D&C 1 17Having that knowledge and deep reverence for his illustrious name, I deplore and resent the miserable attempts made to discredit him; and I predict that they will all come to naught, that he will survive every attack, that he will yet win the esteem and respect of all good men, and that the Father has already glorified him. (CR, October 1951, pp. 117-18.)

D&C 1 23Stephen L Richards: 23

D&C 1 23That the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed

D&C 1 23The work is not new to us. We, and our predecessors, have carried it forward for more than one hundred years. It was the first enterprise undertaken by those of sacred memory who initiated the lofty cause to which we give our allegiance. So soon as the first revelation of the latter days came to them, they lost no time in carrying the message to neighbors and adjacent communities. When the Church was organized, they accepted most literally the revelation that its mission should be to preach the Gospel ". . . unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." (D&C 133:37.) That was their work. In their poverty and weakness they accepted it with such boldness and enthusiasm, fortitude and sacrifice, as history has seldom recorded.

D&C 1 23Their faith and confidence were marvelous. They trusted God, and they did not trust in vain. They knew that he had said that "The weak things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty and strong ones" (D&C 1:19), and that "the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers." (D&C 1:23.) With this assurance our forebears went forth. They assumed their obligation and it superseded everything else. Families were left without a competence, ofttimes in the care of relatives and neighbors and friends. Businesses were sacrificed. Such accumulations as they had were expended for the cause. If I were asked to name the outstanding, distinctive, organized accomplishment of the restored Church of Christ in the last century, I would without hesitation set forth its phenomenal missionary labors. Nothing more truly characterizes the altruism of the gospel that it teaches; nothing more deeply signifies the devotion and sincerity of its members.

D&C 1 23The enormous cost of the service has been widely distributed, shared by nearly every family in the Church. Many families have sent forth more than one missionary, and not infrequently has a home kept one or more missionaries in the field continuously for ten or a dozen years, sometimes for a quarter of a century. I know of no way of securing comparable data from other religious bodies, but I venture the assertion that no such church at any period in history for a century of time has ever given to a missionary service such a proportion of its membership and its available resources. (CR, October 1945, p. 53.)

D&C 1 24Joseph Fielding Smith: 24

D&C 1 24That they might come to understanding

D&C 1 24It is the duty of the members of this Church to make themselves familiar with the revelations as they have been given and with the commandments as they have been taught in these revelations, or have been presented in them and given to the people, that they might know the truth which makes us free. And if we will study them, if we will put them into practice, if we will keep the commandments of the Lord, we will know the truth and there shall be no weapon formed against us that shall prosper. [Sec. 71:9-11.] There shall be no false doctrines, no teaching of men that will deceive us. There are many cults and many false faiths, there are many strange ideas in the world, but if we will search these revelations then we will be fortified against errors and we will be made strong. False teachings will have no effect upon us, for we will know the truth which makes us free. . . .

D&C 1 24Let me read to you this key that the Lord gave to his disciples when he was in his ministry. Speaking of the last days, the days just preceding his coming, he said:

D&C 1 24And whoso treasureth up my word shall not be deceived, for the Son of Man shall come, and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. . . . [Joseph Smith 1:37.]

D&C 1 24If you treasure up the word of the Lord, if you study these revelations, not merely those that are in the Doctrine and Covenants, but those that are in all the standard works of the Church, and you put into practice the commandments that are here found, you will not be deceived in these perilous times, but you shall have the spirit of discernment and you will know the truth and shall know falsehood, for you shall have power to know the spirits of men and to understand the Spirit of the Lord. (CR, October 1931, pp. 17-18.)

James E. Talmage: 30

D&C 1 30In the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants—I pray you read for yourself—after reciting his purposes and plans and the partial realization of such in the bringing forth of this Gospel in this age, he speaks of those who were charged with authority in that day to administer the affairs of the Church, those to whom these commandments were given, and explains that the commandments were given that his servants might have power to lay the foundation of this Church and to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness. Please mark his words: "The only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I the Lord am well pleased." But that is not the end of the sentence or paragraph: "with which I the Lord am well pleased, speaking unto the church collectively and not individually.

D&C 1 30There lies a vital distinction. It is expressed, but we often overlook it. It is a distinction that should be heeded in all our organizations within the Church and without; the difference between the collective status or conditions or achievements and the work of the individual. . . .

D&C 1 30We as individuals are not doing all that could be done, all that should be done. I have no concern for the Church as a whole; its destiny is foretold, it is going on to glorious victory. [Sec. 65.] But that does not say that each of us who are members of the Church will go on to glorious victory; we may be left behind entirely. What are we doing individually? I repeat. (CR, October 1928, p. 118.)

D&C 1 30Joseph F. Smith: 30

D&C 1 30I believe in the Latter-day Saints. I believe they are a people who will do their duty, as a general thing. That there are delinquents, that there are those who are slothful, that there are those who are indifferent, and that there are those who have not the faith they should have, we know; we understand that; and that there are some, occasionally, who go wrong entirely, do wrong entirely; we know and understand that. But the vast majority of the Latter-day Saints are good and faithful members of the Church. God blesses them, and they are in fellowship with him and with each other. (CR, April 1912, p. 9.)

D&C 1 30James E. Talmage: 30

D&C 1 30The only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth

D&C 1 30We are aware that at the present time there is in progress a great world movement having for its object the federation of denominations and sects professing belief in Christianity. It is known as the Inter-Church World Movement. . . .

D&C 1 30It is a very important question to ask: Just where does The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stand in relation to that matter. I answer, it stands aloof and alone.

D&C 1 30Intimations have been given out that this Church is trying to get in; that it is trying to curry favor with the sects in order that it may have a place in the great combination that has been planned. Why, to think such a thing would be sacrilege on our part. We have not derived our authority to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel from the church of Rome. We are no outgrowth of any of the Protestant denominations. We constitute a Church that has been organized and named by the Lord Jesus Christ. So far as these combinations go, we wish the participants well. They have been foolishly, as they profess and declare, spending vast sums of money for the erection of meetinghouses, chapels, churches that they could not use; and they say they can save money by what they are proposing to do, though they are trying to raise a great sum by a world-wide drive in order to bring about the saving.

D&C 1 30If they can do anything better for the common good by joining together, let them join. These churches were formed by men, and men have the right to do with them as they please; we shall not interfere with them. But this Church was not formed on man's initiative, it was not called into being because of some brilliant leader who stepped forward with a new plan; and therefore we cannot, we have not the power nor the authority to make any kind of affiliation with any other church; let me say with equal earnestness, no other denomination, no sect can ever affiliate as such with this, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. There have been overtures made by some religious bodies to find out the terms under which they probably could come in with us; and the answer has been: Come in as every member of this Church has come in through the door; and note that the door is just wide enough to admit you, one at a time, the door of baptism, that ye may receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. [Sec. 20:37; 22; 33:11-13.] (CR, April 1920, pp. 103-4.)

D&C 1 31George Albert Smith: 31

D&C 1 31I am reminded of a portion of the 28th chapter of II Nephi, indicating the attitude of the evil doer, which I read as follows:

D&C 1 31And there shall be also many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin. (v. 8.)

D&C 1 31Think of that—the suggestion that a little sin will be justified, yet in the very first revelation contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, that which is known as the Preface, we find these words: [Sec. 1:31, quoted.]

D&C 1 31Yet there are those who would say that because it is a little sin our Heavenly Father does not care. Continuing the quotation from II Nephi:

D&C 1 31Yea, lie a little, take advantage of one because of his words. (v. 8.)

D&C 1 31Think of what that means, the whispering of the adversary to lie a little. Whether it be a lie intended to effect a religious organization, a business organization, a political organization, or an individual, the lie will brand the one who tells it, and sooner or later he will have to account for the wrong he has committed.

D&C 1 31Yea, lie a little, take advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God. ( v. 8.)

D&C 1 31That is what the adversary of righteousness is saying to the children of men. That is what Lucifer, who goes out defiling the people, is breathing in their souls. That is the kind of doctrine that is being disseminated in the world by some of those who ought to be the leaders of morality and also of righteousness. . . .

D&C 1 31We read further:

D&C 1 31Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark. (v. 9.)

D&C 1 31And then further:

D&C 1 31And others will he pacify and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion, yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

D&C 1 31And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance.

D&C 1 31Yea, they are grasped with death, and hell; and death, and hell, and the devil, and all that have been seized therewith must stand before the throne of God, and be judged according to their works, from whence they must go into the place prepared for them, even a lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment. (vs. 21-23.)

D&C 1 31That is the word of a prophet of the Lord, spoken hundreds of years ago, of what would exist in the world, and I bear you my witness today. . . that that is a condition that does exist in the world in that day and age in which we live. And as your brother, I plead with you that in the dignity of your membership in the great Church of the Lamb of God, you resist the insidious temptations of the adversary and that in your homes and elsewhere you teach and exemplify virtue and righteousness. (CR, October 1932, pp. 28-30.)

D&C 1 32George Teasdale: 32

D&C 1 32He that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven

D&C 1 32He hath said to the sinner, "When the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive." [Ezek. 18:27.] This is a precious promise to the erring children of the Father. Our message to the sinner is that if he will repent, cease to do evil and learn to do well, he shall receive a remission of his sins, through obedience to the Gospel and dedicating the rest of his life to the service of God. What a bright and glorious outlook, to be redeemed from sin and to have the privilege of walking in the light, receiving salvation and obtaining a glorious resurrection! (CR, October 1903, p. 50.)

D&C 1 32Hyrum G. Smith: 32

D&C 1 32In Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants we read these distinctive words: [Sec. 1:31-32, quoted.]

D&C 1 32Now he does not say how soon the forgiveness shall come, but he does make it plain that he will forgive those who repent and keep the commandments of the Lord. (CR, October 1918, p. 71.)

D&C 1 32Harold B. Lee: 32

D&C 1 32If the time comes when you have done all that you can to repent of your sins, whoever you are, wherever you are, and have made amends and restitution to the best of your ability; if it be something that will affect your standing in the Church and you have gone to the proper authorities, then you will want that confirming answer as to whether or not the Lord has accepted of you. In your soul-searching, if you seek for and you find that peace of conscience, by that token you may know that the Lord has accepted of your repentance. [Mosiah 4:2-3.] Satan would have you think otherwise and sometimes persuade you that now having made one mistake, you might go on and on with no turning back. That is one of the great falsehoods. The miracle of forgiveness is available to all of those who turn from their evil doings and return no more, because the Lord has said in a revelation to us in our day: ". . . go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth [meaning again] shall the former sins return, saith the Lord your God." ( D&C 82:7.) Have that in mind, all of you who may be troubled with a burden of sin. (CR, April 1973, pp. 177-78.)

D&C 1 33James E. Talmage: 33

D&C 1 33And he that repents not

D&C 1 33Because there is hope of repentance beyond the veil, procrastinate not the day of your repentance; for, as the Prophet Alma has pointed out [Alma 13:27; 34:33-35] you may find that the gift of repentance will be withheld from you there for a long, long time because of your unworthiness. For repentance is a gift from God, and when man forfeits it he loses the power to repent; he can't turn away from his sins with a contrite heart and with a desire to forsake them, once and forever. O, Latter-day Saints, ye men and women of Israel, listen to the voices of those who speak to you under the inspiration of the power of God, and heed them, for by hearing we are condemned if we follow not in the path that is pointed out to us as the path of our duty. (CR, October 1913, p. 121.)

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36Melvin J. Ballard: 34-36

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36The Lord knew there would be only a few who would accept that message. The majority would reject it. He provided for the few a refuge of peace; but so far as the world is concerned, he said—(I am reading from the 1st Section of the Doctrine and Covenants): [vv. 34-36, quoted.]

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36Peace taken from the earth, and the devil having power over his dominion. During the last one hundred years, or since these words were spoken, more light and knowledge has come into the world in the realm of science, through the laboratory, and otherwise, than in all the ages that have preceded it, and if this were all used for the alleviation of human suffering, peace and prosperity could be here, and poverty abolished.

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36But when we see men and nations spending their wealth to use the gas engine, the laboratory, the airplane, as means of human destruction, surely the devil has seized the blessings and privileges the Almighty intended to use to bring about peace, and is using them to destroy that which he presently shall lose the right to rule over. If. the devil is not in the character of warfare that goes over the front-line trenches, swoops down upon the poor helpless women and children, drops its deadly bombs and assassinates them, then I do not know anything that has ever happened in this world that is so like the work of the devil as that.:He is ruling in the midst of them. (CR, October 1938, pp. 105-6.)

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36George Q. Cannon: 34-36

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36This revelation [Section 87 on war] was made known at that time to the Saints and was a subject of constant remarks in the Church; in 1851 it was published to the world and obtained a somewhat wide circulation nearly twenty-nine years after its date; its wondrous fulfillment began when the first gun was fired at Fort Sumter, South Carolina. [Sec. 130:12-13.] Since that time wars and rumors of wars have prevailed throughout the world. Peace has fled, and in view of all the Lord has said, it is not too much to expect it has fled no more to return till the reign of righteousness shall begin. [Sec. 97:22-23.]

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36It is strange that the solemn warning uttered by Joseph in 1832 should have gone unheeded. His prophecy was not without its purpose. The Lord inspired his mind with visions of the future and with power to view the paths by which the nation might escape the impending disasters, but, like other parts of his message of salvation to the human race, this warning also was rejected. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 126-27.)

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36First Presidency ( Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards): 34-36

SCD&C 1 34D&C 1 35D&C 1 36Since our last Epistle, of October 13, 1852, we know of but few particulars that have transpired among the various nations of the earth. But we know that the revelations of Jesus Christ are true, and that peace is taken from the earth, and that those who will not receive and obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ, when they hear it, will grow worse and worse, in evil passions, strife, war, and blood, until the wicked shall have overthrown the wicked and destroyed themselves from the face of the earth [Sec. 63:32-33; 87:6], that Jesus may have the privilege to reign unmolested in the midst of those that love him. (MS, July 9, 1853, 15:437.)

D&C 1 35Joseph Fielding Smith: 35

D&C 1 35For I am no respecter of persons

D&C 1 35The Lord is no respecter of persons. However, let us not misinterpret this saying. It does not mean that the Lord does not respect those who obey him in all things more than he does the ungodly. Without question the Lord does respect those who love him and keep his commandments more than he does those who rebel against him. [Sec. 76:5; 1 Nephi 17:35.] The proper interpretation of this passage is that the Lord is not partial and grants to each man, if he will repent, the same privileges and opportunities of salvation and exaltation. He is just to every man, both the righteous and the wicked. He will receive any soul who will turn from iniquity to righteousness and will love him with a just love and bless him with all that the Father has to give; but let it not be thought that he will grant the same blessings to those who will not obey him and keep his law. If the Lord did bless the rebellious as he does the righteous, without their repentance, then he would be a respecter of persons. His justice and his mercy are perfect. Justice, says Alma, "Exerciseth all her demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly repentant are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:24-25.) (CHMR, 1948, 2:27.)

D&C 1 35Harold B. Lee: 35

D&C 1 35The devil

D&C 1 35In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, his preface to his commandments in this dispensation, the Lord said this, making it still clearer to the nature of this force of evil. [Sec. 1:35, quoted.]

D&C 1 35Satan's dominion, as the Lord has further explained, was the dominion of those who do wickedly in and throughout the world. . . .

D&C 1 35Satan, or the devil, is known by various terms. He is called the dragon; he is called the serpent; he is called perdition; he is called Lucifer; and he is called the adversary or the prince of darkness. After an encounter with Moses with this master of darkness, the Lord appeared and told Moses who Satan was, that he was one of the sons of God who came to Elohim with a proposition before this world was, that would have destroyed the agency of man. [Moses 4:1-4.] Satan was cast out with all those who followed after him, and they became those striving in this earth in a further effort to destroy the agency of man. [Sec. 29:36-38.] (CR, October 1949, pp. 55-56.)

D&C 1 36Harold B. Lee: 36

D&C 1 36The Lord. . . shall come down

D&C 1 36In our day, we have been told some similar things about the power of the Lord among his peoples. In the very first revelation, or the preface to the revelations, the Lord said: [Sec. 1:35-36, quoted.]

D&C 1 36One of the ways by which "he comes down among his people" is clearly explained in the revelation in which he defines certain gifts of the Spirit. He enumerates some of the gifts of the Spirit which men might enjoy; knowledge, and faith, and discernment, and the gift of tongues, and the testimony of knowledge that Jesus is the Son of God, and then he says this:

D&C 1 36. . . .unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church, . . . are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts. . . . (Ibid. 46:27.)

D&C 1 36Previously he had said: ". . . given for the benefit of those who love me and keep my commandments." (Ibid. 9.) In our day he sounded a warning . . . when he said to those to whom these gifts are committed:

D&C 1 36And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments. [Ibid. 59:21.] (CR, October 1960, p. 16.)

SCD&C 1 37D&C 1 38Joseph F. Smith: 37-38

SCD&C 1 37D&C 1 38The Kingdom of God is here to grow, to spread abroad, to take root in the earth and to abide where the Lord has planted it by his own power and by his own word, in the earth, never more to be destroyed or to cease, but to continue until the purposes of the Almighty shall be accomplished, every whit that has been spoken of by the mouths of the holy prophets since the world began. [Sec. 65:2; 27:6; 128:20-21.] (CR, April 1902, p. 2.)

D&C 1 38Wilford Woodruff: 38

D&C 1 38I am not ashamed to acknowledge myself a firm believer in the literal fulfilment of the Bible, as well as every communication of God to man, although I am well aware that the Scriptures have been more or less spiritualized by the whole Christian world, especially during the last hundred years. . . .The Lord has taught us in a modern revelation contained in this book, the "Doctrine and Covenants," that it matters not whether he speaks from heaven by his own voice, or by the ministration of angels, or by the mouth of his servants when they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost, it is all the same the mind and will of God; and although the heavens and the earth pass away, my words would not fall unfulfilled. (JD, September 16, 1877, 19:223.)

D&C 1 38Heber C. Kimball: 38

D&C 1 38What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken

D&C 1 38The Spirit of Prophecy foresees future events. God does not bring to pass a thing because you say it shall be so, but because he designed it should be so, and it is the future purposes of the Almighty that the Prophet foresees. That is the way I prophesy; but I have predicted things I did not foresee, and did not believe anybody else did, but I have said it, and it came to pass even more abundantly than I predicted; and that was with regard to the future situation of the people who first came into this valley. Nearly every man was dressed in skins, and we were all poor, destitute, and distressed, yet we all felt well. I said, "It will be but a little while, brethren, before you shall have food and raiment in abundance, and shall buy it cheaper than can be bought in the cities of the United States." I did not know there were any Gentiles coming here, I never thought of such a thing; but after I spoke it, I thought I must be mistaken this time. Brother [Charles C.] Rich remarked at the time, "I do not believe a word of it." And neither did I; but, to the astonishment and joy of the saints, it came to pass just as I had spoken it, only more abundantly. The Lord led me right, but I did not know it.

D&C 1 38I have heard Joseph Smith say many times that he was much tempted about the revelations the Lord gave through him—it seemed to be impossible for them to be fulfilled. (JD, March 19, 1854, 3:111-12.)

D&C 1 39Eldred G. Smith: 39

D&C 1 39We were reminded. . . in our meeting in the temple. . . that the greatest testimony is that which comes and testifies of the Spirit. We cannot always trust what we see and what we hear, but we can always trust the prompting of the Spirit that comes to us, which declares to us that which is truth; and by that power we get our strength and testimony of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. . . . If there are members in the Church who are uncertain, who are lacking in that strength of a testimony, ask yourself and ye shall receive, knock and it shall be opened unto you. If you will put yourself in tune that your spirit shall be in tune with the Spirit of the Holy Ghost, then you shall receive a knowledge of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. [D&C88:63-65; 11:12-17.] (CR, Oct.1956, p.76.)

D&C 1 39Joseph F. Smith: 39

D&C 1 39Men may deny truth, through a wilful desire to do it, or through ignorance on their part, and they may reject the truth; but no man that lives can say of a truth that God has not spoken from the heavens to men in this latter day as he spoke to ancient prophets and inspired men, and revealed unto them anciently, and also in our present time, his mind and will, and his law. Men say they do not believe it; but that does not make the truth of non-effect. Men may express their doubts about it; but the truth remains. Men may reject it; still the foundation of the truth is unshaken. [D&C 88:66.] Men may array themselves against it; they may fight it bitterly, as many have done from its incipiency; but the truth remains unshaken and undisturbed—the truth that God did speak to his servant Joseph Smith, and did reveal himself unto him; not only the Father, but the Son also. (CR, October 1909, pp. 2-3.)
