Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 2

Words spoken by Moroni, the Angel, to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while in his father's house at Manchester, New York, on the evening of September 21, 1823. See History of the Church, vol. 1, page 12. Moroni was the last of a long line of historians who had made the record that is now before the world as the Book of Mormon. Compare Malachi 4:5, 6. See also Sections 27:9 and 110:13-16.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

I continued to pursue my common vocation in life until the twenty-first of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-three, all the time suffering severe persecution at the hands of all classes of men, both religious and irreligious, because I continued to affirm that I had seen a vision. . . .

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but his robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately round his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do. . . .

After telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi, and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bible. . . .

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: [Sec. 2:1, quoted.]

He also quoted the next verse differently: [Sec. 2:1-2, quoted.] (HC 1:9, 11, 12, September 21, 1823; Manchester, New York.)

SCD&C 2 1D&C 2 2D&C 2 3Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-3

SCD&C 2 1D&C 2 2D&C 2 3The whole world ought to take notice of this prediction [Mal. 4:5, , but the world does not understand it. Surely the signs of the times point to the fact that the great and dreadful day is near, even at our doors. The fig tree figuratively, is putting forth her leaves. The turmoil, trouble, the war and bloodshed that we have seen, and which we still see, all point to the fact that this day for the coming of the Son of God is near. Therefore, Elijah the prophet is due to appear. I am sure you agree with me that he has already appeared, for we have it so recorded by the testimony of witnesses. [See Section 110.] It was on the third day of April, 1836, when he came to the Kirtland Temple, to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and conferred upon them the keys of his priesthood and told them that he came in fulfillment of the prophecy of Malachi, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to their fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse. (CR, April 1948, p. 132.)

D&C 2 1Joseph Smith: 1

D&C 2 1Elijah was the last prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. "And I will send Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord," etc. etc. [Mal. 4:5-6.] Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness. (HC 4:211, October 5, 1840.)

D&C 2 1Joseph Fielding Smith: 1

D&C 2 1Joseph Smith was ordained under the hands of Peter, James, and John, receiving the Melchizedek Priesthood, and he went forth and built the Church in this dispensation. All that he did was valid, all those ordinances were valid, but in order that the binding power should come which is recognized in the heavens, and by which we pass by the angels and the Gods to exaltation, had to come from Elijah, who held that power upon the face of the earth, for the Lord had given it to him, and so he came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on the 3rd day of April, 1836, and bestowed upon them the keys of his priesthood. [Sec. 110:13-16.] (Elijah the Prophet and His Mission, 1936, p. 22.)

D&C 2 1Joseph Smith: 1

D&C 2 1In the days of Noah, God destroyed the world by a flood, and he has promised to destroy it by fire in the last days: but before it should take place Elijah should come first and turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, etc.

D&C 2 1Now comes the point. What is this office and work of Elijah? It is one of the greatest and most important subjects that God has revealed. He should send Elijah to seal the children to the fathers, and the fathers to the children.

D&C 2 1Now was this merely confirmed to the living, to settle difficulties with families on earth? By no means. It was a far greater work. Elijah! what would you do if you were here? Would you confine your work to the living alone? No, I would refer you to the Scriptures, where the subject is manifest: that is; without us, they could not be made perfect, nor we without them; the fathers without the children, nor the children without the fathers. [Heb. 11:40; D&C 128:18.]

D&C 2 1I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you will receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah. (HC 6:251-52, 1844.)

D&C 2 1Rudger Clawson: 1

D&C 2 1As early as the year 1823, the Lord made use of this language. [Sec. 2:1, quoted.]

D&C 2 1A dreadful day; a day of pestilence, of famine, of earthquake, of tempests, and a day of burning, designated here in very impressive language as "the great and dreadful day of the Lord!" When that day comes, the power of the Priesthood must be upon the earth to protect and deliver the people of God from destruction; for the righteous and those who keep the commandments of God, including those who are tithed, shall not be burned. [Sec. 64:23-24.] (CR, April 1902, p. 28.)

D&C 2 2John A. Widtsoe: 2

D&C 2 2In our pre-existent state, in the day of the great council, we made a certain agreement with the Almighty. The Lord proposed a plan, conceived by him. We accepted it. Since the plan is intended for all men, we become parties to the salvation of every person under that plan. We agreed, right then and there, to be not only saviors for ourselves, but measurably saviors for the whole human family. We went into a partnership with the Lord. The working out of the plan became then not merely the Father's work, and the Savior's work, but also our work. The least of us, the humblest, is in partnership with the Almighty in achieving the purpose of the eternal plan of salvation.

D&C 2 2That places us in a very responsible attitude towards the human race. By the doctrine, with the Lord at the head, we become saviors on Mount Zion, all committed to the great plan of offering salvation to the untold numbers of spirits. To do this is the Lord's self-imposed duty, this great labor his highest glory. Likewise, it is man's duty, self-imposed, his pleasure and joy, his labor, and ultimately his glory.

D&C 2 2There is no place for forgetting the other man, in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. There stands my brother, it was for him that the whole plan was made, for him the Church was organized, for him all these blessings were given—not for me alone. Oh, I stand there, too. The Church was made for me, the Gospel was given for me, all the blessings were given for me; but my brother is entitled to them just as much as I am. He and I together and all of us must unitedly work together to fulfill the great purposes of the Almighty Father. [Sec. 38:27.]

D&C 2 2Under the Gospel, what is man's highest ideals? Under the Gospel it must be to become like the Father. [Sec. 76:54-60; 132:24; Moses 1:39.] If the Lord's concern is chiefly to bring happiness and joy, salvation, to the whole human family, we cannot become like the Father unless we too engage in that work. There is no chance for the narrow, selfish, introspective man in the kingdom of God. He may survive in the world of men; he may win fame, fortune and power before men, but he will not stand high before the Lord unless he learns to do the works of God, which always point toward the salvation of the whole human family. [Sec. 15:6; 18:10-16; 128:5, 15-18.] (Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, October 1934, p. 289.) [See HC 6:59-61.]

D&C 2 2Joseph Fielding Smith: 2

D&C 2 2The promises made to the fathers

D&C 2 2The question is asked: "What is meant by the 'promises made to the fathers', in the instruction of Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith, as recorded in the second section of the Doctrine and Covenants?"

D&C 2 2This expression has reference to certain promises made to those who died without a knowledge of the Gospel, and without the opportunity of receiving the sealing ordinances of the Priesthood in matters pertaining to their exaltation. According to these promises, the children in the latter days are to perform all such ordinances in behalf of the dead.

D&C 2 2At various times during the history of the world the opportunity for mankind to receive the blessings of the Gospel has been denied them. For instance, during the time of the apostasy, following the ministry of our Savior and his apostles down to the time of the restoration, the opportunity for men to receive the remission of their sins by baptism and partake of other ordinances essential to e exaltation was impossible, for the Church, with its authorized ministers, was not on the earth. It is true that similar conditions have existed at other and more remote periods of time. Even when the Priesthood has been on the earth and every opportunity given to men to repent and embrace the Gospel, many have died without that opportunity who, perhaps, would have done so had the privilege been presented to them. . . .

D&C 2 2The Lord has said that his great work is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. [Moses 1:39.] This being true, then all men must have the opportunity of hearing the Gospel, either now or in the spirit world. Moreover, the Lord declared to Joseph Smith that "all who have died without a knowledge of the gospel who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom." [See Sec. 76:67-70, Joseph Smith.] This is likewise true of all those who shall die henceforth without receiving it, who would receive it if the opportunity came. . . .

D&C 2 2Some of these promises made to the fathers are found in the Scriptures. For instance, Isaiah said in reference to our Savior: "I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house." (42:6-7.)

D&C 2 2Again he says: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me; because the Lord hath appointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn." (61:1-2.)

D&C 2 2It is generally understood by the Latter-day Saints that these references to the prisoners who are bound refer to those who are dead, who were to hear the Gospel and be redeemed. Further light is thrown on this by another reference by Isaiah: "And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall be gathered together in the pit and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited." (24:21-22.)

D&C 2 2Another significant passage embodying this promise is found in the Pearl of Great Price in the words of the Lord to Enoch: "But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them.

D&C 2 2"And that which I have chosen hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they. . . shall be in torment." (Moses 7:38-39.) (IE, July 1922, 25:829-31.)

D&C 2 3Joseph Smith: 3

D&C 2 3If it were not so

D&C 2 3The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead. The Apostle says, ". . . they without us cannot be made perfect" (Heb. 11:40); for it is necessary that the sealing power should be in our hands to seal our children and our dead for the fulness of the dispensation of times—a dispensation to meet the promises made by Jesus Christ before the foundation of the world for the salvation of man. [Titus 1:2.]

D&C 2 3Now I will speak of them. I will meet Paul halfway. I say to you, Paul, you cannot be perfect without us. [Sec. 128:15, 18.] It is necessary that those who are going before and those who come after us should have salvation in common with us; and thus hath God made it obligatory upon man. Hence, God said, "I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (Malachi 4:5.) (TPJS, April 6, 1844, p. 356.)
