Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 4

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to his father, Joseph Smith, Sen., at Harmony, Pennsylvania, February, 1829.—Qualifications for the labors of the ministry are set forth.

Joseph Fielding Smith: Introduction

He [Joseph Smith, Sr.] was the first person who received the Prophet's testimony after the appearance of the angel, and was always true to the mission of his son. He moved to Kirtland in 1831, where he was ordained patriarch and an assistant counselor to the Prophet in the Presidency of the High Priesthood, December 18, 1833. He served as a member of the first high council in 1834. During the persecutions in Kirtland, in 1837, he was made a prisoner by the apostate enemies of the Church, but gained his liberty and made his way to Far West in 1838. From here he was again driven by enemies under the exterminating order of the infamous Lilburn W. Boggs. In midwinter he made his way to Quincy, and later in the spring of 1839, to Commerce, where he made his home. He was six feet two inches tall, and well proportioned. His ordinary weight was about two hundred pounds. He was a very strong, active man, but the exposure he suffered during the expulsion from Missouri brought on consumption, from which he died. His funeral services were held September 15, 1840, Elder Robert B. Thompson delivering the discourse. (Essentials in Church History, 1967 ed., pp. 246-47.)

Heber J. Grant: 1

D&C 4 1A marvelous work

D&C 4 1This "marvelous work and a wonder" has come to pass and has spread all over the world where there has been religious liberty; and from every land and from every clime honest, faithful, God-fearing men and women have heard the sound of the true voice of the shepherd through his servants who have gone forth to proclaim the Gospel. And men of great influence have been gathered into this Church. Men like John Taylor, who presided over the Church, heard the Gospel in a foreign land; the parents of George Q. Cannon, and many other leaders in this Church, heard the sound of this Gospel and embraced it and gathered to Zion, and labored with all the power and ability that they possessed for the advancement of God's kingdom. Year by year this great and wonderful work has rolled on and we are becoming known as a God-fearing people, as a people with a destiny that is sure to be fulfilled. (CR, October 1929, p. 9.)

SCD&C 4 1D&C 4 2D&C 4 3D&C 4 4D&C 4 5D&C 4 6D&C 4 7George Albert Smith: 1-7

SCD&C 4 1D&C 4 2D&C 4 3D&C 4 4D&C 4 5D&C 4 6D&C 4 7One of the very first revelations that was given by our Heavenly Father, as contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, reads as follows: [Sec. 4:1-2, quoted.]

SCD&C 4 1D&C 4 2D&C 4 3D&C 4 4D&C 4 5D&C 4 6D&C 4 7Now I do not understand that we are serving God with all our might if we forsake his children, or if we spend so much of our time selfishly building up ourselves, accumulating things of this life, and leaving his children in darkness, when we could bring them into the light. My understanding is that the most important mission that I have in this life is: first, to keep the commandments of God, as they have been taught to me; and next, to teach them to my Father's children who do not understand them. It makes little difference when I go to the other side, whether I have been a man of wealth in this world or not, unless I have used that wealth to bless my fellow men. Though I be a wanderer in this world, and suffer for the necessities of life, if by reason of the knowledge that my Father has given me I devote myself to the instruction of his children, to planting faith in their hearts, to dissipating the errors that have come to them by tradition, I believe when I go to the other side that I will find a bank account that will be beyond compare with what I would have if I lived for the things of this earth alone. I read a portion of the Section 4 and I want to read that last verse again: [Sec. 4:2-3, quoted.]

SCD&C 4 1D&C 4 2D&C 4 3D&C 4 4D&C 4 5D&C 4 6D&C 4 7It is not necessary for you to be called to go into the mission field in order to proclaim the truth. Begin on the man who lives next door by inspiring confidence in him, by inspiring love in him for you because of your righteousness, and your missionary work has already begun. [Sec. 4:4-7, quoted.] (CR, October 1916, pp. 50-51.)

SCD&C 4 5D&C 4 6Joseph Fielding Smith: 5-6

SCD&C 4 5D&C 4 6It is true, we are engaged in a warfare, and all of us should be valiant warriors in the cause in which we are engaged. Our first enemy we will find within ourselves. It is a good thing to overcome that enemy first, and bring ourselves into strict obedience to the principles of life and salvation which he has given to the world for the salvation of men. When we shall have conquered ourselves, it will be well for us to wage our war without, against false teachings, false doctrines, false customs, habits and ways, against error, unbelief, the follies of the world that are so prevalent, and against infidelity, and false science under the name of science, and every other thing that strikes at the foundation of the principles set forth in the doctrine of Christ for the redemption of man and the salvation of their souls. (CR, October 1914, pp. 128-29.)

SCD&C 4 5D&C 4 6George Teasdale: 5-6

SCD&C 4 5D&C 4 6Before this Church was organized the Lord gave instructions concerning those who should assist in this work, and what should qualify them for the work. Said he [Sec. 4:5-6, quoted]. We have understood the necessity of all these things from the beginning. We have been patient in affliction. When we have been smitten and driven, we have not retaliated; but we have prayed for our enemies, and have taken the Gospel to them, simply because we have learned to love God and our neighbor, according to his commandment. (CR, October 1901, p. 38.)
