Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 6

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Oliver Cowdery, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, April, 1829. Oliver Cowdery began his labors as scribe, in the translation of the Book of Mormon, April 7, 1829. He had already received a divine manifestation attesting the truth of Joseph's testimony respecting the plates on which was engraved the Book of Mormon record. Joseph inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim and received this response. See History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 32-35.—Oliver's willingness to serve is commended; and both to him and to Joseph blessings of great import are promised.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

On the 5th day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery came to my house, until which time I had never seen him. He stated to me that, having been teaching school in the neighborhood where my father resided, and my father being one of those who sent to the school, he went to board for a season at his house, and while there the family related to him the circumstances of my having received the plates, and accordingly he had come to make inquiries of me. Two days after the arrival of Mr. Cowdery (being the 7th of April) I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he began to write for me, which, having continued for some time, I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and obtained the following: [Section 6, follows.] (HC 1:32-33, April 1829; Harmony, Pennsylvania.)

John A. Widtsoe: 1

At least one prophecy of the Prophet Joseph Smith has been literally fulfilled. When he was not much more than a boy, in the early years of his manhood, before the Church was organized, the Lord said to him: [Sec. 6:1, quoted.]

Unknown, untaught, with no reputation, he should have been forgotten in the small hamlet, almost nameless, in the backwoods of a great state; but he dared to say that the work that he was doing, under God's instruction, was to become a marvel and a wonder in the world. We know. . . that whether it be friend or enemy who speaks of us, if he is a sober-thinking, honest man, he will declare that whatever in his opinion the foundations of this work may be—we know the foundations—it is a marvelous work and a wonder, none like it in the long history of the world. The truths set loose by the Prophet Joseph Smith have touched every man of faith throughout the whole civilized world, and measurably changed their beliefs for good. (CR, April 1946, pp. 21-22.)

D&C 6 5George Teasdale: 5

D&C 6 5It is easy to understand the principles of eternal life if we want to know them, because the Lord has said, "Ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; seek, and ye shall find." [Matt. 7:7.] (CR, October 1901, p. 38.)

D&C 6 5Joseph Fielding Smith: 5

D&C 6 5There is no reason in the world why any soul should not know where to find the truth. If he will only humble himself and seek in the spirit of humility and faith, going to the Lord just as the Prophet Joseph Smith went to the Lord to find the truth, he will find it. There's no doubt about it. There is no reason in the world, if men would only hearken to the whisperings of the Spirit of the Lord and seek as he would have them seek for the knowledge and understanding of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for them not to find it, no reason, except the hardness of their hearts and their love of the world. "Knock, and it shall be opened unto you." This is my testimony. I know it is true. (CR, April 1951, p. 59.)

D&C 6 6Joseph Smith: 6

D&C 6 6We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object. (HC 3:390, July 2, 1839.)

D&C 6 6D&C 6 5Joseph Fielding Smith: 6

D&C 6 6In the early days of the Church the brethren came to the Prophet Joseph Smith asking what the Lord would have them do. The answer given to them was "to bring forth the cause of Zion." That is our work, to establish Zion, to build up the kingdom of God, to preach the Gospel to every creature in the world that not one soul may be overlooked where there is the possibility for us to present unto him the truth. (CR, April 1951, pp. 152-53.)

D&C 6 7Anthon H. Lund: 7

D&C 6 7Seek not for riches

D&C 6 7The Lord, in one of his revelations given early in the Church, says: [Sec. 6:7, quoted]. The riches of eternal life we ought to seek, not the riches of the world. . . . We do not look upon wealth in itself as a curse. We believe that those who can handle means rightly can do much to bless their fellows. But he who is ruled by the love of money is tempted to commit sin. The love of money is the root of all evil. [1 Tim. 6:10.] There is hardly a commandment but is violated through this seeking for riches. (CR, April 1903, p. 24.)

D&C 6 7Heber J. Grant: 7

D&C 6 7Seek not for riches

D&C 6 7The great criterion of success in the world is that men can make money, but I want to say to you Latter-day Saints that to do this is not true success. . . .What is the matter? Why, the appetite for money grows upon a man, increases and strengthens unless he is careful, just as much as the appetite for whiskey, and it gets possession of him, and he loves the money instead of loving it only for the good that he can do with it. He does not estimate properly the value of things. (CR, October 1911, p. 23-24.)

D&C 6 7Brigham Young: 7

D&C 6 7Seek not for riches

D&C 6 7It is thought by many that the possession of gold and silver will produce for them happiness, and hence, thousands hunt the mountains for the precious metals; in this they are mistaken. The possession of wealth alone does not produce happiness, although it will produce comfort, when it can be exchanged for the essentials and luxuries of life. When wealth is obtained by purloining, or if any other unfair and dishonorable way, fear of detection and punishment robs the possessor of all human happiness. When wealth is honorably obtained by men, still the possession of it is embittered by the thought that death will soon strip them of it and others will possess it. What hopes have they in the future, after they get through with this sorrowful world? They know nothing about the future; they see nothing but death and hell. Solid comfort and unalloyed joy are unknown to them. When the faithful Latter-day Saints come to the end of their earthly existence, "we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." [2 Cor. 5:1.] The faithful Latter-day Saint knows that the dissolution of this mortal house will introduce his immortal spirit to freedom from death and punishment, and to the enjoyment of the society of the spirits of just men made perfect. To a person who has such a glorious hope everything is bright and beautiful. If he has but little, he enjoys that little with a thankful heart to his Heavenly Father; if he possesses much, he is still thankful, not worshipping, or placing his heart upon the filthy lucre God has placed in his power to do good with. In poverty he feels blest and happy; in riches he feels blest and happy; for his hope is in God, and his wealth consists in eternal riches, having laid up treasures in heaven, where moth doth not destroy, nor rust corrode, nor thief break through nor steal. [Matt. 6:19.] (JD, December 11, 1864, 11:15-16.)

D&C 6 7Orson F. Whitney: 7

D&C 6 7Seek not for riches

D&C 6 7What more eloquent preaching of the Gospel has there ever been, in this or any previous age, than the great gathering movement which has been going on since Joseph Smith lifted up the standard of the restored Gospel in this dispensation? There is no more eloquent preaching than when men and women will forsake their native land, their homes, their parents, their children, their material possessions—every earthly thing, and cross the stormy ocean, the heated plains, the frosty mountains, many of them laying down their lives, to be buried in lonely graves by the wayside; pulling hand carts, wading rivers, crossing deserts, climbing mountains, and settling in a barren waste—all for what? Was it for gold and silver, houses and lands, flocks and herds, and the betterment of their temporal condition? Was it for the honors of men and the applause of the world that they did these things? No, it was because they loved God and wanted to build up his kingdom. They had heard the voice of the Shepherd; they were his sheep, and a stranger they would not follow. [John 10:1-5.] Yet these people, our grandfathers and grandmothers, our parents, who came from Scandinavia, from Germany, from Switzerland, from England, Scotland, and Wales, from Australia and the islands of the sea, from Canada and the States of the Union, braving every hardship, facing every peril, laying their all upon the altar, coming out and fighting for God and his divine purpose—they are called by some "the offscourings of the earth," "the scum of creation!" Perhaps it is because they "came out on top!" (laughter.) But cream also rises, and if I were asked to characterize and describe the Latter-day Saints who have made such sacrifices, I would say they are the cream of God's creation—the heroes and heroines of modern times. There is no more eloquent preaching of the Gospel than is found in their toils and privations, in their struggles and achievements. (CR, April 1915, p. 101.)

D&C 6 7Joseph Smith: 7

D&C 6 7The mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you

D&C 6 7Many men will say, "I will never forsake you, but will stand by you at all times." But the moment you teach them some of the mysteries of the kingdom of God that are retained in the heavens and are to be revealed to the children of men when they are prepared for them, they will be the first to stone you and put you to death. (HC 5:424, June 11, 1843.)

D&C 6 7Joseph Fielding Smith: 7

D&C 6 7The mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you

D&C 6 7The Lord has promised to reveal his mysteries to those who serve him in faithfulness. . . . There are no mysteries pertaining to the Gospel, only as we, in our weakness, fail to comprehend Gospel truth. The Gospel is very simple, so that even children at the age of accountability may understand it. Without question, there are principles which in this life we cannot understand, but when the fulness comes we will see that all is plain and reasonable and within our comprehension. The "simple" principles of the Gospel, such as baptism, the atonement, are mysteries to those who do not have the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. (CHMR, 1947, 1:40.)

D&C 6 7Francis M. Lyman: 7

D&C 6 7He that hath eternal life is rich

D&C 6 7We will seek the riches of eternity here. We can take the riches of eternal life with us when we leave this sphere, but we cannot take the riches of this world. [Alma 39:14.] Yet the riches of this are convenient and necessary, and we cannot very well get along without them. But the riches of eternal life are lasting and permanent. They come from the good we accomplish, the righteousness we bring to pass, the purity to which we attain, the cleansing and purifying of our own hearts, that we may come as near being perfect in this life as our Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, are perfect. Why shall we not do right? What commandments of the Lord are there that we cannot observe? What requirements are there in this Church that we cannot comply with? The Lord wants us to have faith in him. Now, that is possible. He has the faith to bestow. He is the giver of it. Man cannot import it. It is the gift of God—a gift that he is anxious to bestow upon all his children. (CR, April 1899, pp. 38-39.)

D&C 6 8John A. Widtsoe: 8

D&C 6 8Even as you desire of me so it shall be unto you

D&C 6 8If we want something for this Church and Kingdom, or if we want something for our individual lives, we must have a great, earnest, overpowering desire for that thing. We must reach out for it, with full faith in our Heavenly Father that the gift may be given us. Then it would seem as if the Lord himself cannot resist our petition. If our desire is strong enough, if our whole will is tempered and attuned to that which we desire, if our lives make us worthy of the desired gift, the Lord, by his own words, is bound to give us that which we desire, in his own time and in his own manner. (CR, April 1935, p. 82.)

D&C 6 9Joseph Fielding Smith: 9

D&C 6 9Say nothing but repentance

D&C 6 9In the revelation to Oliver Cowdery, and to several others who came to ask what the Lord would have them do, the Lord said: "Say nothing but repentance unto this generation; keep my commandments, and assist to bring forth my work." We must not infer from this expression that those who went forth to preach were limited in their teachings so that all they could say was "repent from your sins," but in teaching the principles of the Gospel they should do so with the desire to teach repentance to the people and bring them in humility to a realization of the need for remission of sins. Even today in all of our preaching it should be with the desire to bring people to repentance and faith in God. That was the burden of John's message as he went forth to prepare the way for the Lord: "Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand," he declared to the people, but he also taught them the necessity of baptism and officiated in that ordinance for all who repented of their sins. [Matt. 3:11.] (CHMR, 1947, 1:39-40.)

D&C 6 13Joseph F. Smith: 13

D&C 6 13If thou wilt do good

D&C 6 13Now, so long as the Latter-day Saints are content to obey the commandments of God, to appreciate the privileges and blessings which they enjoy in the Church, and will use their time, their talents, their substance, in honor to the name of God, to build up Zion, and to establish truth and righteousness in the earth, so long our Heavenly Father is bound by his oath and covenant to protect them from every opposing foe, and to help them to overcome every obstacle that can possibly be arrayed against them or thrown in their pathway; but the moment a community begin to be wrapt up in themselves, become selfish, become engrossed in the temporalities of life, and put their faith in riches, that moment the power of God begins to withdraw from them, and if they repent not the Holy Spirit will depart from them entirely, and they will be left to themselves. That which was given them will be taken away, they will lose that which they had, for they will not be worthy of it. God is just as well as merciful, and we need not expect favors at the hand of the Almighty except as we merit them, at least in the honest desire of our hearts, and the desire and intent will not always avail unless our acts correspond. For we are engaged in a literal work, a reality; and we must practice as well as profess. We must be what God requires us to be, or else we are not his people nor the Zion which he designed to gather together and to build up in the latter days upon the earth.(JD, April 8, 1883, 24:176.)

D&C 6 13James E. Talmage: 13

D&C 6 13Thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God

D&C 6 13Our belief in the universal application of the atonement implies no supposition that all mankind will be saved with like endowments of glory and power. In the kingdom of God there are numerous degrees or gradations provided for those who are worthy of them; in the house of our Father there are many mansions, into which only those who are prepared are admitted. . . . [Sec. 98:18; 88:20-24.] There are some who have striven to obey all the divine commandments, who have accepted the testimony of Christ, obeyed "the laws and ordinances of the Gospel," and received the Holy Spirit; these are they who have overcome evil by Godly works and who are therefore entitled to the highest glory; these belong to the Church of the Firstborn, unto whom the Father has given all things; they are made kings and priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek; they possess celestial bodies, "whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical" [Sec. 76:70]; they are admitted to the glorified company, crowned with exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom. (AF, 1950, pp. 91.92.)

SCD&C 6 14D&C 6 15D&C 6 16D&C 6 17D&C 6 18D&C 6 19D&C 6 20D&C 6 21D&C 6 22D&C 6 23D&C 6 24Joseph Smith: 14-24

SCD&C 6 14D&C 6 15D&C 6 16D&C 6 17D&C 6 18D&C 6 19D&C 6 20D&C 6 21D&C 6 22D&C 6 23D&C 6 24After we had received this revelation [Section 6], Oliver Cowdery stated to me that after he had gone to my father's to board, and after the family had communicated to him concerning my having obtained the plates, that one night after he had retired to bed he called upon the Lord to know if these things were so, and the Lord manifested to him that they were true, but he had kept the circumstances entirely secret, and had mentioned it to no one; so that after this revelation was given he knew that the work was true, because no being living knew of the thing alluded to in the revelation, but God and himself. (HC 1:35, April 1829.)

SCD&C 6 14D&C 6 15D&C 6 16D&C 6 17D&C 6 18D&C 6 19D&C 6 20D&C 6 21D&C 6 22D&C 6 23D&C 6 24Orson Pratt: 14-24

SCD&C 6 14D&C 6 15D&C 6 16D&C 6 17D&C 6 18D&C 6 19D&C 6 20D&C 6 21D&C 6 22D&C 6 23D&C 6 24"Elder Orson Pratt: Did you see the angel at this time?

SCD&C 6 14D&C 6 15D&C 6 16D&C 6 17D&C 6 18D&C 6 19D&C 6 20D&C 6 21D&C 6 22D&C 6 23D&C 6 24"David Whitmer: Yes, he stood before us. Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is strictly and absolutely true, just as it is there written. Before I knew Joseph [Smith], I had heard about him and the plates from persons who declared they knew he had them, and swore they would get them from him. When Oliver Cowdery went to Pennsylvania, he promised to write me what he should learn about these matters, which he did. He wrote me that Joseph had told him his (Oliver's) secret thoughts, and all he had meditated about going to see him, which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself, and so he stopped to write for Joseph. Soon after this, Joseph sent for me (D. Whitmer) to come to Harmony to get him and Oliver and bring them to my father's house. I did not know what to do, I was pressed with my work. I had some 20 acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual, and on going to the field, found between five and seven acres of my ground had been plowed during the night. I don't know who did it; but it was done just I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow. This enabled me to start sooner. When I arrived at Harmony, Joseph and Oliver were coming toward me, and met me some distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day before dinner, and this is why they had come out to meet me; all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished." (Historical Record, Church Encyclopedia, Book I, May 1887, 6:208-9.)

D&C 6 26Orson Pratt: 26

D&C 6 26There are records which contain much of my gospel

D&C 6 26Then he [Nephi] saw in the latter days. . . that by the power of God the records of his people should come forth; and he saw that a Church of the saints should arise, and that it should spread itself upon all the face of the earth, among all the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles; and he saw also that the great and abominable church that was among all the nations of the Gentiles, having dominion among all people and tongues, should gather together in multitudes among the nations of the earth and fight against the Lamb of God and against the Saints of the Most High and his covenant people. [1 Nephi 14:10-13.]

D&C 6 26But what I wish to call your attention to at this time is one event which has been in a measure literally fulfilled. It is an event that no man, unless he were a prophet inspired by the Most High God, could have had a heart big enough to prophesy of with the least expectation of its fulfillment; and that is, the Church of the Lamb of God that was to be raised up after the coming forth of these records of the ancient Israelites should be among all nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles. [1 Nephi 14:14.]

D&C 6 26This was uttered and printed before the Church of Latter-day Saints was in existence. How could a young man, inexperienced as Joseph Smith was, have had all this foreknowledge of future events, unless he was inspired of God? How did he know that any church believing in the Book of Mormon would arise? He was then in the act of translating these records; the Church had not yet an existence; and he was young, inexperienced, and ignorant as regards the education and wisdom of this world. How did he know that, after his manuscript was published, a church called the Church of the Lamb would arise and be built upon the fulness of the Gospel contained in the book? How did he know that, if it did arise, it would have one year's existence? What wisdom, education, or power could have given him this foreknowledge independent of the power of God? How could he know, if a church should arise, that it would have any influence beyond his own neighborhood? How did he know it would extend through the state of New York, where it was first raised? How could he know that it would extend over the United States, and much more, that it would go to all nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles? And how did he know that the dominions of this Church among all the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles should be small, because of the wickedness of the great "mother of abominations"? How did he know that the "mother of harlots" among these Gentiles would gather together in great multitudes among all the nations and kingdoms of the earth to fight: against the Saints of the Lamb of God? Common sense tells us that this would be taking a stretch far beyond what any false prophet dare take, with any hope of fulfillment. (JD, July 10, 1859, 7:182-83.)

D&C 6 28John A. Widtsoe: 28

D&C 6 28In the mouth of two or three witnesses

D&C 6 28Oliver Cowdery, whose reputation for honesty has never been questioned, was with Joseph Smith when John the Baptist came to restore the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood, and when Peter, James and John appeared to restore the Melchizedek Priesthood, and also when the foundation-laying revelations from spiritual beings, given at the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, were received.[Sec.13;27:12-13;110.] Of all these joint experiences, Oliver Cowdery often bore testimony.

D&C 6 28Sidney Rigdon, who was with Joseph Smith when the revelation called the Vision was received, bore testimony in diverse places to the glimpse at that time, with Joseph Smith, of heavenly personages, including the Lord himself. [Sec. 76:19-24.] (Joseph Smith, 1957, pp. 338-39.)

D&C 6 32John A. Widtsoe: 32

D&C 6 32There will I be in the midst of them

D&C 6 32At times it has seemed to me that the spirit that has moved upon those who have spoken and listened in the small gatherings in the mission field has been even stronger and more powerful than we feel here at home. It often happens that, when far away from home, far from the sheltered protection of the temple, the tabernacle, and stakes of Zion, we draw more heavily upon the spiritual forces about us. (CR, April 1934, p. 113.)

D&C 6 33Brigham Young: 33

D&C 6 33If ye sow good ye shall also reap good

D&C 6 33A man who wishes to receive light and knowledge, to increase in the faith of the Holy Ghost, and to grow in the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus Christ, will find that when he imparts knowledge to others he will also grow and increase. Be not miserly in your feelings, but get knowledge and understanding by freely imparting it to others, and be not like a man who selfishly hoards his gold; for that man will not thus increase upon the amount, but will become contracted in his views and feelings. So the man who will not impart freely of the knowledge he has received will become so contracted in his mind that he cannot receive truth when it is presented to him. Wherever you see an opportunity to do good, do it, for that is the way to increase and grow in the knowledge of the truth. [Sec. 58:26-28.] (JD, April 8, 1855, 2:267.)

D&C 6 33L. Tom Perry: 33

D&C 6 33"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

D&C 6 33"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-12.)

D&C 6 33The Lord has clearly charted a course for us to obtain his blessings. He is bound by his divine law to bless us for our righteousness. The overwhelming question in each age is why each generation must test his law, when the Lord's performance from generation to generation has been absolutely consistent. Is this not the time to again reexamine our position? Is that which we are building in our personal lives, our families, our communities, and our nations firmly anchored to a foundation based on divine law? (CR, April 1976, p. 98.)

D&C 6 34George Q. Cannon: 34

D&C 6 34Every man and woman who has received the truth should live in such a manner before the Lord as to have the light of the Holy Spirit constantly beaming upon their minds. They should be in close communion through that Holy Spirit, with their God, so that if they had to stand alone in the midst of a gainsaying world they should be a living witness to the truth of the Gospel and the power of God manifested in these days, and that if the Priesthood from Zion were to be withdrawn from their midst, they could stand firm and unshaken, enjoying the light of revelation and having the consciousness that God was directing them in all their ways. (MS, January 3, 1863, 25:9.)

SCD&C 6 34D&C 6 35D&C 6 36D&C 6 37John A. Widtsoe: 34-37

SCD&C 6 34D&C 6 35D&C 6 36D&C 6 37I remember reading, when a boy, a helpful passage from the Doctrine and Covenants. Let me read it here in conclusion. As a lad I felt fear, sometimes of men, but more often of the dark outside forces. I often wondered if this persecuted people, after all, would be able to accomplish all that was pictured in its destiny. Then I found in my reading of the Doctrine and Covenants this passage which has been a joy and a help and a strength to me all my life, for the Lord said to his people in Harmony, Pennsylvania, before the Church was organized: [Sec. 6:34-37, quoted.]

SCD&C 6 34D&C 6 35D&C 6 36D&C 6 37What do we care for the slanderer or the liar; what do we care for the enemy who arises to defeat our holy purposes ? We have the truth, the mightiest weapon God has given to his people, and we shall win, in the end, if we do the things that God requires us to do. (CR, October 1923, p. 27.)

D&C 6 36Ezra Taft Benson: 36

D&C 6 36In the Church we have no fear that any discovery of new truths will ever be in conflict with these standards—with any fundamental basic principle which we advocate in the Gospel. Truth is always consistent. This fact gives to us as members of the Church a feeling of great security, a feeling of peace, a feeling of assurance. We know beyond any question that the truths which we advocate, the truths of the Gospel restored to the earth through the Prophet Joseph, are in very deed the truths of heaven. These truths will always be consistent with the discovery of any new truths, whether discovered in the laboratory, through research of the scientist, or whether revealed from heaven through prophets of God. Time is always on the side of truth. (CR, April 1958, p. 60.)

D&C 6 36Richard L. Evans: 36

D&C 6 36Keep courage. Do not feel sorry for yourselves. Whatever you do, do not feel sorry for yourselves. You live in a great age of opportunity. I remember the words of one very sharp and shrewd observer who said, "Whenever I hear someone sigh and say that life is hard, I am tempted to ask 'compared to what,?" What are the alternatives? No one ever promised us it would be easy. It is a schooling; it is an opportunity; it is a learning period, and a wonderful one. Despite all the disappointments and difficulties, the great and ultimate rewards are beyond price.

D&C 6 36Keep faith. "And, if you keep my commandments," the Lord God has said to us, "and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God." [D&C 14:7.] (CR, April 1961, p. 76.)
