Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 8

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Oliver Cowdery, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, April, 1829. In the course of the translation of the Book of Mormon, Oliver, who continued to serve as scribe, writing at the prophet's dictation, desired to be endowed with the gift of translation. The Lord responded to his supplication by granting this revelation.—The spirit of revelation is defined and the gift of Aaron specified.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Whilst continuing the work of translation, during the month of April, Oliver Cowdery became exceedingly anxious to have the power to translate bestowed upon him, and in relation to this desire the following revelations were obtained: [Sections 8 and 9, follow.] (HC 1:36, April 1829; Harmony, Pennsylvania.)

Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-5

SCD&C 8 1D&C 8 2D&C 8 3D&C 8 4D&C 8 5The Lord placed great emphasis on the necessity of holding sacred the gifts of God. Oliver had a gift (Sec. 8:3-4), even that of revelation, but he was admonished to receive it in humility and with a contrite spirit. All who receive gifts of the Spirit should do so with a humble spirit. The gifts are sacred and we should hold them so, and "trifle not with sacred things." [Sec. 6:12.] No doubt but Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith were impressed with this counsel, for it was only a short time before when Joseph Smith was punished, and Martin Harris lost the privilege of being associated in the work of translation because of trifling with sacred things. Oliver had learned of the punishment meted out to Martin Harris. [Sec. 3:12-13; 10:6-7; 19:20.] This admonition should be thoughtfully considered by every Elder of the Church, for trifling with the gifts may lead to dire consequences, even to loss of life, and at any event brings displeasure of God. His gifts are holy, sacred, and all who receive them should remember from whence they come and for what they are to be used. [Sec. 46:9-10.] (CHMR, 1947, 1:40.)

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3 Joseph Smith: 2-3

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3The Spirit of Revelation is in connection with these blessings. A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing unto you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented into your minds by the Spirit of God [Sec. 85:6; Enos 10], will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus. (HC 3:381, June 26, 1839.)

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3 Heber J. Grant: 2-3

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3The Lord gives to many of us the still, small voice of revelation. [Sec. 85:6.] It comes as vividly and strongly as though it were with a great sound. It comes to each man, according to his needs and faithfulness, for guidance in matters that pertain to his own life. For the Church as a whole it comes to those who have been ordained to speak for the Church as a whole—and I say to you again, that it is the duty of the presidency of this Church to ask the people to do anything and everything that the inspiration of God tells them to do. We as Latter-day Saints, holding the Priesthood of God, should magnify it [Sec. 84:33-38], and we should respect the General Authorities of the Church; and as we respect them, God will respect us. [Sec. 124:84, 118.] (CR, April 1945, p. 9.)

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3Henry D. Moyle: 2-3

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3Where else in all the world are the true fruits of the inspiration of the Almighty to be found, inspiration that giveth the souls of men understanding? Throughout the history of the Church innumerable examples of spiritual guidance are found. One which I have cherished since childhood is an early experience of Wilford Woodruff.

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3While traveling in New England, on assignment by Brigham Young, President Woodruff drove his carriage into the yard of Brother Williams. Brother Orson Hyde drove a wagon by the side of his carriage. He had only been there a few minutes when the Spirit said to him, "Get up and move that carriage." When he told his wife that he had to move the carriage, she asked. "What for?" He answered, "I don't know."

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3That was all she asked on such occasions. When he told her that he did not know, that was enough. President Woodruff got up and moved his carriage four or five rods, and put the off fore wheel against the corner of the house. He then returned to bed. The same Spirit said, "Go and move your animals from the oak tree." They were two hundred yards from his carriage. He moved his horses and put them in a little hickory grove. Again he went to bed. In thirty minutes a whirlwind came up and broke that oak tree off within two feet of the ground. It swept over three or four fences and fell square in the dooryard, near Brother Orson Hyde's wagon, and right where the carriage had stood. What would have been the consequences if he had not listened to that Spirit? Why, President Woodruff, his wife, and children doubtless would have been killed.

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3That was the still, small voice to him—no thunder, no lightning, but the still small voice of the Spirit of God. It saved his life. It was the Spirit of revelation.

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3We can all afford to develop a sensitiveness to the promptings of the Spirit in all things pertaining to our physical as well as our spiritual well-being.

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3In speaking on this, Joseph Fielding Smith said, "The testimony of the Holy Ghost is Spirit speaking to spirit, and is not confined solely to the natural or physical sense." (CR, April 1957, pp. 33-34.)

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3George Q. Cannon: 2-3

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3I will read a portion of a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, previous to the organization of the Church, dated April 1829: [Sec. 8:1-3, quoted.]

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3The point I wish to call to your attention is contained in the second and third verses of this revelation. The Latter-day Saints are in many respects like other people who are not Latter-day Saints. We are apt to entertain views which are not very correct, and which may be the result of our traditions and preconceived ideas. This is a peculiarity that pertains to mankind generally, that whenever they deal with the things of God, or speak about them, or contemplate them, and especially when they read the predictions made by the servants of God concerning future events, or events that may transpire right before their eyes, they are apt to get, sometimes, erroneous ideas, or, at least, exaggerated ideas, in relation to them. . . . How many of the Latter-day Saints are there who understand that this is the way in which Moses led the children of Israel so miraculously? How many are there who think that if we had a man like Moses among us, the people would be led differently and with greater manifestations of power than they are? How many are there who are dissatisfied with what God is doing at present, and are looking for someone to appear in the future who shall exhibit convincing and overwhelming manifestations of power? How many are there at the present time who are neglecting the precious and inestimable gift of revelation which God has bestowed upon his people, because it does not come to them in the way to suit their preconceived notions and ideas, or who are not suited with the way the Church has been and is led, because there is not that wonderful degree of power exhibited which they imagine should be?. . .The same Spirit of revelation that Moses had, concerning which God speaks through the Prophet Joseph Smith, has rested upon men that have held the keys of this kingdom, whether it was during President [Brigham] Young's life or at the present time—that same Spirit of revelation rests upon him who holds the presidency as senior apostle in the midst of the people of God. The apostles of this Church have all the authority, they have all the keys, and it is within the preview of their office and calling to have all the Spirit of revelation necessary to lead this people into the presence of the Lamb in the celestial kingdom of our God. . . .

SCD&C 8 2D&C 8 3But it is the truth, that the same Spirit of revelation that rested upon Moses, and which enabled him to lead the children of Israel through the Red Sea [Ex. 14:26-31; Heb. 11:29], rests upon the servants of God in the midst of this people, and you will find it so to your entire satisfaction if you will listen to their counsels and be guided by them. (JD, November 1879, 21:264, 268, 270, 271.)

SCD&C 8 6D&C 8 7D&C 8 8D&C 8 9D&C 8 10D&C 8 11D&C 8 12Joseph Fielding Smith: 6-12

D&C 8 6SCD&C 8 6D&C 8 7D&C 8 8D&C 8 9D&C 8 10D&C 8 11D&C 8 12At this time the Lord seemed perfectly willing that Oliver Cowdery as well as Joseph Smith should engage in this labor of translating the plates, and he gave in some detail what qualifications are necessary for the reception of knowledge by revelation and also the procedure necessary in translating ancient records. Oliver was informed that this power could not be received except by the exercise of faith with an honest heart, and by this faith, knowledge of the ancient records and their engravings should be made known. The Lord said: "Behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart." [Sec. 8:2.] This is the Spirit of revelation. (CHMR, 1947, 1:46.)

D&C 8 6Joseph Fielding Smith: 6

D&C 8 6The gift of Aaron

D&C 8 6There was another gift bestowed upon Oliver Cowdery, and that was the gift of Aaron. Like Aaron with his rod in his hand going before Moses as a spokesman, so Oliver Cowdery was to go before Joseph Smith. Whatever he should ask the Lord by power of this gift should be granted if asked in faith and in wisdom. Oliver was blessed with the great honor of holding the keys of this dispensation with Joseph Smith, and like Aaron [Ex. 4:10-17], did become a spokesman on numerous occasions. It was Oliver who delivered the first public discourse in this dispensation. (CHMR, 1947, 1:48.)

D&C 8 10J. Reuben Clark, Jr.: 10

D&C 8 10Without faith you can do nothing

D&C 8 10As I think about faith, this principle of power, I am obliged to believe that it is an intelligent force. Of what kind, I do not know. But it is superior to and overrules all other forces of which we know. It is the principle, the force, by which the dead are restored to life.

D&C 8 10I do not believe that the Lord, that God permits any man to have faith that would overrule his purposes. In that connection, I call to your attention the fact that the Savior himself pled that his crucifixion might be turned aside. Yet, on one occasion he said, when he asked that the hour might be passed on, ". . . but for this cause came I unto this hour." [John 12:27.] The Son of God was not given the necessary faith at the time to enable him to turn aside the purposes reached by himself and the Father before and still remembered the Father. . . .

D&C 8 10You brethren . . . have had this great power given unto us, this power of faith. What are we doing about it? Can you, can we, do the mighty things that the Savior did? Yes. They have been done by the members of the Church who had the faith and righteousness so to do. Think of what is within your power if you but live the Gospel, if you but live so that you may invoke the power which is within you. (CR, April 1960, p. 21.)
