Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 12

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Joseph Knight. Sen., at Harmony, Pennsylvania, May, 1829. Joseph Knight believed the declarations of Joseph Smith, concerning his possession of the Book of Mormon plates, and the work of translation then in progress, and had given material assistance to the translator awl his scribe. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 47.—Great and marvelous character of the Lord's work—Personal participation in the bringing forth and establishment of the cause of Zion open to all who have earnest desires and who possess the requisite qualifications.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

About the same time an old gentleman came to visit us of whose name I wish to make honorable mention—Mr. Joseph Knight, Sen., of Colesville, Broome County, New York, who, having heard of the manner in which we were occupying our time, very kindly and considerately brought us a quantity of provisions, in order that we might not be interrupted in the work of translation (of the Book of Mormon plates) by the want of such necessities of life; and I would just mention here, as in duty bound, that he several times brought us supplies, a distance of at least thirty miles, which enabled us to continue the work when otherwise we must have relinquished it for a season. Being very anxious to know his duty as to this work, I inquired of the Lord for him, and obtained the following: [Section 12 follows.] (HC 1:47-48, May 1829; Harmony, Pennsylvania.)

SCD&C 12 1D&C 12 2D&C 12 3D&C 12 4D&C 12 5D&C 12 6D&C 12 7D&C 12 8D&C 12 9George Teasdale: 1-9

SCD&C 12 1D&C 12 2D&C 12 3D&C 12 4D&C 12 5D&C 12 6D&C 12 7D&C 12 8D&C 12 9Just think of it! that we should live to fulfil that, and to be associated with this "marvelous work and a wonder." Then there are so many opportunities given unto us to assist in this work. There is plenty of room for all, male and female, who desire to labor for the glory of God. But the Lord has said that those who assist in this work should be full of love, having faith, hope and charity, being temperate in all things, trusting in the Lord, and doing good. (CR, April 1901, pp. 36-37.)

D&C 12 6John A. Widtsoe: 6

D&C 12 6The question as to individual responsibility for the welfare of the Church was asked in the early days of members of the Church. Several of the men who labored with the Prophet Joseph Smith came to him in those early days and said: "What shall we do?" They might have said: "What shall we do to be saved?" The Lord in every instance gave an answer. We have a series of short revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, which are the answers to that question. I find in every one a significant statement, worded almost identically in all of these revelations, to Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and others of less fame in the Church: "Keep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion." [Sec. 6:6; 11:6; 14:6.] That is our business, the business of the Latter-day Saints.

D&C 12 6From one point of view, it is selfish enough, perhaps, to keep the commandments that I may be blessed, but it is something even greater to keep the commandments that Zion may be established. As the foundation of his great cause, the Lord gave the law of sacrifice. [Moses 5:5-8.] Unless we give of ourselves we cannot build Zion, or anything else worthy of the great cause that the Lord has given us. The law of sacrifice, from the day of Adam to the present day, in one form or another, is the basic principle of life among the communities of Saints. [Sec. 64:23; 97:8; 101:35-40; 117:12-14.]

D&C 12 6So we need, in this Church and Kingdom, for our own and the world's welfare, a group of men and women in their individual lives who shall be as a light to the nations, and rally standards for the world to follow. [Sec. 45:9; 115:4-5.] Such a people must be different from the world as it now is. There is no opportunity for Latter-day Saints to say we shall be as the world is, unless the world has the same aim that we have. We are here to build Zion to Almighty God, for the blessing of all the world. In that aim we are unique and different from all other peoples. We must respect that obligation, and not be afraid of it. We cannot walk as other men, or talk as other men, or do as other men, for we have a different destiny, obligation, and responsibility placed upon us, and we must fit ourselves for that great destiny and obligation. (CR, April 1940, p. 36.)

D&C 12 6Anthon H. Lund: 6

D&C 12 6Keep my commandments. . . and establish the cause of Zion

D&C 12 6The Lord has asked us to do certain things. We will find that they are for our own good. These commandments have been given by a kind Father to his children. He has seen our conditions and our circumstances, and what he has ordained has been calculated for our greatest benefit. When such is the case, we should all feel that we want to keep his commandments. We want to benefit ourselves. In fact, this feeling is so strong with us that often we forget what is righteousness, on account of our selfishness. But if we will work truly for our own benefit, then we will keep the laws upon the earth, and we will listen to the counsels which he gives us through his servants. If we do this, the greatest amount of happiness will be ours and we will be able to do our share towards carrying out God's purposes on the earth. (CR, October 1897, p. 3.)

D&C 12 8Joseph Smith: 8

D&C 12 8Full of love

D&C 12 8It is a time-honored adage that love begets love. Let us pour forth love—show forth our kindness unto all mankind, and the Lord will reward us with everlasting increase; cast our bread upon the waters and we shall receive it after many days, increased to a hundredfold. . . .

D&C 12 8I do not dwell upon your faults, and you shall not upon mine. Charity which is love, covereth a multitude of sins [1 Pet. 4:8], and I have often covered up all the faults among you; but the prettiest thing is to have no faults at all. We should cultivate a meek, quiet and peaceable spirit. (HC 5:517, July 23, 1843.)

D&C 12 8Delbert L. Stapley: 8

D&C 12 8Having faith

D&C 12 8I desire. . . to challenge each of you to have faith in God; know that he lives, that he is the Father of our spirits, that we are created in the image of his person, that we possess like traits, qualities, and powers, that we are in very deed his children, that he loves us and has made glorious preparation in his many mansions for our eternal well-being.

D&C 12 8Have faith in life and its purpose; know that God has provided and planned it for our joy and happiness. Live each day wisely and fruitfully.

D&C 12 8Have faith in Christ, our Lord, as the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, who is full of grace and truth.

D&C 12 8Have faith that Jesus is the Author of peace and salvation to the people of the world.

D&C 12 8Have faith in his Gospel plan of salvation, exaltation, and glory.

D&C 12 8Have faith in his matchless love in giving his life as an atoning sacrifice to ransom the souls of men from the grave.

D&C 12 8Have faith that he is our Redeemer, Savior, and God; that there is no other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

D&C 12 8Have faith in his earthly ministry and divine teachings which lead to joy and happiness in life.

D&C 12 8Have faith in his resurrection and ascension to glory and that he now sits on the right hand of God the Father.

D&C 12 8Have faith that by his resurrection he broke the bands of death, and that resurrection of the body applies to all mankind.

D&C 12 8Have faith in the First Vision of this dispensation. . . .

D&C 12 8Have faith that God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, personally appeared to the boy Joseph Smith, and revealed themselves to him.

D&C 12 8Have faith in Joseph Smith as a true Prophet of God, called to usher in this, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

D&C 12 8Have faith in the Church and Kingdom of God established by our Lord through Joseph Smith.

D&C 12 8Have faith in continued revelation. Have faith in all that God has revealed. Have faith that he will yet reveal many great and important things concerning his work and kingdom.

D&C 12 8Have faith in priesthood authority, knowing that the Lord has said, "For he that receiveth my servants, receiveth me." ( D&C 84:36.)

D&C 12 8Have faith in the power of God and the gift of healing and miracles.

D&C 12 8Have faith in the Bible as the word of God, as far as it is translated correctly.

D&C 12 8Have faith in the Book of Mormon and its inspiring message of truth and faith.

D&C 12 8Have faith in the Doctrine and Covenants and in its doctrines and teachings which apply to our day and time.

D&C 12 8Have faith in the Pearl of Great Price and its valuable information and teachings by two chosen prophets of God—Abraham, the father of the faithful, and Moses, the great law-giver.

D&C 12 8Have faith in your heritage as descendants of Abraham, that you belong to the house of Israel and are children and heirs of promise.

D&C 12 8Have faith in our beloved President, David O. McKay, who is not only the President of the Church, but is also prophet, seer, and revelator to the Church and the world today.

D&C 12 8Have faith to pray for and sustain him in his high calling and position.

D&C 12 8Have faith to be humble and believe and not doubt.

D&C 12 8Have faith to receive and obey the truths, principles, and ordinances of the Gospel of Christ.

D&C 12 8Have faith to set aside your own views and personal desires to do God's will with confidence and good works.

D&C 12 8Have faith in the value of service and be willing to devote your time, talents, and gifts to the building of the kingdom and to the blessing of people.

D&C 12 8Have faith to be honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men.

D&C 12 8Have faith that God will bless and reward the faithful who love him and serve him in righteousness and in truth unto the end.

D&C 12 8Have faith. . . to do these things, walking always in obedience to the commandments, doing those things that will please the Lord and lead you into his presence. (CR, April 1960, pp. 74-75.)
