Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 13

Ordination of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the Aaronic Priesthood, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, May 15, 1829, under the hands of an Angel, who announced himself as John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament. The angelic visitant averred that he was acting under the direction of Peter, James, and John, the ancient Apostles, who held the keys of the higher Priesthood, which was called the Priesthood of Melchizedek. The promise was given to Joseph and Oliver that in due time the Priesthood of Melchizedek would be conferred upon them. See History of the Church, vol. 1,p. 39. Compare Section 27:7, 8, 12.

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

On the 5th of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery came to my house, until which time I had never seen him. . . .Two days after the arrival of Mr. Cowdery (being the 7th of April), I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he began to write for me. . . .

We still continued the work of translation, when in the ensuing month (May, 1829), we on a certain day went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying: [Section 13, quoted.]

He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized, and gave us instructions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and afterwards that he should baptize me. Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me, after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood—for so we were commanded.

The messenger who visited us on this occasion, and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament [Lk. 3:1-17; 7:24-35], and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood he said would in due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the first Elder of the Church and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was on the 15th day of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger and baptized.

Immediately on our coming up out of the water after we had been baptized we experienced great and glorious blessings from our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery, than the Holy Ghost fell upon us and he stood up and prophesied concerning the rise of this Church, and many other things connected with the Church, and this generation of the children of men. We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation. (HC 1:32-33, 39-42, April-May, 1829; Harmony, Pennsylvania.)

Oliver Cowdery: Introduction

Near this time of the setting of the sun, Sabbath evening, April 5th, 1829, my natural eyes for the first time beheld this brother [Joseph Smith]. He then resided in Harmony, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania. On Monday, the 6th, I assisted him in arranging some business of a temporal nature, and on Tuesday, the 7th, commenced to write the Book of Mormon. These were days never to be forgotten—to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened by the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated with the Urim and Thummim, or as the Nephites would have said, "Interpreters," the history or record called "The Book of Mormon.". . .

No men, in their sober senses, could translate and write the directions given to the Nephites from the mouth of the Savior, of the precise manner in which men should build up his Church, and especially when corruption had spread an uncertainty over all forms and systems practiced among men, without desiring a privilege of showing the willingness of the heart by being buried in the liquid grave, to answer a "good conscience by the resurrection of Jesus Christ."

After writing the account given of the Savior's ministry to the remnant of the seed of Jacob, upon this continent, it was easy to be seen, as the people said would be, that darkness covered the earth and gross darkness the minds of the people. On reflecting further it was easy to be seen that amid the great strife and noise concerning:religion, none had authority from God to administer the ordinances of the gospel. For the question might be asked, have men authority to administer in the name of Christ, who deny revelations? when his testimony is no less than the spirit of prophecy? and his religion based, built, and sustained by immediate revelations in all ages of the world when he has had a people on the earth? If these facts were buried, and carefully concealed by men whose craft would have been in danger if once permitted to shine in the faces of men, they were no longer to us; and we only waited for the commandment to be given "Arise and be baptized."

This was not long desired before it was realized. The Lord, who is rich in mercy, and ever willing to answer the consistent prayer of the humble, after we had called upon him in a fervent manner, aside from the abodes of men, condescended to manifest to us his will. On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake to us. While the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory and delivered the anxiously looked-for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance. What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld, our ears heard, as in the "blaze of day"; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the centre, and his words, "I am thy fellow-servant," dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel from glory, 'twas a message from the Most High! And as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon our souls, and we were wrapt in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever!

But, dear brother, think further, think for a moment what joy filled our hearts and with what surprise we must have bowed, (for who would not have bowed the knee for such a blessing?) when we received under his hand the Holy Priesthood as he said, "Upon you, my fellow servants, in the name of the Messiah, I confer this Priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness!"

I shall not attempt to paint to you the feelings of this heart, nor the majestic beauty and glory which surrounded us on this occasion; but you will believe me when I say, that earth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to clothe language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as they were delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit! Man may deceive his fellow-men, deception may follow deception, and the children of the wicked one may have power to seduce the foolish and untaught; till naught but fiction feeds the many, and the fruit of falsehood carries in its current the giddy to the grave; but one touch with the finger of his love, yes, one ray of glory from the upper world, or one word from the mouth of the Savior, from the bosom of eternity, strikes it all into insignificance, and blots it forever from the mind. The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel! the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me past description, and I shall ever look upon this expression of the Savior's goodness with wonder and thanksgiving while I am permitted to tarry; and in those mansions where perfection dwells and sin never comes, I hope to adore in that day which shall never cease. (MS, January 1843, 3:153-54, quoting from a letter to W. W. Phelps, September 7, 1834.)

Joseph Smith: Introduction

The question arose from the saying of Jesus, "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist; but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he." [Luke 7:28.] How is it that John was considered one of the greatest of prophets? His miracles could not have constituted his greatness.

First, he was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man.

Secondly, he was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of man. Whoever had the honor of doing that? Whoever had so great a privilege and glory?. . .

Thirdly, John, at that time, was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth, and holding the keys of power. . . . (HC 5:260-61, January 29, 1843.)

D&C 13 1Orson Pratt:

D&C 13 1My fellow servants

D&C 13 1Perhaps you may inquire here: Was John without tabernacle? Was he a spirit or was he a personage of tabernacle, of flesh and bones? We all know that he was beheaded before the crucifixion of Christ; and if you wish to know the condition of John when he came to Joseph and Oliver, read the appendix to the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and you will find that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and many others who are named there, among whom was John the Baptist, were with Christ in his resurrection; that is, they came forth in the first resurrection, at the time that Jesus received his body. [Sec. 133:55.] About that period the graves of the Saints were opened and many of them came forth. [Matt. 27:52-53.] John was amongst them; and he held, legally, the power, keys and Priesthood bestowed upon the lineage of his father, Aaron.

D&C 13 1What did John do when he appeared to brothers Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery? He did not go forth into the water to baptize them, as he did anciently in Jordan, but he gave the authority to them to baptize he laid his hands upon their heads and ordained them. Thus the hands of an immortal being—a man sent from heaven—were laid upon their heads! They were ordained to that same Priesthood that John himself held, with the promise arid prediction that that Priesthood should not be taken from the earth while the earth should stand. (JD, December 19, 1869, 13:67.)

D&C 13 1LeGrand Richards:

D&C 13 1The Priesthood of Aaron

D&C 13 1From the visit of John the Baptist, we learn these great truths:

D&C 13 11. That one must be ordained to the necessary priesthood by one having authority before he can administer the ordinances of the Gospel.

D&C 13 12. That the Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of:

D&C 13 1a. The ministering of angels.

D&C 13 1b. The Gospel of repentance.

D&C 13 1c. Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins.

D&C 13 13. That this Priesthood shall never be taken again from the earth until "the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."

D&C 13 14. That while the Aaronic Priesthood is divine authority from God, its administration is limited; it "had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost"; that in conferring this Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, John the Baptist acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which should thereafter be conferred upon them. (A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, 1950, p. 73.)

D&C 13 1Parley P. Pratt:

D&C 13 1The keys of the ministering of angels

D&C 13 1Whenever the keys of Priesthood, or, in other words, the keys of the science of Theology, are enjoyed by man on the earth, those thus privileged are entitled to the ministering of angels, whose business with men on the earth is to restore the keys of the Apostleship when lost; to ordain men to the apostleship when there has been no Apostolic succession; to commit the keys of a new dispensation; to reveal the mysteries of history, the facts of present or past times, and to unfold the events of a future time. They can also be present without being visible to mortals. (Key to the Science of Theology, 1943, p. 112.)

D&C 13 1Charles W. Penrose:

D&C 13 1The sons of Levi

D&C 13 1Now as to the "sons of Levi," spoken of by John the Baptist in his ordination of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. (D&C 13.) They are, or will be, descendants of Levi, holding the Priesthood of Aaron, who will make the offerings predicted by the prophets to be presented to the Lord in latter days in Zion and in Jerusalem. (See Malachi 3:2-4; D&C 124:38, and 128:24.) In Zion, men chosen of the Lord for the special work mentioned will be persons sanctified by the spirit unto "the renewing of their bodies." (D&C 84:32-34.) At Jerusalem they will be Levites by lineal descent, offering the sacrifices that will be required after the restoration spoken of in Zechariah 14:16-21, and many others of the prophets of old concerning "the restitution of all things." (Acts 3:19-21.) (IE, August 1912, 15:952.)

D&C 13 1Joseph Smith:

D&C 13 1An offering the Lord in righteousness

D&C 13 1Thus we behold the keys of this Priesthood consisted in obtaining the voice of Jehovah that He talked with him (Noah) in a familiar and friendly manner; that He continued to him the keys, the covenants, the power and the glory with which he blessed Adam at the beginning; and the offering of sacrifice, which also shall be continued at the last time; for all the ordinances and duties that ever have been required by the Priesthood, under the directions and commandments of the Almighty in any of the dispensations, shall all be had in the last dispensation, therefore all things had under the authority of the Priesthood at any former period, shall be had again, bringing to pass the restoration spoken of by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets; then shall the sons of Levi offer an acceptable offering to the Lord. "And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord. . . ." (See Malachi 3:3)

D&C 13 1It will be necessary here to make a few observations on the doctrine set forth in the above quotation, and it is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice (i.e., the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus) was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in future: but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the priesthood, or with the Prophets.

D&C 13 1The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses [Moses 5:5-8]; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings. . . .

D&C 13 1It is a very prevalent opinion that the sacrifices which were offered were entirely consumed. This was not the case; if you read Leviticus, second chapter, second and third verses, you will observe that the priests took a part as a memorial and offered it up before the Lord, while the remainder was kept for the maintenance of the priests; so that the offerings and sacrifices are not all consumed upon the altar—but the blood is sprinkled, and the fat and certain other portions are consumed. [Lev. 4.]

D&C 13 1These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. [Sec. 84:4-5, 31; 124:39.] This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchisedic Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the Prophets be brought to pass? [Acts 3:19-21.] It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the Prophets [3 Nephi 9:19-20; 15:3-9]; but those things which existed prior to Moses, day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

D&C 13 1It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ [Moses 6:62-68; 7:23-24; Gal. 3:8; 1 Cor. 10:1-4], what necessity for them since that time? (HC 4:210-12, October 5, 1840.)

D&C 13 1Joseph Fielding Smith:

D&C 13 1The sons of Levi. . . an offering. . . in righteousness

D&C 13 1What kind of offering will the sons of Levi make to fulfil the words of Malachi and John? (Mal. 3:1-4; D&C 13; 124:39; 128:24 ) Logically such a sacrifice as they were authorized to make in the days of their former ministry when they were first called. (Ezek. 43:18-27; 44:9-27.) Will such a sacrifice be offered in the temple? Eventually not in any temple as they are constructed for work of salvation and exaltation today. It should be remembered that the great temple, which is yet to be built in the city of Zion, will not be one edifice, but twelve. Some of these temples will be for the lesser priesthood. [History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 357-59.]

D&C 13 1When those temples are built, it is very likely that provision will be made for some ceremonies and ordinances which may be performed by the Aaronic Priesthood and a place provided where the sons of Levi may offer their offering in righteousness. This will have to be the case because all things are to be restored. There were ordinances performed in ancient Israel in the tabernacle when in the wilderness, and after it was established at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, and later in the temple built by Solomon. The Lord has informed us that this was the case and has said that in those edifices ordinances for the people were performed. [D&C 124:28-29.]

D&C 13 1These temples that we now have, however, the Lord commanded to be built for the purpose of giving to the saints the blessings which belong to their exaltation, blessings which are to prepare those who receive them to "enter into his rest,. . . which rest is the fulness of his glory," and these ordinances have to be performed by authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood, which the sons of Levi did not hold. [D&C 84:24.]

D&C 13 1. . .Now in the nature of things, the law of sacrifice will have to be restored, or all things which were decreed by the Lord would not be restored. It will be necessary, therefore, for the sons of Levi, who offered the blood sacrifices anciently in Israel, to offer such a sacrifice again to round out and complete this ordinance in this dispensation. Sacrifice by the shedding of blood was instituted in the days of Adam and of necessity will have to be restored. [Moses 5:5-8]

D&C 13 1The sacrifice of animals will be done to complete the restoration when the temple spoken of is built; at the beginning of the millennium, or in the restoration, blood sacrifices will be performed long enough to complete the fulness of the restoration in this dispensation. Afterwards sacrifice will be of some other character. [3 Nephi 9:10-20.] (Doctrines of Salvation, 1956, 3:93-94.)
