Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 14

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to David Whitmer, at Fayette, New York, June, 1829. The Whitmer family had become greatly interested in the translating of the Book of Mormon. Joseph changed his residence to the Whitmer home, where dwelt until the work of translation was carried to completion and the copyright on the forthcoming book secured. Each of the three sons, having received a testimony as to the genuineness of the work, became deeply concerned over the matter of his individual duty; and the Prophet inquired of the Lord respecting the matter. This revelation and the two next following (Sections 15 and 16) were given in answer, through the Urim and Thummim. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 48. David Whitmer later became one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon.—Conditions of attaining eternal life specified—The Lord's purpose of bringing the fulness of his Gospel from the gentiles to the house of Israel—David Whitmer informed of his call to assist in the latter-day work—His reward, conditioned by his faithfulness, is promised.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Shortly after commencing to translate, I became acquainted with Mr. Peter Whitmer, of. Fayette, Seneca County, New York, and also with some of his family. In the beginning of the month of June, his son, David Whitmer, came to the place where we were residing and brought with him a two-horse wagon, for the purpose of having us accompany him to his father's place, and there remain until we should finish the work. [See Sec. 6:14-24, Orson Pratt commentary.] It was arranged that we should have our board free of charge, and the assistance of one of his brothers to write for me, and also his own assistance when convenient. Having much need of such timely aid in an undertaking so arduous, and being informed that the people in the neighborhood of the Whitmers were anxiously awaiting the opportunity to inquire into these things, we accepted the invitation, and accompanied Mr. Whitmer to his father's house, and there resided until the translation was finished and the copyright secured. Upon our arrival, we found Mr. Whitmer's family very anxious concerning the work, and very friendly toward ourselves. They continued so, boarded and lodged us according to arrangements; and John Whitmer, in particular, assisted us very much in writing during the remainder of the work.

In the meantime, David, John and Peter Whitmer, Jun., became our zealous friends and assistants in the work; and being anxious to know their respective duties, and having desired with much earnestness that I should inquire of the Lord concerning them, I did so, through the means of the Urim and Thummim, and obtained for them in succession the following revelations: [Sections 14, 15, and 16 follow.] (HC 1:48-49, June 1829; Fayette, New York.)

D&C 14 1John A. Widtsoe:

D&C 14 1A great and marvelous work

D&C 14 1Not only in numbers have we become a "marvelous work and a wonder" in a little less than one hundred years; but in a greater and a larger sense have we become a marvelous people, for we have impressed our thought upon the whole world. The world does not believe today as it did ninety years ago. A few days ago I picked up a recent number of a great magazine, and my feelings were roused within me and my testimony increased when I found one of the writers declaring to the readers of the magazine that "God cannot look upon sin with the least degree of tolerance," borrowed almost word for word from section one of the Doctrine and Covenants [v. 31]. In such a way have the doctrines taught by the despised Latter-day Saints been appropriated by the nations of the earth; and whether the people of the earth accept the inspiration of Joseph Smith, nevertheless, in fact the whole current of human thought has been changed by the doctrines of this people. That is perhaps the greatest achievement of "Mormonism" during the last ninety years, unless it be the achievement to secure a body of people numbering hundreds of thousands who almost always see eye to eye, who understand as with one mind, who feel as with one heart, who worship God alike, and who in that united worship and action find a tremendous advantage in life. Do you know of a happier people? I find happiness wherever I go, for Latter-day Saints understand the truth. They have seen the beginning and they know the end of the designs of God with respect to his children. They do not grope in darkness. Who cares if we are few in comparison with the 1,500 millions of people on the face of the earth? We are as yeast in the dough, and will yet ferment the whole earth. (CR, October 1921, p.109.)

D&C 14 6Anthon H. Lund: 6

D&C 14 6Seek to bring forth and establish my Zion

D&C 14 6The Prophet Nephi, in speaking of Zion, gives us characteristics that should be found in the Zion of the latter days. [2 Nephi 26:29-31.] Among them was that there should not be priestcraft; and he defines priestcraft as preaching for gain and for influence among the people. This the Lord forbids. He says that the people should work for Zion. That should be the object of their coming together, the one aim and purpose of their lives—to work for Zion, and not to make anything else the object of their lives. If they make money their object he says they shall perish. How often have we seen this fulfilled! Those who have forgotten why the Lord called them from their homes and gathered them here, and who have made money their sole object, have perished spiritually; they have lost the faith which was once so strong in their breasts that they were able to leave everything that was dear unto them and gather here. We want to take this lesson to heart. We want to be laborers in Zion, and work for the cause of Zion, and not for other objects—that is, not to make them the only objects of our lives. (CR, October 1897, pp. 2-3.)

D&C 14 6Brigham Young: 6

D&C 14 6Seek to bring forth and establish my Zion

D&C 14 6You hear brethren talk of coming to Zion to enjoy the blessings of this land; but do you not see that it is the shortsightedness of men which causes their disappointment when they arrive here. They read in the Bible, in the Book of Mormon, and Book of Doctrine and Covenants, about Zion, and what is to be. . . before they came here they were the ones to help to build up Zion. They gathered here with the spirit of Zion resting upon them, then expecting to find Zion in its glory, whereas their own doctrine should teach them that they are coming here to make Zion.

D&C 14 6We can make Zion, or we can make Babylon, just as we please. We can make just what we please of this place. The people can make Zion: they can make a heaven within themselves. When people gather here, they should come with a determination to make Zion within themselves, with the resolution that "I will carry myself full of the Spirit of Zion wherever I go; and this is the way in which I will control evil spirits; for I mean that my spirit shall have control over evil," and do you not see that such a course will make Zion? (JD, July 5, 1857, 5:4.)

D&C 14 7Joseph F. Smith: 7

D&C 14 7Keep my commandments and endure to the end

D&C 14 7We have entered into the bond of that new and everlasting covenant agreeing that we would obey the commandments of God in all things whatsoever he shall commend us. This is an everlasting covenant even unto the end of our days, and when is the end of our days? We may think it has reference to the end of our mortal lives, that a time will come after we have finished this probation when we can live without obedience to the commandments of God. This is a great error. We shall never see the day in time nor eternity when it will not be obligatory, and when it will not be a pleasure as well as a duty for us, as his children, to obey all the commandments of the Lord throughout the endless ages of eternity. It is upon this principle that we keep in touch with God, and remain in harmony with his purposes. It is only in this way that we can consummate our mission, and obtain our crown and the gift of eternal lives, which is the greatest gift of God. Can you imagine any other way? (CR, April 1898, p. 68.)

D&C 14 7Orson F. Whitney: 7

D&C 14 7Eternal life. . . is the greatest of all the gifts of God

D&C 14 7God's greatest gift is eternal life, but that pertains to Eternity. The greatest blessing that our Heavenly Father can bestow upon us in time, or while we are here, is the power to lay hold upon eternal life. The everlasting Gospel, through obedience to its every requirement, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, gives this power. It not only saves—it exalts men to where God and Christ dwell in the fulness of celestial glory. [Sec. 76:54-62.] (CR, October 1929, p. 30.)

SCD&C 14 8D&C 14 9D&C 14 10D&C 14 11Joseph Fielding Smith: 8-11

SCD&C 14 8D&C 14 9D&C 14 10D&C 14 11In the revelation given to David Whitmer (Sec. 14), the Lord made him the promise that if he would keep the commandments and endure to the end, he should have eternal life, moreover he was commanded to assist in bringing forth the Lord's work and that the time would come when he would be a witness "of the things of which you shall both hear and see, and also that you may declare repentance unto this generation." This promise was based upon his faithfulness, and David was faithful and sincerely in earnest in his devotion to the Church and Joseph Smith when that witness came and for several years afterwards. There was one incident of significance that occurred when the Angel Moroni presented the plates before the three witnesses. The record states: "In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, 'David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keepeth his commandments' when immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying, 'These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God.'" (HC 1:54.) (CHMR, 1947, 1:63.)

D&C 14 8Orson Pratt: 8

D&C 14 8You may stand as a witness

D&C 14 8As I have already mentioned, one more witness remains who saw that angel and the plates. Who is it? David Whitmer, a younger man than Martin Harris, probably some seventy years of age, I do not recollect his age exactly. Where does he live? In the western part of Missouri. Does he still hold fast to his testimony? He does. Many of the Elders of this Church, in going to and fro among the nations, have called upon him from time to time, and they all bear the same testimony—that Mr. David Whitmer still, in the most solemn manner, declares that he saw the angel and that he saw the plates in his hands. But he is not here with us; he has not gathered up with the people of God. That, however, does not prove that his testimony is not true, by no means. (JD, July 18, 1875, 18:161.)

D&C 14 10Wilford Woodruff: 10

D&C 14 10From the Gentiles unto the house of Israel

D&C 14 10Sometimes our neighbors and friends think hard of us because we call them Gentiles; but, bless your souls, we are all Gentiles. The Latter-day Saints are all Gentiles in a national capacity. The Gospel came to us among the Gentiles. We are not Jews, and the Gentile nations have got to hear the Gospel first. The whole Christian world have got to hear the Gospel, and when they reject it, the law will be bound and the testimony sealed, and it will turn to the house of Israel. Up to the present day we have been called to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, and we have had to do it. For the last time we have been warning the world, and we have been engaged in that work for forty-five years. (JD, September 12, 1875, 18:112.)

D&C 14 11John A. Widtsoe: 11

D&C 14 11Perhaps the event of that troubled year [1838] which gave keenest sorrow was the loss of Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer from the membership roll of the Church—two of the three original witnesses of the Book of Mormon, men of high esteem in the Church. Oliver Cowdery was excommunicated, and for many years remained outside the Church, rather than to confess his error and repent. David Whitmer withdrew from the Church rather than to face trial upon the charges made against him. The absence from the councils of the Church of these fine men who had been so gloriously blessed by heaven was grieved by the whole Church membership.

D&C 14 11Though these men were no longer members of the Church, yet they always maintained the truth of their testimony as found in the Book of Mormon, and their belief in the divinity of the revelations given to Joseph Smith the Prophet. Moreover, Oliver Cowdery, after some years, humbly entered the waters of baptism again [Oct. 1848] and was on his way to plead with David Whitmer to return to the Church, when death overtook him. [Mar. 3, 1850.] Both affirmed with their last breath the truth of their testimony regarding the Lord's latter-day work. Their knowledge of the truth of the restored Gospel did not leave them.

D&C 14 11Naturally the question arises: How could these men, both of whom had seen the angelic guardian of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated and the plates themselves, and one of whom in addition had been privileged to have converse with heavenly beings, John the Baptist, Peter, James and John—how could such men so conduct themselves as to endanger their Church membership or be content to remain outside the Church? They had knowledge, beyond that of other men, of the reality and divinity of the events which led to the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

D&C 14 11The answer to the question is simple, well understood by all. These brethren did not use their knowledge in conformity with the order of the Church as set forth in the revelations of the Lord. That is, they entered forbidden paths; they did not obey the commandments of God. The practices of their lives did not correspond with their knowledge. (CR, April 1938, p. 49.)
