Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 15

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to John Whitmer, at Fayette, New York, June, 1892. See heading to Section 14. John Whitmer later became one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon.—The message is intimately and impressively personal, in that the Lord tells of what was known only to John Whitmer and himself—The recipient blessed for his worthy desire—The thing of greatest worth to him.

Joseph Fielding Smith: Introduction

John [Whitmer] displayed his eagerness to be of assistance and did some writing for the Prophet at that time [June 1829]. With his brothers, he desired earnestly to know what message the Lord had for him, and due to his solicitation the Lord gave him a revelation (Sec. 15) through the Urim and Thummim. . . .

Peter Whitmer, Jr., became one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon. He was the fifth son of Peter Whitmer and was born September 27, 1809. With other members of the Whitmer family, he became very friendly with the Prophet and assisted him when the Prophet was translating the Book of Mormon. He also desired the word of the Lord in relation to his responsibilities and received the revelation by Urim and Thummim known as section sixteen. [June 1829; Fayette, New York.] (CHMR, 1947, 1:64.)

SCD&C 15 1D&C 15 2D&C 15 3D&C 15 4D&C 15 5D&C 15 6Rudger Clawson: 1-6

SCD&C 15 1D&C 15 2D&C 15 3D&C 15 4D&C 15 5D&C 15 6The matters that are brought to our attention in these words of revelation [Sec. 15] are most glorious for contemplation. Cast your minds back to the early days of this Church, and there stood this man John Whitmer, recently come into the Church of Christ. Various occupations in which he might engage were before him. He had the opportunity to labor upon the farm, to engage in merchandising, to follow mining, to study the profession of medicine or law, or to adopt one of the many other occupations in which men employ themselves. The question he asked himself at that time was, What would be the most worth to him?. . . I say, these opportunities were before him, because the country was before him, and this country is full of opportunities, which are within the reach of all. . . . He stood there in this situation, not having been trained long in the Gospel of Christ, and I say to you—for it is on record here—that a voice came to that man from the eternal worlds, and that voice set at rest in him every doubt, every dubiety, every fearful anticipation. At a critical time in his life, when he must choose which way to go, that voice said unto him that which would be of most worth unto him was to declare repentance unto the people and bring souls unto Christ. The message was of such importance that it came to him with "sharpness and with power." It was the voice of Jesus Christ. (CR, April 1902, p. 7.)
