Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 19

A commandment of God, and not of man, revealed through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Martin Harris, at Manchester, New York, March, 1830, by him who is Eternal.—Christ affirms his omnipotence—Declares that punishment and suffering are inevitable consequences of unrepented sins—Explains the signification of endless torment and eternal damnation—Reaffirms the actuality of his own suffering in the flesh—Emphasizes the necessity of prayer—gives specific commandment to Martin Harris.

Joseph Fielding Smith: Introduction

This revelation was given some time in March, 1830 [Manchester, New York]. It would seem that Martin Harris had come to Joseph Smith seeking further assurance in relation to his standing before the Lord, being sorely troubled in his spirit because of his transgression. He had already been granted the privilege on his earnest solicitation of being one of the three witnesses, and that wonderful vision had been given. [Sections 5 and 17.] Perhaps out of this came much serious reflection and he sought further light. However, there is no indication in the History of the Church as to the reason why the revelation was given and the exact day is unknown when it was given. It was without question a revelation of great comfort to Martin, and it is one of the great revelations given in this dispensation; there are few of greater import than this. The doctrine of the atonement of the Lord, as directly applying to the individual, and his exposition of "eternal punishment," as here set forth, give to the members of the Church light which was not previously known. (CHMR, 1948, pp. 80-81.)

Charles W. Penrose: 1-3

SCD&C 19 1D&C 19 2D&C 19 3Thanks be to God the eternal Father! Hallelujah, praise his holy name for the gift of his Son, Jesus Christ, for the redemption of mankind from the transgression of Adam, who is our earthly head. He is our Father in that sense, the father of all the race. . . . But our Father whom we worship is the Great Eloheim, who sits on high, who is working, through his Son Jesus Christ, for our redemption, and he is the Savior, after all, of all that are saved. Through and by his Son Jesus Christ are we redeemed from our own sins and also from the sin of our first parents, the transgression of Adam and Eve in the garden. He who knew no sin offered himself as a sacrifice for those who had sinned, and that reaches right back to Adam. . . .

SCD&C 19 1D&C 19 2D&C 19 3What a glorious kingdom there will be, when sin is banished, when darkness is dispersed, when false governments will perish; when the true kingdom of God shall be set up, and Jesus Christ as King of Kings and Lord of Lords shall reign over all the earth.(CR, April 1920, pp. 33-34.)

D&C 19 3Orson Pratt: 3

D&C 19 3Judging every man according to his works

D&C 19 3There is a certain degree of judgment rendered upon every man and every woman as soon as they have passed the ordeals of this present probation. When they lay their bodies down their spirits return into the presence of God, when a degree of judgment and sentence is immediately passed. Hence we read in the Book of Mormon, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they depart from this mortal body, return home again to that God who gave them life, and then shall it come to pass that the spirits of the righteous shall enter into a state of rest, peace and happiness, called Paradise, where they shall rest from all their labors. And then shall it come to pass that the spirits of the wicked—for behold they have no part or portion of the spirit of the Lord—shall depart into outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth; and in these two states or conditions the children of men shall be placed until the time of the resurrection. [Alma 40:11-14.]

D&C 19 3Then again there will be a judgment after the resurrection, that will not be the final judgment, that is the judgment of the twelve tribes of Israel, spoken of by our Savior, which will take place when he and the Twelve return again to the earth. That judgment will be exercised more directly on the whole house of Israel that have loved the Lord and kept his commandments. [Sec. 29:12.]

D&C 19 3Here then are the various times of judgment, and various conditions and circumstances of the children of men in the spiritual state, judged before the resurrection, assigned to happiness or misery as the case may be, and in the judgment of the first resurrection certain rewards, glory, power, exaltation, happiness, and eternal life will be conferred upon those who are not favored with coming forth on the morning of the first resurrection, namely, those who have disobeyed the Gospel. To all such the voice of the angel will be—"Let sinners stay and sleep until I call again" [Sec. 43:18], their sins having been sufficiently judged beforehand, that they are not counted worthy of a resurrection among the just and the righteous ones of the earth. This agrees with another passage recorded in the Book of Covenants, that at the sound of the third trump then come the spirits of men that are under condemnation. [Sec. 88:100-101.] These are the last of the dead, and they live not again till the thousand years are ended, neither again until the end of the earth. Why? Because a certain measure of judgment is pronounced upon them even then. (JD, October 11, 1874, 17:184-85.)

D&C 19 3LeGrand Richards: 3

D&C 19 3Judging every man according to. . . the deeds which he hath done

D&C 19 3All men are to receive "according to their works" (see Rev. 20:12), which requires that suitable places shall be prepared for the souls of all men. Hence the statement of Jesus: "In my Father's house are many mansions." (See John 14:2.) The Gospel of Jesus Christ provides a plan whereby man cannot only be saved, but can also be exalted in the celestial kingdom. "In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel." (Rom. 2:16.) (A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, 1950, p. 237.)

SCD&C 19 5D&C 19 6D&C 19 7D&C 19 8D&C 19 9D&C 19 10D&C 19 11D&C 19 12George Q. Cannon: 5-12

SCD&C 19 5D&C 19 6D&C 19 7D&C 19 8D&C 19 9D&C 19 10D&C 19 11D&C 19 12Contemplate the condition of the world when this Gospel was restored! What was known about heaven? What was known about hell ? There are two places, one of bliss, the other place of torment. How much terror was entertained by the people at large concerning this place of torment. To have to think that this was endless; to think how the hearts of mothers were wrung with anguish at the death of their wayward children, of their loved ones, when they were told by men who assumed authority and to whom they had been taught to look with respect, that they were eternally damned—sent to a place of torment worlds without end! Is it any wonder that men wished they had never been born? They did not know what to do. Suicide brought no relief; they could not get deliverance from the inexorable consequences of living, because their souls were indestructible. They could not hope to escape from the justice of God, go where they might. And this feeling of hopelessness and misery filled thousands of bosoms, millions, I may say. But what did this Gospel do? It brought light from God, the author of our being. Instead of thinking it was a bad condition to be born, it produced a feeling of gladness in the hearts of men and women that they ever had been born; because when they saw the justice of God, that they would get rewarded according to the deeds done in the body, all fear vanished, for they would be dealt with by a just and merciful God and not a tyrant, such as the world described the Lord to be.

SCD&C 19 5D&C 19 6D&C 19 7D&C 19 8D&C 19 9D&C 19 10D&C 19 11D&C 19 12Think of the glad tidings of salvation that have come to us through the revelations that God has given to this Church respecting the dead and their future fate. Before, the popular idea was that unnumbered millions of heathens who had died in ignorance of the Gospel had been sent to this endless place of torment; that they were sent to hell without any hope of deliverance through the endless ages of eternity. The feeling of those who would dare think upon this subject, when such thoughts were presented to them, was only to hate, as a monster, the God who would do such things. What could be more monstrous than to send innocent people to hell for not being that which they knew nothing of? No wonder that men revolted at the thought. No wonder that men defied the Almighty under such misconceptions. The Gospel has brought to us revelation concerning this. We see our God in all his beauty, in all his grandeur, clothed with all those attributes that call forth our highest admiration and worship. We can worship him in spirit and in truth. (CR, April 1899, p. 19.)

D&C 19 6Brigham Young: 6

D&C 19 6It is not written that there shall be no end to this torment

D&C 19 6A gentleman asked the Prophet Joseph once if he believed that all other sects and parties would be damned excepting the Mormons. Joseph Smith's reply was, "Yes, sir, and most of the Mormons too, unless they repent." We believe that all will be damned who do not receive the gospel of Jesus Christ; but we do not believe that they will go into a lake which burns with brimstone and fire, and suffer unnamed and unheard of torments, inflicted by cruel and malicious devils to all eternity.

D&C 19 6The sectarian doctrine of final rewards and punishments is as strange to me as their bodiless, partless, and passionless God. Every man will receive according to the deeds done in the body, whether they be good or bad. [Sec. 76:110-11.] All men, excepting those who sin against the Holy Ghost, who shed innocent blood or who consent thereto, will be saved in some kingdom [Sec. 76:40-45; 88:29-32]; for in my father's house, says Jesus, are many mansions. [John 14:2.] Where is John Wesley's abode in the other world? He is not where the Father and the Son live, but he is gone into what is called hades, or paradise, or the spirit-world. He did not receive the gospel as preached by Jesus Christ and His apostles; it was not then upon the earth. The power of the Holy Priesthood was not then among men; but I suppose that Mr. Wesley lived according to the best light he had, and tried to improve upon it all the days of his life. Where is the departed spirit of that celebrated reformer? It occupies a better place than ever entered his heart to conceive of when he was in the flesh. (JD, June 18, 1865, 11:125-26.)

D&C 19 11James E. Talmage: 11

D&C 19 11Eternal punishment is God's punishment

D&C 19 11During this hundred years many other great truths not known before, have been declared to the people, and one of the greatest is that to hell there is an exit as well as an entrance. [Sec. 76:81-85; Matt. 5:25-26.] Hell is no place to which a vindictive Judge sends prisoners to suffer and to be punished principally for his glory; but it is a place prepared for the teaching, the disciplining of those who failed to learn here upon the earth what they should have learned. True, we read of everlasting punishment, unending suffering, eternal damnation. [Matt. 18:8; 25:41, 46; Rev. 14:10-11.] That is a direful expression, but in his mercy the Lord has made plain what those words mean. "Eternal punishment," he says, "is God's punishment, for he is eternal; and that condition or state or possibility will ever exist for the sinner who deserves and really needs such condemnation; but this does not mean that the individual sufferer or sinner is to be kept in hell longer than is necessary to bring him to a fitness for something better. When he reaches that stage the prison doors will open and there will be rejoicing among the hosts who welcome him into a better state. The Lord has not abated in the least what he said in earlier dispensations concerning the operation of his law and his Gospel, but he had made clear unto us his goodness and mercy through it all, for it is his glory and his work to bring about the immortality and eternal life of man. [Moses 1:39.] (CR, April 1930, p. 97.)

D&C 19 13Reed Smoot: 13

D&C 19 13I command you to repent

D&C 19 13There is another thing with our young people, as well as the people generally, that I desire to call your attention to and that is procrastination—putting off till tomorrow what we ought to do today, and thinking that we will live our religion a little better next year. The old saying that to travel by the road of by-and-by will reach the home of never, is just as true today as it ever was. Let us live our religion today. Let us do the duty of today. . . . Let us do everything required of us today, and not put it off for some future time. (CR, October 1900.)

D&C 19 15Joseph Smith: 15

D&C 19 15There is no pain so awful as that of suspense. This is the punishment of the wicked; their doubt, anxiety and suspense cause weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth. (HC 5:340, April 8, 1843.)

SCD&C 19 16D&C 19 17D&C 19 18D&C 19 19Joseph Fielding Smith: 16-19

SCD&C 19 16D&C 19 17D&C 19 18D&C 19 19We cannot comprehend the great suffering that the Lord had to take upon himself to bring to pass this redemption from death and from sin. He spent a few years upon the earth, and during that short sojourn he suffered the abuse of men. They stoned him; they spat upon him; they cursed him; they ridiculed him; they accused him of almost every crime they could think of, and finally they took him and crucified him upon a cross.

SCD&C 19 16D&C 19 17D&C 19 18D&C 19 19We get into the habit of thinking, I suppose, that his great suffering was when he was nailed to the cross by his hands and his feet and was left there to suffer until he died. As excruciating as this pain was, that was not the greatest suffering that he had to undergo, for in some way which I cannot understand, but which I accept on faith, and which you must accept on faith, he carried on his back the burden of the sins of the whole world. It is hard enough for me to carry my own sins. How is it with you? And yet he had to carry the sins of the whole world, as our Savior and the Redeemer of a fallen world, and so great was his suffering before he went to the cross, we are informed that blood oozed from the pores of his body, and he prayed to his Father that the cup might pass if possible, but not being possible, he was willing to drink.

SCD&C 19 16D&C 19 17D&C 19 18D&C 19 19And here is what he has said to the Church: [Sec. 19:16 9, quoted.]

SCD&C 19 16D&C 19 17D&C 19 18D&C 19 19Now, when he said that if we do not repent we will have to suffer, even as he did, he had no reference to being nailed to a cross, but it was the torment of mind, of spirit, that he had reference to, before he ever got to the cross, and if men will not repent, they will have to suffer even as he suffered.

SCD&C 19 16D&C 19 17D&C 19 18D&C 19 19Now. . . briefly, he did all this for us, the Son of God, and he did it, as I have read to you, because his Father commanded him and because his Father so loved the world that he wanted to save the world from its sins. (CR, October 1947, pp. 147-48.)

D&C 19 17Charles W. Penrose: 17

D&C 19 17If they would not repent they must suffer

D&C 19 17Alma states here [Alma 40:14-26] that he was very much troubled concerning the doctrine of the condition of people after they passed away from this life. He wanted to know something of the condition of man between death and the resurrection, and he says an angel of God made known to him that there is a space between death and the resurrection, that the spirits of wicked are in a state of unrest, having a knowledge of all their wickedness, and a remembrance of all their transgressions; that they are in a state of fear, looking for the wrath and indignation of God, not knowing what their punishment will be; while on the other hand, the spirits of the righteous enter into a state of rest. They have a perfect knowledge of all that God has done for them, and all their acts of righteousness, and they await in peace for the time when their bodies shall be brought forth from the dust to stand in the presence of their God to receive their crown. (JD, August 1880, 21:223.)

SCD&C 19 18D&C 19 19John Taylor: 18-19

SCD&C 19 18D&C 19 19The suffering of the Son of God was not simply the suffering of personal death; for in assuming the position that he did in making an atonement for the sins of the world he bore the weight, the responsibility, and the burden of the sins of all men, which, to us, is incomprehensible. As stated, "The Lord, your Redeemer, suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pains of all men"; and Isaiah says: "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows," also, "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all," and again, "He hath poured out his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bore the sin of many" [Isa. 53:4, 6, ; or, as it is written in the Second Book of Nephi: "For behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam" [9:21]; whilst in Mosiah it is declared: "He shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people." [Mosiah 3:7.]

SCD&C 19 18D&C 19 19Groaning beneath this concentrated load, this intense, incomprehensible pressure, this terrible exaction of Divine justice, from which feeble humanity shrank, and through the agony thus experienced sweating great drops of blood, he was led to exclaim, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me." He had struggled against the powers of darkness that had been let loose upon him there; placed below all things, his mind surcharged with agony and pain, lonely and apparently helpless and forsaken, in his agony the blood oozed from his pores. Thus rejected by his own, attacked by the powers of darkness, and seemingly forsaken by his God, on the cross he bowed beneath the accumulated load, and cried out in anguish, "My God, why hast thou forsaken me?" "It is finished!" "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit." [Matt. 27:46; John 19:30; Luke 23:46.] As a God, he descended below all things, and made himself subject to man in man's fallen condition; as a man, he grappled with all the circumstances incident to his sufferings in the world. Anointed, indeed, with the oil of gladness above his fellows, he struggled with and overcame the powers of men and devils, of earth and hell combined; and aided by this superior power of the Godhead, he vanquished death, hell and the grave, and arose triumphant as the Son of God, the very eternal Father, the Messiah, the Prince of Peace, the Redeemer, the Savior of the world; having finished and completed the work pertaining to the atonement, which his Father had given him to do as the Son of God and the Son of Man. As the Son of Man, he endured all that it was possible for flesh and blood to endure; as the Son of God, he triumphed over all, and forever ascended to the right hand of God, to further carry out the designs of Jehovah pertaining to the world and to the human family. (Mediation and Atonement, 1950, pp. 146-48.)

D&C 19 23First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant): 23

D&C 19 23Listen to my words

D&C 19 23Finally, brethren, give heed unto the whisperings of the Spirit of the Lord, your God. Be ye filled with the Holy Ghost; let your peace flow like unto a river, without let or hindrance; be merciful and kind to the stranger, and forbearing to each other; be faithful to keep your covenants, and abide the trial of your faith. [Sec. 97:8.] Be humble before the Lord your God and keep his commandments, and the veil of the covering will be filled with joy and rejoicing from day to day, as ye see the time approaching, and witness the steppings of Almighty God amid the mighty tread of earth's millions hastening to destroy each other [Sec. 63:32-33]; put down iniquity, wickedness, and bring forth Zion, the peace of Jerusalem, and the universal triumph and reign of truth and righteousness upon the whole earth. (MS, July 8, 1854, 16:429-30.)

D&C 19 23Spencer W. Kimball: 23

D&C 19 23You shall have peace in me

D&C 19 23Peace, joy, satisfaction, happiness, growth, contentment, all come with the righteous living of the commandments of God. The one who delights in all of the worldly luxuries of today, at the expense of spirituality, is living but for the moment. His day is coming; retribution is sure. (CR, April 1952, pp. 23-24.)

D&C 19 25Richard L. Evans: 25

D&C 19 25I command thee

D&C 19 25I have a great respect for all men and their beliefs, but think it not a strange thing that in a kingdom, the kingdom of God, there should be specific requirements and commandments, and a way that God has given for our realizing the highest happiness and peace and progress. (CR, April 1961, p. 77.)

D&C 19 25George Albert Smith: 25

D&C 19 25Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's [Ex. 20:17]

D&C 19 25Do you believe that the Lord said that? Do you believe that he meant what he said? If we only understood how near we are to the judgment day there are men and women in the various communities of this world who would now be on their knees in sack-cloth and ashes; but they think that time's so far off that they procrastinate the day of repentance. [Sec. 45:26-27.] (CR, October 1935, p. 121.)

D&C 19 26John A. Widtsoe: 26

D&C 19 26On February 28, 1828, Martin Harris, a prosperous farmer of Palmyra, friendly to Joseph, took one of these transcripts [copy of characters from the gold plates] to New York City. There two eminent students of ancient languages, Doctors Anthon and Mitchell, examined them. In later years both of these men acknowledged that the characters were presented to them. Martin Harris declared that the "experts" said the characters were a mixture of ancient alphabets. However, when they learned how the characters had been obtained and that part of the "book" or plates were sealed, they repudiated their first positive statement. Egyptology was in its early infancy at that time. The visit and the statements of the two men were sufficient, however, to induce Harris to become a scribe for the Prophet, and later, when the Book of Mormon was to be published, to mortgage his farm for $3,000 with which to pay the printer. (Joseph Smith, 1951, p. 39.)

D&C 19 27Orson F. Whitney: 27

D&C 19 27The Gentile

D&C 19 27The name Gentile is not with us a term of reproach. It comes from Gentiles, meaning of a nation, a family or a people not of Israel—that is all. "Mormon" is a nickname for Latter-day Saints, but "gentile" is not a nickname. It simply means, with us, one who does not belong, to the Church. They are wiser than we are in material things—the things of earth and time. But when it comes to spiritual things—the things of heaven and eternity, we can teach them. We need their wealth and worldly wisdom, their wonderful skill in managing and manipulating temporalities. And they need the Gospel and the Priesthood. They need us, for we hold in our hands the key to their eternal salvation. (CR, April 1928, pp. 59-60.)

D&C 19 27Joseph Fielding Smith: 27

D&C 19 27The Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant

D&C 19 27It is true that Lehi and his family were descendants of Joseph through the lineage of Manasseh (Alma 10:3), and Ishmael was a descendant of Ephraim, according to the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith. That the Nephites were descendants of Joseph is in fulfilment of the blessings given to Joseph by his father Israel. The Nephites were of the Jews, not so much by descent as by citizenship, although in the long descent from Jacob, it would be possible of some mixing of the tribes by intermarriage.

D&C 19 27It should be remembered that in the days of Rehoboam, son of Solomon, ten of the twelve tribes of Israel revolted and were known as the kingdom of Israel from that time on until they were carried away into Assyria. The other two tribes of Judah and Benjamin remained loyal to Rehoboam and were known as the kingdoms of Judah. Lehi was a citizen of Jerusalem, in the kingdom of Judah. Presumably his family had lived there for several generations, and all the inhabitants of the kingdom of Judah, no matter which tribe they had descended through, were known as Jews. The condition is comparable to conditions today. For example: Many members of the Church have been gathered out of England, Germany, the Scandinavian countries, and other foreign lands. Coming to this country they have to take out citizenship papers, and then they and their descendants are known as Americans, being citizens of this country. There is also a comparable example in the case of Paul the apostle. When he was arrested on complaint of the Jews, the chief captain mistook him for an Egyptian who had created a rebellion, and Paul said to the captain, ". . . I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and, I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people." When the privilege was granted, Paul spoke to the angry Jews and said: "I am verily a man which as a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as ye are all this day." (Acts 21:37-39; 22:3.) In writing his epistles to the Roman saints and also to the saints of Philippi, Paul said: ". . . For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham of the tribe of Benjamin." (Romans 11:1 and Philippians 3:5.)

D&C 19 27Not only in the Book of Mormon are the descendants of Lehi called Jews, but also in the Doctrine and Covenants. In section 19, verse 27, this is found: [Sec. 19:27, quoted.] Again, in giving instructions to the Elders who had journeyed from Kirtland to Missouri, the Lord revealed the place for the building of the temple and gave instruction for the purchase of land "lying westward, even unto the line running directly between Jew and Gentile." (Sec. 57:4.) This line westward was the dividing line between the whites and Indians. (IE, October 1955, 58:702.)

D&C 19 28Wilford Woodruff: 28

D&C 19 28You should enter your secret closets, and call upon the name of the Lord. Many of you have learned to pray; then fail not to let your prayers ascend up into the ears of the God of Sabaoth [hosts]; and he will hear you. I think: sometimes that we do not fully comprehend the power that we have with God in knowing how to approach him acceptably. All that these men holding the Priesthood, and all that our sisters need do, is to live near to God, and call upon him, pouring out their soul's desire in behalf of Israel, and their power will be felt, and their confidence in God will be strengthened. But the blessings of heaven can only be obtained and controlled upon the principles of righteousness. I have heard the Prophet Joseph pray when the power of God rested down upon him, and all who heard him felt it; and I have seen his prayers answered in a marvelous manner almost immediately. Governor Reynolds of Missouri on one occasion employed men to try and kidnap Joseph, and they almost accomplished their designs, but Joseph had some Gentile friends as well as his brethren, through whom he was rescued, and was taken to Nauvoo and released under a writ of habeas corpus. But the governor continued to harass him with writs and was determined to destroy Joseph. Joseph and the Twelve went before God in prayer. Joseph, kneeling before the Lord, offered up prayer and asked God to deliver him from the power of that man. Among other things, he told the Lord that he was innocent before him, and that his heart was heavy under the persecutions he endured. In about forty-eight hours from that time word reached Joseph that Reynolds had blown his brains out. Before perpetrating the deed he left a note on his desk stating that, as his services were not appreciated by the people of the State, he took that course to end his days. (JD, January 27, 1883, 24:55.)

D&C 19 28George Teasdale: 28

D&C 19 28I was inducted into the Kingdom of God by prayer, and I have been sustained by the Almighty Father by prayer ever since that day. I do not pray for form's sake. I pray because I earnestly desire to have the fellowship of the Holy Ghost. I cannot understand how anybody can pray for form's sake, although I have almost been led to believe that we do so on a great many times and occasions, and I will give you my reasons for so thinking. What is the idea, after singing, of one of the brethren standing up here to open this meeting by prayer? is he not our spokesman, the mouthpiece, and should we not, while he utters the sentences, have those sentences pass through our minds in a prayer as a congregation, and when he has finished it, endorse the same by saying "amen." What is the meaning of amen? So be it. Well, I noticed today that there were few "amens." Why is this? Did we not endorse the prayer? Did we not sanction it? I should think if we did we would naturally say "amen"—so let it be. . . .What is the meaning of prayer? Why, it is to earnestly ask something that we require with all our hearts. All who are in fellowship of the Holy Ghost will ask God for his Spirit to be in their hearts in all their business relations even, that they might not soil their hands, but keep them clean and their hearts pure, and that they might merit his approbation. The Lord Jesus Christ encouraged his disciples to pray—to pray without ceasing. [1 Thess. 5:17.] (JD, January 11, 1885, 26:50-51.)

D&C 19 30Anthon H. Lund: 30

D&C 19 30Reviling not against revilers

D&C 19 30Some there are who think we are afraid to meet anyone in debate. Not so. It is much harder for our young brethren to keep from debating than it is to engage in it; for they feel that they have the truth, and they are not afraid to meet anyone in defense of principles in which they believe. But we have only one object in view in going out amongst the nations, and that is to follow the Master's instructions—to go out and teach men. That is our work. We do not go out to win battles as debaters; but we go out to teach men that which we have received, and which we know is true. If men are not willing to receive it, that is their own concern, not ours. [Sec. 43:15-16.] When our Elders show the world the beauty of the principles of the Gospel as revealed to us, it is for men to say whether they will receive them or not. The Elders do their duty, and leave the result to the Lord. Those who seek to debate with our Elders and thirst for the honor of beating them in argument, do not want to be taught; they simply want contention. Paul tells us to avoid contention. He said: "But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God." [1 Cor. 11:16.] So we say, contention is not our custom, and we advise our missionaries not to contend, but simply go out and teach the principles of the Gospel. (CR, October 1902, pp.80-81.)

D&C 19 31Francis M. Lyman: 31

D&C 19 31We all remember that expression of the Apostle Paul, in regard to the principle of faith, that I have thought has unwittingly deluded the Christian people generally in the world, for he declared that "without faith it is impossible to please [God.]" [Heb. 11:6.] Naturally, it has been taken that with faith the Lord may be pleased, and that too with faith alone. But we have come to understand that faith, genuine living faith, produces the very important principle of repentance, and that without repentance it is not possible to please God. Without baptism for the remission of sins it is not possible to please him. Without the gift of the Holy Ghost it is not possible to please him. [Sec. 20:41; 35:6.] But, with these great and superior, and primary principles in the Gospel in life and salvation, we have discovered and have proven in our lives that men may be saved. (CR, October 1911, pp. 30-31.)

D&C 19 31Lorenzo Snow: 31

D&C 19 31By fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost

D&C 19 31I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray than I heard a sound, just above my head, like the rustling of silken robes, and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, filling me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and O, the joy and happiness I felt! No language can describe the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of mental and spiritual darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that time imparted to my understanding. I then received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and of the restoration of the Holy Priesthood, and the fulness of the Gospel. It was a complete baptism—a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or element (the gift of) the Holy Ghost; and even more real and physical in its effects upon every part of my system than the immersion by water; dispelling forever, so long as reason and memory last, all possibility of doubt or fear in relation to the fact handed down to us historically, that the "babe of Bethlehem" is truly the Son of God; also the fact that he is now being revealed to the children of men, and communicating knowledge, the same as in the apostolic times. I was perfectly satisfied, as well as I might be, for my expectations were repeated, and continued to be for several successive nights. The sweet remembrance of those glorious experiences, from that time to the present, bring them fresh before me, imparting an inspiring influence which pervades my whole being, and I trust will to the close of my earthly existence. (IE, June 1919, 22:645 55.)

D&C 19 32Joseph Fielding Smith: 32

D&C 19 32This is a great and the last commandment. . . I shall give unto you

D&C 19 32In this revelation [Sec. 19] Martin is again admonished and called on to repent, and the dire consequences of his failure to repent are pointed out to him. It is evident that Martin Harris came to the Prophet seeking the favor of the Lord and in response to his pleading this revelation was given. The Lord also warns him that he need not ask for favor again, for this is to be the last, and a great commandment unto him. (CHMR, 1947, 1:81.)

D&C 19 38Rudger Clawson: 38

D&C 19 38It is astonishing the amount of scripture and revelation that has been given upon the subject of prayer, touching its importance, its far-reaching character, and its necessity to the children of men, especially to the children of God. I am reminded of a passage which occurs in a revelation given to Martin Harris in March, 1830. The Lord said unto him: [Sec. 19:28, 38, quoted.]

D&C 19 38How impressive are those few simple words in regard to prayer! How far-reaching! They center into a man's life and comprehend his whole existence, at least from the years of his accountability until he passes into the grave. He must pray under all circumstances. Prayer is not reserved for the Sabbath day or for any particular occasion. It is not only to be used at the general conferences of the Church, but the spirit of prayer must be in our hearts unceasingly. We must pray in our families, we must pray in secret; we must pray in our hearts. The spirit of prayer must be with us when we retire at night and when we arise in the morning. It must be upon us when we leave our homes or in the valleys, or wherever we are. We are told in the words which I have quoted that if the spirit is upon us the Lord will bless us, and the blessings which will come in answer to prayer will be of more importance to us than treasures of earth. We know something of the treasures of earth; we realize the value and the desirability of earthly things. We know how they are sought after, and what great sacrifices are made for them. But how much better it is to enjoy the full measure of the Spirit of God which is promised. (CR, April 1904, pp. 42-43.)

D&C 19 38Reed Smoot: 38

D&C 19 38Pray always

D&C 19 38Many people say: What does prayer do ? What good does it accomplish? Let us reflect; let us refer to the Bible, and see what prayer did for God's people in the past. As I recall it now, prayer has divided seas, and has rolled back flowing rivers; it has caused living streams of water to burst forth from solid rock; it has muzzled lions and has rendered vipers and poisons harmless; it has arrested the sun in its rapid race, and has stopped the course of the moon; it has burst open iron gates, and has recalled souls from eternity; it has called legions of angels down from the heavens. Prayer has bridled the vicious passions of men; it has routed and destroyed armies of proud, daring atheists. Prayer has brought one man from the bottom of the ocean, and carried another, in a chariot of fire, to heaven. I can imagine the scoffer and unbeliever saying: "Oh, this is ancient: history. These are Bible stories; tell us what prayer has done on modern individuals; tell us what prayer has done touching the things of this life; something that prayer has done in this age of the world, and let the dark ages take care of themselves." Well, I know a people who can say that through the power of prayer there have been accomplished as great things in this day as were ever done in former ages. It was through prayer that the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith; through prayer that the great plan of salvation was revealed unto him. It is through prayer that this people have been directed from the foundation of this Church to the present time. It was through prayer that the pioneers were protected and guided across the trackless plains of the western wilderness, and brought safely to the tops of these mountains. It has been through prayer that God has blessed the earth in these valleys and made it produce abundantly, of fruits, vegetables, grains, and nearly every other requisite for the sustaining of his people in comfort. It seems to me that if we look into our own lives, and see what prayer has done for each and every one of us, we will find countless blessings that have come to us through prayer.

D&C 19 38But we must so live that we are worthy of the blessings asked for. I do not believe that a people steeped in sin, or a man corrupt in heart, can receive the full blessings of the eternal Father, for they do not place themselves in a position to receive them. A man must repent of his sins; he must have faith that God is the Giver of all good; he must believe that God actually exists before he can feel that his prayer will be answered. [Sec. 88:63-65.] (CR, October 1908, p. 77.)

D&C 19 38David O. McKay: 38

D&C 19 38Great shall be your blessing

D&C 19 38If our young people will. . . approach the Lord, there are at least four great blessings which will come to them here and now.

D&C 19 38The first is Gratitude. Their souls will he filled with thanksgiving for what God has done for them. They will find themselves rich in favors bestowed. The young man who closes the door behind him, who draws the curtains, and there in silence pleads with God for help, should first pour out his soul in gratitude for health, for friends, for loved ones, for the gospel, for the manifestations of God's existence. He should first count his many blessings and name them one by one.

D&C 19 38The second blessing of prayer is Guidance. I cannot conceive of a young man's going astray wet, will kneel down by his bedside in the morning and pray to God to help him keep himself unspotted from the sins of the world. I think that a young girl will not go far wrong who will kneel down in the morning and pray that she might be kept pure and spotless during the coming day. I cannot think that a Latter-day Saint will hold enmity in his heart or feelings of envy and malice toward any of his fellow men. Guidance: Yes, God will be there to guide and direct him who will seek him in faith with all his might and with all his soul.

D&C 19 38The third blessing is Confidence. All over this land there are thousands and tens of thousands of students who are struggling to get an education. In the Church, let us teach these students that if they want to succeed in their lessons they would seek their God; that the greatest: Teacher known to the world stands near to guide them. Once the student feels that he can approach the Lord through prayer, he will receive confidence that he can get his lessons, that he can write his speech, that he can stand up before his fellow students and deliver his message without fear of failure. Confidence comes through sincere prayer.

D&C 19 38Finally, he will get Inspiration. It is not imagination, if we approach God sincerely seeking light and guidance from him, our minds will be enlightened and our souls thrilled by his Spirit. Washington sought it; Lincoln received it; Joseph Smith knew it; and the testimony, the evidence of the Prophet Joseph's inspiration is manifest to all who will but open their eyes to see and their hearts to understand. (CR, April 1961, pp. 7-8.)
