Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 21

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Fayette, New York, April 6, 1830. This revelation was given at the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, on the date named, in the home of Peter Whitmer, Sen. Six men, who had previously been baptized, participated. By unanimous vote these expressed their desire and determination to organize, according to the commandment of God; see Section 20. They also voted to accept and sustain Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery as the presiding officers of the Church. With the laying on of hands, Joseph then ordained Oliver an Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and Oliver similarly ordained Joseph. After administration of the sacrament, Joseph and Oliver laid hands upon the participants individually, for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, and for the confirmation of each as a member of the Church. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 75.—Church records—The Lord manifests acceptance of the Church, and recognition of the presiding officers.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Whilst the Book of Mormon was in the hands of the printer, we still continued to bear testimony and give information, as far as we had opportunity; and also make known to our brethren that we had received a commandment to organize the Church; and accordingly we met together for that purpose, at the house of Mr. Peter Whitmer, Sen., (being six in number) on Tuesday, the sixth day of April, A. D. one thousand eight hundred and thirty. Having opened the meeting by solemn prayer to our Heavenly Father, we proceeded, according to previous commandment, to call on our brethren to know whether they accepted us as their teachers in the things of the Kingdom of God, and whether they were satisfied that we should proceed and be organized as a Church according to said commandment which we had received. To these several propositions they consented by a unanimous vote. I then laid my hands upon Oliver Cowdery, and ordained him an Elder of the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"; after which, he ordained me also to the office of an Elder of said Church. We then took bread, blessed it, and brake it with them; also wine, blessed it, and drank it with them. We then laid our hands on each individual member of the Church present, that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree—some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly. Whilst yet together, I received the following commandment: [Section 21, follows.] (HC 1:74-78, April Fayette, New York.)

SCD&C 21 1D&C 21 2D&C 21 3D&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6D&C 21 7D&C 21 8Rudger Clawson: 1-8

SCD&C 21 1D&C 21 2D&C 21 3D&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6D&C 21 7D&C 21 8These words [Sec.21:1-12] were the words of Jehovah, delivered to the Prophet Joseph Smith upon the day that the Church was organized. The Church was very weak in numbers then, but strong in spirit. In this revelation the Lord intimates that he was about to move the cause of Zion in mighty power, and talked to the Prophet as if it were an accomplished fact. He desired, it seems, that his people, though few in number, should be impressed with the fact that a Prophet, Seer and Revelator stood at the head; for he instructed that a record to this effect should be kept. He also desired to impress the people with the great truth that this Church should be built up, not by the power of man, but by the power of the Holy Ghost; that no man, though he might be a Prophet or an Apostle, should take the honor unto himself of building up the Church of Christ, but that the honor and the glory must be given to God. Did not the Lord say to the Prophet Daniel that in the latter days the God of heaven would set up his kingdom, and it should be as a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which should roll until it filled the whole earth. [Daniel 2:34-35, 4.] The God of heaven was to do this, but he would use men as his instruments. (CR, October 1901, pp. 7-8.)

D&C 21 1Anthon H. Lund: 1

D&C 21 1There shall be a record kept among you

D&C 21 1At the beginning of this revelation [Sec. 21] we were told that there should be a recorder in the Church, that records should be kept among the people. This important work in the Church, of keeping records, was commanded; and if we read farther we will find that John Whitmer was appointed to be Church recorder, to write the events of the Church. I mention this to show you how important this part of our Church government is, to keep history, to keep a record of what takes place. (CR, April 1913, p. 11.)

D&C 21 1Orson F. Whitney: 1

D&C 21 1A seer

D&C 21 1A seer is greater than a prophet. [Mosiah 8:15.] One may be a prophet without being a seer; but a seer is essentially a prophet—if by "prophet" is meant not only a spokesman, but likewise a foreteller. Joseph Smith was both prophet and seer.

D&C 21 1A seer is one who sees. But it is not the ordinary sight that is meant. The seeric gift is a supernatural endowment. Joseph was "like unto Moses"; and Moses, who saw God face to face, explains how he saw him in these words: "Now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." (Moses 1:11.) Such is the testimony of the ancient seer, as brought to light by the seer of the latter days. (Saturday Night Thoughts, 1921, p. 39.)

D&C 21 1Ezra T. Benson: 1

D&C 21 1A translator

D&C 21 1When Brother Joseph commenced this work, he used to translate by means of the Urim and Thummim, as we read that the prophets and seers did anciently. Did he do this in the latter part of his career? No; he did not, and by the Holy Ghost he could see the very secrets of a man's heart. He could translate other languages, and he did it by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost. I wish to bring this matter to your minds, I want you to understand what it is. (Ezra T. Benson, 1856, pp. 227-28.)

D&C 21 1Anthony W. Ivins: 1

D&C 21 1A prophet

D&C 21 1The word Prophet defined in the Hebrew language means one who has been called to denounce sin and foretell the consequences and punishment of it. He is to be above all else a preacher of righteousness, to call the people back from idolatry to faith in the living God, and when moved upon by the Spirit of the Lord, to foretell coming events. But more particularly a prophet is to be an expounder of present duties and an interpreter of the meaning and application of the written word. (CR, October 1933, p. 84.)

D&C 21 1Anthon H. Lund: 1

D&C 21 1A prophet

D&C 21 1Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God. His teachings prove that what he taught was divinely inspired. Some of his prophecies have been fulfilled, and others remain to be fulfilled. His predictions have not been guesswork. In 1832 he looked down and saw the fate of the Church. [Sec. 101:17-22; 103:5-7.] Now it is reasonable to suppose that if the Lord raised up a prophet, that prophet would say something in regard to these two important things: the nation and the Church, and he did. He told how the Church would be persecuted and driven, and that even the blood of some should be spilt and should cry unto heaven against those who had shed it. [Sec. 87:7.] He prophesied that the Church should go to the Rocky Mountains, and he was so much impressed with the spirit of this that he appointed a committee to go and search for a place to locate the saints. He did not live to see this accomplished, but we have seen this prophecy fulfilled. In regard to the nation, he plainly foretold where the Rebellion (Civil War) should begin and what its results should be. [Sec. 87:1-3.] Everyone can see plainly that part of that revelation has been fulfilled and the other part remains to be fulfilled. (CR, (October 1899, pp. 13-14.)

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6Marion G. Romney: 4-6

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6I would like now to suggest some tests which can safely be used to distinguish the genuine from the counterfeit. . . .

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6Anything purporting to pertain to the Gospel of Jesus Christ may be put to the following four simple tests:

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 61. Does it purport to originate in the wisdom of men or was it revealed from heaven? If it originated in the wisdom of men, it is [John 3:3-5; 7:16; 2 Nephi 9:28-29; 1 Cor. 2:14] not of God. . . .

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 62. Does the teaching bear the proper label?. . . [3 Nephi 27:4-8.]

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6From the foregoing it is perfectly plain that if any teaching purporting to be from Christ comes under any label other than that of Jesus Christ, we can know it is not of God.

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 63. The last phrase of the above quotation gives us the third test. "But if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel." The teaching must not only come under the proper label, but it must also conform to the other teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 64. Now the fourth and last test I shall mention is: Does it come through the proper Church channel?. . .

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6In the revelation the Lord gave to the Prophet in answer to his inquiry about the stone which Hiram Page had, he said, speaking of the president of the Church [Sec. 21:4-5, quoted].

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6Such is the obligation of this Priesthood with respect to our present Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, President David O. McKay. [Sec. 21:6, quoted.]

SCD&C 21 4D&C 21 5D&C 21 6Now. . . if we will keep these things in mind, we shall not be deceived by false teachings. I remember years ago when I was a bishop, I had President [Heber J.] Grant talk to our ward. After the meeting I drove him home. . . . Standing by me, he put his arm over my shoulder and said: "My boy, you always keep your eye on the President of the Church, and if he ever tells you to do anything, and it is wrong, you do it, and the Lord will bless you for it." Then, with a twinkle in his eye, he said, "But you don't need to worry. The Lord will never let his mouthpiece lead the people astray." (CR, October 1960, pp. 76-78.)

D&C 21 6Anthon H. Lund: 6

D&C 21 6The gates of hell

D&C 21 6The Lord, in comforting the saints, told them that if they would listen to his counsel, the gates of hell should not have power over them, and this promise is the same to you and to me inasmuch as we listen to the counsels of inspired men. As I understand that expression, "the gates of hell," it means those things which lead to hell, in fact, are the entrances to it. How many things are there that lead to those gates? How many things we have to be warned against and which we have to watch out for, because if we yield to them, they will lead us to the gates of hell! Let us each and every one examine ourselves and know well the path in which we are walking and avoid everything that we know is wrong, and forbidden by the Lord, well knowing that if we yield to such we have not the promise that the gates of hell shall not have power over us; on the other hand, if we perform our duty, live according to the testimony which God has given us, we need not fear, for he will lead us in the paths of righteousness that lead to eternal life. (CR, April 1913, pp. 10-11.)

D&C 21 9George Albert Smith: 9

D&C 21 9A hundred years ago yesterday the Lord commenced this work. At that time he gave certain information. I shall not take time to read that [Sec. 21], but I call attention to the fact that in it the Lord said: [Sec. 21:9, quoted.]

D&C 21 9I call attention to the fact that he made a promise that he would bless all those who labored in his vineyard, and since that time thousands of men and women have gone into the world to advocate the truth. I have met and visited with hundreds, yes, and with thousands of them myself, and I have never heard one bear any other testimony than that the Lord had blessed him and given him great joy when he labored in his service. (CR, April 1930, p. 66.)

D&C 21 9Brigham Young: 9

D&C 21 9By the Comforter

D&C 21 9I have proven to my satisfaction, according to the best knowledge I can gather, that a man can be deceived by the sight of the natural eye, he can be deceived by the hearing of the ear, and by the touch of the hand; that he can be deceived in all of what are called the natural senses. But there is one thing in which he cannot be deceived. What is that? It is the operations of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit and power of God upon the creature. It teaches him of heavenly things; it directs him in the way of life; it affords him the key by which he can test the devices of man, and which recommends the things of God. (JD, September 17, 1876, 18:230.)

SCD&C 21 10D&C 21 11Anthon H. Lund: 10-11

SCD&C 21 10D&C 21 11Joseph had informed the little flock that gathered there when the Church was organized of what the Lord commanded, and it was proposed to them that Joseph Smith be the first Elder of the Church, and Oliver the second. Then Joseph ordained Oliver and Oliver ordained Joseph to the office of an Elder. This was not bestowing the Melchizedek Priesthood on either of them. They held that before. It had been conferred upon them by Peter, James and John. [Sec. 27:12-13.] It was not given to them by the authority of those present. The Lord had revealed to them, through his servant, and had conferred upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood, but there was no Church organized as yet, and hence there were no officers needed in the Church, but when the Church was organized, on April the 6th, 1830, then it was necessary that men should fill official positions in the Church, and do this by the consent of those over whom they were to exercise authority. As yet, the office of a High Priest had not been given, but Elders had been voted for, and had been ordained, and they took charge of the meeting. (CR, April 1913, pp. 9-10.)

D&C 21 12George Q. Cannon: 12

D&C 21 12The first public meeting of the Church after the day of its organization was held at the house of Peter Whitmer in Fayette, on the 11th day of April, 1830. On that occasion, Oliver Cowdery, under Joseph's direction, proclaimed the word of God for the comfort and instruction of saints and strangers. The appointment for this meeting had gone forth through all the neighborhood; and many persons came to hear what wonderful things were to be spoken by the men who professed to be called directly of God to the ministry. This was the first public discourse delivered by an authorized servant of God in these last days. At the conclusion of the services a number of persons demanded baptism and membership among the people of God. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, p. 61.)
