Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 22

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which was established in these last days, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and thirty. Given at Manchester, New York, April, 1830, in consequence of some who had previously been baptized desiring to unite with the Church without re-baptism.—The indispensability of baptism in the way prescribed and through the authority given by the Lord is set forth.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Several persons who had attended the above meeting [April 6, 1830] became convinced of the truth and came forward shortly after, and were received into the Church. . . . Revelation to the Church of Jesus Christ which was established in these last days, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and thirty. Given at Manchester, New York, April, 1830, in consequence of some desiring to unite with the Church without re-baptism, who had previously been baptized. [Section 22, follows.] (HC 1:79, April 1830.)

SCD&C 22 1D&C 22 2D&C 22 3D&C 22 4James E. Talmage: 1-4

SCD&C 22 1D&C 22 2D&C 22 3D&C 22 4In this restored Church has been placed, by divine ministration and ordinance, the authority of the Lesser and the Greater—or of the Aaronic and of the Melchizedek Priesthoods, with the several offices thereof and the several duties, responsibilities and powers pertaining to each office as of old.

SCD&C 22 1D&C 22 2D&C 22 3D&C 22 4That it was and is something new, and yet something old, as it is in fact eternal, was set forth by the Lord in a revelation given in April, 1830, just after the organization of the Church. [Sec. 22.] There were people who had joined other churches. Many of them had been and were devout. They had been baptized, some of them by sprinkling and some of them by pouring, but they called it baptism, and some of them by immersion; and they raised the question as to whether they could not become members of this Church now by application and profession of faith alone, affirming that it was unjust that they should be required to be baptized again. In this claim they plainly forgot that the outward form of baptism can be performed by anybody, but that baptism as an ordinance acceptable unto the Lord requires the power and the authority of the Priesthood which he has given. Therefore the Lord said: [Sec. 22:1-4, quoted.]. . .

SCD&C 22 1D&C 22 2D&C 22 3D&C 22 4Isn't that in line with the declaration our Lord made while he talked in the flesh, even the Christ, known as Jesus of Nazareth, who was acknowledged as a marvelous prophet whose teachings were full of wisdom? On one occasion, amidst circumstances which the rest of the chapter will give unto you, he spoke these words recorded in the 9th chapter of Matthew, beginning with the sixteenth verse:

SCD&C 22 1D&C 22 2D&C 22 3D&C 22 4No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse.

SCD&C 22 1D&C 22 2D&C 22 3D&C 22 4Neither do men put new wine into old bottles; else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish, but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved. (CR, October 1922, pp. 71-72.)

D&C 22 1Joseph Fielding Smith: 1

D&C 22 1A new and an everlasting covenant

D&C 22 1I am reminded of an expression that occurs in one of the early revelations (Sec. 22) shortly after the organization of the Church, when the Lord said that he had given unto the Church "a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning." Those words are very significant. It was a new and everlasting covenant, and yet it had always existed, for it was from the beginning, and so this new commandment that we should love one another has always been. The truth does not grow old. Some people, you know, are extremely progressive. They want a change in this and a change in that, and a change in the other thing, but the principles of the gospel never change. (CR, October 1920, p. 55.)

D&C 22 2Rudger Clawson: 2

D&C 22 2Baptized

D&C 22 2Baptism, then, may be said to be the door that leads into the kingdom of God, or into the Church and kingdom of God. How beautiful that is! I am not spiritualizing. There is an earthly work to do. And then when one gets into the kingdom of God there is a greater work to do because it is word upon word, line upon line, precept upon precept, that one must learn by experience after he comes into the Church and kingdom of God. A man is not saved by baptism altogether, but he must exercise that power and do the work that is necessary. (CR, October 1932, pp. 9-10.)

D&C 22 4Anthon H. Lund: 4

D&C 22 4Enter ye in at the gate

D&C 22 4There are so many religious denominations in the world, and the question arises, How shall I find the correct one? Paul tells us there is but one true faith, that none is allowed to preach any other gospel than the one he preached: for if one should do so, he says, "Let him be accursed." [Gal. 1:6-8.] It is therefore of vital consequence to know which is the true religion. The Lord has not left us without means to show this for ourselves. We have his word, which we can study, and it was written by men inspired by the Holy Ghost. While we are convinced of this, we do not believe that the word of God as contained in the sacred books is able to authorize men to officiate in the ordinances of the Gospel. The word of God is for our guidance, but we need the living oracles to direct and guide us and to administer the ordinances. . . .

D&C 22 4The true Church must be established by authority of God, and there must be the life of the Holy Spirit in it. The Holy Ghost must be conferred upon the members by the ordinance ordained for its bestowal [Sec. 20:41], and when the Spirit is received it will testify unto the recipients that they have obeyed the demands of the true Gospel. (CR, October 1915, p. 10.)
