Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 23

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Manchester, New York, April, 1830, to Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Joseph Smith, Sen., and Joseph Knight, Sen. As the result of earnest desire on the part of the five persons named, the Prophet inquired of the Lord, and received this revelation in response.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

The following persons being anxious to know of the Lord what might be their respective duties in relation to this work, I inquired of the Lord, and received for them the following:

Revelation to Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Joseph Smith, Sen., and Joseph Knight, Sen. Given at Manchester, New York, April 1830. [Section 23, follows.] (HC 1:80, April 1830.)

SCD&C 23 1D&C 23 2D&C 23 3D&C 23 4D&C 23 5Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-5

SCD&C 23 1D&C 23 2D&C 23 3D&C 23 4D&C 23 5First the Lord spoke to Oliver Cowdery informing him that he was under no condemnation, but that he was to beware of pride, lest thou shouldst enter into temptation. This was one of Oliver Cowdery's besetting sins. If he could have humbled himself in the troubled days of Kirtland he would not have lost his place and membership in the Church. That which had been bestowed upon him was exceedingly great and had he been willing to humble himself, it was his privilege to stand with the Prophet Joseph Smith through all time and eternity, holding the keys of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. However, at this particular time when this word was sought, he was free from condemnation. He was commanded to make known his calling to both the Church and also to the world, and while doing this his heart would be opened to teach them the truth from henceforth and forever. His great mission was to stand shoulder to shoulder with the Prophet Joseph Smith holding the keys of salvation for this dispensation. It was also his duty to bear witness to all mankind of the restoration of the Gospel.

SCD&C 23 1D&C 23 2D&C 23 3D&C 23 4D&C 23 5The Lord also told Hyrum Smith that he was free from condemnation and that his heart was opened, his tongue loosed, and his calling was to exhortation, and to strengthen the Church continually. In a later revelation the Lord said of Hyrum Smith that he loved him "because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loved that which is right before me, saith the Lord." Because of his integrity and because his heart was right, he had conferred upon his head all that once was given to Oliver Cowdery. (D&C 124:15, 94-96.) There is another thing of great significance in this brief blessing to Hyrum Smith (Sec. 23:3), which is: "Wherefore thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. Amen." It is doubtful if the Prophet Joseph fully understood the meaning of this expression when this revelation was given. In later years it was made clear. Evidently it has reference to the office of Patriarch, and in this office it was his duty and that of his family forever.

SCD&C 23 1D&C 23 2D&C 23 3D&C 23 4D&C 23 5To Samuel Smith the Lord said it was his duty also to strengthen the Church, although he was not yet called to preach before the world. It will be recalled that Samuel was the third person baptized in this dispensation. He was one of the first to be ordained to the office of Elder, and it was not long after this revelation when he was sent forth to teach, which he did with marked success, far beyond his own realization.

SCD&C 23 1D&C 23 2D&C 23 3D&C 23 4D&C 23 5To Joseph Smith, Sen., who was so faithful and devoted to his son in the commencement of this marvelous work, the Lord said: He was not under any condemnation, and he also was called to exhort, and to strengthen the Church, and this was his duty from henceforth and forever. (CHMR, 1947, 1:112-13.)

D&C 23 6James E. Talmage: 6

D&C 23 6Take up your cross

D&C 23 6The cross to be taken up may be heavy, perhaps to be dragged because too burdensome to be borne. We are apt to assume that self-denial is the sole material of our cross; but this is true only as we regard self-denial in its broadest sense, comprising both positive and negative aspects. One man's cross may consist mostly in refraining from doings to which he is inclined, another's in doing what he would fain escape. One's besetting sin is evil indulgence; his neighbor's a lazy inattention to the activities required by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, coupled perchance with puritanical rigor in other observances.

D&C 23 6But the great question, striking home to every thoughtful soul, is that of the Master—"For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul?" (Matt. 16:26.)

D&C 23 6It is possible then for a man to lose his own soul. To deny is to reject the Lord's own doctrine. The safeguard against such incalculable loss is specifically indicated—to follow the Savior; and this can mean only keeping his commandments, whatever the temporary suffering or worldly sacrifice may be. (The Vitality of Mormonism, 1919, p. 353.)

D&C 23 6Joseph F. Merrill: 6

D&C 23 6Pray vocally. . . as well as in secret

D&C 23 6I was reared in a family where prayer, night and morning, was always the order. I have seen my father sometimes too busy to eat his breakfast, but never too busy to kneel with his family in prayer before he left, to thank the Lord for the prospects of the day, for the rest of the night, and to ask his direction and help in the labors of the day. I was taught to pray at my mother's knee, and when I would say my own little prayers, I was taught that it was my prayer; it should be said in secret, or at least to myself. (CR, April 1944, p. 151.)

D&C 23 7Charles C. Rich: 7

D&C 23 7In the first instructions we received from the Elders, we were told we must repent of our sins and be baptized, in order to receive the Holy Spirit, and that we had no claims upon the Lord for his Spirit until we had complied with the requirements made of us. [Sec. 36:2-3.] I remember very well my feelings upon this subject before I obeyed the Gospel. I studied carefully, anxiously, and prayerfully, that I might know if it were the Church of Jesus Christ. I did not want to run any risk in the matter, and remain in uncertainty. I was willing to do anything that would give me a knowledge of the truth. I was willing to receive it through the ministration of an angel, through direct revelation, or by any other way, but I did not want to be deceived. Every time I reflected carefully upon the subject I came to this point: the conditions upon which the promises have been made are repentance, baptism, and imposition of hands. The spirit would then whisper, You have not been baptized, you have not obeyed the Gospel; but when I had complied with the law, then I had a perfect claim to the blessings and the promises, and did receive them, and obtained a perfect knowledge of the truth, and then could bear a testimony of it to all the world. I mention these things to show you the principles we have to act upon in order to obtain the blessings of salvation and eternal life. And I can testify that the Lord has fulfilled his promises, and has poured out his Spirit upon the people, through baptism and the laying on of hands. . . .We must comply with the principles of the eternal law in order to obtain eternal blessings. [Sec. 130:20-21.] I want to impress these principles upon your minds, for there is no "think so" and "guess so" about these things, for the Lord himself has decreed them, and I bear record that they are true. (JD, February 10, 1878, 19:250-51.)

D&C 23 7First Presidency (David O. McKay, Stephen L Richards, J. Reuben Clark, Jr.): 7

D&C 23 7Unite with the true church

D&C 23 7We hold out to all men the promise that if they will accept the Lord's revealed truth and conform their lives to the commandments and revelations of the Father, they will acquire testimony convincing to their souls of the divinity of the mission of the Lord Jesus Christ and the restoration of his Holy Gospel in this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, which is to precede the second coming of our Lord and Savior. The Lord will bring to those who accept his truth and the way of life he has given—happiness, contentment, satisfaction, and a peace that passeth understanding. [Sec. 59:23.] (DN, December 16, 1953.)
