Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 25

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, July, 1830.—The word of the Lord directed to Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife—Her duties defined, and glorious possibilities of achievement set forth—The Lord's admonitions are applied to all.

[Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet to Emma Smith, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, July, 1830. See "Introduction" to Section 24.]

SCD&C 25 1D&C 25 2D&C 25 3D&C 25 4D&C 25 5D&C 25 6D&C 25 7D&C 25 8D&C 25 9 Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-9

SCD&C 25 1D&C 25 2D&C 25 3D&C 25 4D&C 25 5D&C 25 6D&C 25 7D&C 25 8D&C 25 9This revelation was given to Emma Smith, wife of Joseph Smith. She was the daughter of Isaac and Elizabeth Lewis Hale, and was born July 10, 1804. She was married to the Prophet in 1827, while he was under the tutelage of the Angel Moroni. She believed in the Prophet, although her parents did not, and she was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in June, 1830. Her life from that time on was a very trying one, due to constant persecution and mobbings. She passed through these trials with her husband and shared them, as did the faithful wives of the leaders of the Church. The calling given to Emma Smith in this revelation was an important one, and was fulfilled.

SCD&C 25 1D&C 25 2D&C 25 3D&C 25 4D&C 25 5D&C 25 6D&C 25 7D&C 25 8D&C 25 9Emma Smith was human, possessing many of the characteristics which are found in most of us. Being the wife of the man whom the Almighty had blessed, she felt, as most women would have felt under like circumstances, that she was entitled to some special favors. It was difficult for her to understand why she could not view the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and other sacred things, which view had been given to special witnesses. At times this human thought caused her to murmur and ask the questions of the Prophet why she was denied this privilege. In this revelation the Lord admonishes her and tells her that it is for a wise purpose to be made known in time to come, why she and the world were deprived of this privilege. Her duty was to be obedient to her husband, hearken to him in faith, and she should have an inheritance in Zion. Even greater blessings were in store for her; she should be a daughter of God. . . in his kingdom, and a crown of righteousness should she receive. Moreover, she was told that her duty was to be a comfort with consoling words to her husband in his afflictions, for he should have many. ( D&C 24:8.) Any man who has had afflictions knows what a comfort a confiding wife can be. How much better it is to be a comfort than to be a nagger and to murmur!. . .

SCD&C 25 1D&C 25 2D&C 25 3D&C 25 4D&C 25 5D&C 25 6D&C 25 7D&C 25 8D&C 25 9"And thou shalt be ordained under his hand to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church." Like the expression "elect lady," so also has this saying led to speculation and misunderstanding. The term "ordain" was used generally in the early days of the Church in reference to both ordination and setting apart, and, too, correctly according to the meaning of the word. Men holding the Priesthood were said to have been "ordained" to preside over branches and to perform special work. Sisters also were said to have been "ordained" when they were called to some special duty or responsibility. In later years we developed a distinction between ordain and setting apart. Men are ordained to offices in the Priesthood and set apart to preside over stakes, wards, branches, missions, and auxiliary organizations. The sisters are set apart—not ordained—as presidents of auxiliary organizations, to missions, etc. This saying that Emma Smith was "ordained" to expound scripture does not mean that she had conferred upon her the Priesthood, but that she was set apart to this calling, which found its fulfillment in the Relief Society of the Church. (CHMR, 1947, 1:117-18.)

D&C 25 1Brigham Young: 1

D&C 25 1All those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters

D&C 25 1By what means shall the people of this generation become the sons and daughters of the Almighty? By believing in the Lord Jesus Christ? [Sec. 11:30; 34:1-4; 35:2.]

D&C 25 1Yes. How shall they know that they believe in him? By yielding obedience to the Gospel as it is revealed to us in this generation, at the same time believing in all that has been revealed to others until now concerning the children of men, the character of God, the creation of the earth, the ordinances of the Lord's house, the oracles of truth—believing in all things that have been revealed to mankind from the time that the Lord first began to reveal his will to them. (JD, November 17, 1867, 12:101.)

D&C 25 3Joseph Smith: 3

D&C 25 3Thou art an elect lady

D&C 25 3I assisted in commencing the organization of "The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo" in the Lodge Room. Sister Emma Smith, President, and Sister Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland, Counselors. I gave much instruction, read in the New Testament, and Book of Doctrine and Covenants, concerning the Elect Lady, and showed that the elect meant to be elected to a certain work, etc., and that the revelation was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the Society, she having previously been ordained to expound the Scriptures. [Sec. 25:3, 7.] Emma was blessed, and her counselors were ordained by Elder John Taylor. (HC 4:552 53, March 17, 1842.)

D&C 25 7John Taylor: 7

D&C 25 7And thou shalt be ordained. . . to expound scriptures

D&C 25 7I was in Nauvoo at the time the Relief Society was organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and I was present on the occasion. At a later meeting of the Society held in Salt Lake City I was present, and I read from a record called the Book of the Law of the Lord, the minutes of that meeting. At that meeting the Prophet called Sister Emma to be an elect lady. That means that she was called to a certain work; and was in fulfillment of a certain revelation concerning her. [Sec. 25:13.] She was elected to preside over the Relief Society, and she was ordained to expound the scriptures. In compliance with Brother Joseph's request, I set her apart and also ordained Sister Whitney, wife of Bishop Newel K. Whitney, and Sister Cleveland, wife of Judge Cleveland, to be her counselors. Some of the sisters have thought that these sisters mentioned were in this ordination ordained to the Priesthood. And for the information of all interested in this subject I will say, it is not the calling of these sisters to hold the Priesthood, only in connection with their husbands, they being one with their husbands. (JD, August 8, 1880, 21:367-68.)

D&C 25 10John A. Widtsoe: 10

D&C 25 10I remember the man who baptized me into the Church, a very common, ordinary man to begin with a ropewalker with a jug of beer two or three times a day, a glass of whiskey a little later, and a cud of tobacco mostly all day long, Living a useless, purposeless life, except for three meals a day, and the satisfaction of some of the carnal appetites. He heard the Gospel and accepted it. It was good. It was something he had been longing for. The man grew in power and stature in the Church. As I recall it, he filled five or six missions and presided over one of the missions of the Church. He was the same man, with the same arms, same feet, same body, same mind, but changed because of the Spirit that comes with the acceptance of eternal truth. Have we not seen this in our own families and friends, in the little towns in which we live ? Have not we felt our own strength grow mightier in love for our fellow men, in love for our daily tasks, in love for all the good things of life? (CR, April 1952, p. 34.)

D&C 25 10Hyrum M. Smith: 10

D&C 25 10It is folly to suppose that you gain a salvation in the kingdom of God while you are breaking the commandments of God. It is folly to suppose that the broad way, and those roads that meander and curve and turn away from the straight and narrow path will lead to that gate which entereth into life. . . .We must take all the words of the Savior; live by every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God following the paths of truth, and keep the Lord's commandments; then there will be salvation for us. [James 1:22.] (CR, April 1906, p. 51.)

SCD&C 25 11D&C 25 12George Albert Smith: 11-12

SCD&C 25 11D&C 25 12Not only does the spoken word touch the hearts of the children of men, but our Heavenly Father, knowing the importance of appropriate singing in worship, called Emma Smith and appointed her to select the hymns that were published in the first hymn book of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They have been added to from time to time, until today the songs of Zion are sung in many lands, and the words of the Gospel of Jesus Christ have been interpreted in many lands, not only by the spoken word, but by the hymns that are sung from the hearts of those who accept the Gospel of our Lord. (CR, October 1938, pp. 27-28.)

D&C 25 12Reed Smoot: 12

D&C 25 12The song of the righteous is a prayer unto me

D&C 25 12In a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith in July, 1830, the Lord, in speaking to Joseph's wife, Emma, said: [Sec. 25:12, quoted.]. . .

D&C 25 12I believe that we can worship in song as acceptably to him as in any other way. . . . I know of no people on earth who have written into their songs the principles of the Gospel they believe in more than have the Latter-day Saints. . . .

D&C 25 12"Come, come ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear, But with joy wend your way. Though hard to you this journey may appear, Grace shall be as your day,"

D&C 25 12is filled with inspiration. Brother William Clayton, the author of this song, was inspired to write it, at a time when the people were crossing the plains, careworn, disheartened and in need of encouragement. President [Brigham] Young realized their condition and knew that music would inspire them to renewed energy. He therefore asked William Clayton to write a hymn suitable to the conditions, and the result was the hymn "Come, Come, Ye Saints." It was inspired by God, and it has been an inspiration to God's people ever since.

D&C 25 12I believe that Sister Snow, when she composed that immortalized song, "O My Father, Thou that dwellest in the high and glorious place," was inspired of God the Eternal Father. The idea that we had a Mother, as well as a Father, in heaven was first taught in this dispensation by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Sister Snow was convinced that he was right in so teaching, and embodied that principle of the Gospel in the song. I believe that hymn, "O My Father"' has been the means of causing thousands of people of the world to investigate "Mormonism." (CR, October 1912. pp. 50-51.)

D&C 25 12Joseph F. Smith: 12

D&C 25 12It shall be answered. . . upon their heads

D&C 25 12Good music is gracious praise of God. It is delightsome to the ear, and it is one of our most acceptable methods of worshipping God. And those who sing in this choir and in all the choirs of the saints should sing with the spirit and with the understanding. They should not sing merely because it is a profession, or because they have a good voice; but they should sing also because they have the spirit of it and can enter into the spirit of prayer and praise to God who gave them their sweet voices. (CR, October 1899, p. 69.)

D&C 25 12Boyd K. Packer: 12

D&C 25 12It shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads

D&C 25 12This is what I would teach you. Choose from among the sacred music of the Church a favorite hymn, one with words that are uplifting and music that is reverent, one that makes you feel something akin to inspiration. Remember President Lee's counsel: perhaps "I am a Child of God" would do. Go over it in your mind carefully. Memorize it. Even though you have had no musical training, you can think through a hymn.

D&C 25 12Now, use this hymn as the place for your thoughts to go. Make it your emergency channel. Whenever you find these shady actors have slipped from the sidelines of your thinking onto the state of your mind, put on this record, as it were.

D&C 25 12As the music begins and as the words form in your thoughts, the unworthy ones will slip shamefully away. It will change the whole mood on the stage of your mind. Because it is uplifting and clean, the baser thoughts will disappear. For while virtue, by choice, will not associate with filth, evil cannot tolerate the presence of light.

D&C 25 12In due time you will find yourself, on occasion, humming the music inwardly. As you retrace your thoughts, you discover some influence from the world about you encouraged an unworthy thought to move on stage in your mind, and the music almost automatically began. . . .

D&C 25 12There are many references in the scriptures, both ancient and modern, that attest to the influence of righteous music. The Lord, Himself, was prepared for His greatest test through its influence, for the scripture records: "And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives." (Mark 14:26.) (CR, October 1973, pp. 24-25.)

D&C 25 13John Taylor: 13

D&C 25 13Cleave unto the covenants which thou hast made

D&C 25 13The covenants which men enter into generally are of a transitory nature, and pertain to time, and when time ceases with them these obligations terminate. Our covenants, however, are of another character. We enter into eternal covenants with God to serve him faithfully here on the earth, and then we expect to be associated with him in the heavens. Having entered into covenants of this kind, we feel that there are certain responsibilities and obligations resting upon us, which it is our bounder duty to perform. [Sec. 101:39-40.] (JD, January 12, 1873, 15:284.)

D&C 25 15George Albert Smith: 15

D&C 25 15Keep my commandments continually

D&C 25 15I have many times repeated what my grandfather said. . . . In advising his family he said, "There is a line of demarcation, well defined. On one side of the line is the Lord's territory. On the other side of the line is the devil's territory." And he said, "If you will stay on the Lord's side of the line, you are perfectly safe, because the adversary of all righteousness cannot cross the line."

D&C 25 15What does that mean? It means to me that those who are living righteous lives, keeping all the commandments of our Heavenly Father, are perfectly safe, but not those who trifle with his advice and counsel. (CR, September 1949, pp. 5-6.)
