Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 26

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, Oliver Cowdery, and John Whitmer, at Harmony, Pennsylvania, July, 1830. Instructions as to immediate duty—Reaffirmation of the principle of common consent in Church affairs.

D&C 26 2Charles W. Penrose: 2

D&C 26 2All things shall be done by common consent

D&C 26 2It may seem rather a dry and formal matter to some of the people to come together and lift up their hands to sustain the authorities of the Church, but it is a necessary duty and if we look at it properly, we shall take pleasure therein. It may seem a little monotonous, but as I have said, it is necessary, for it was designed by the Almighty in the organization of this Church, that the voice of the people should respond to the voice of the Lord. It is the voice of the Lord and the voice of the people together in this Church that sanctions all things therein. [Sec. 20:63-66.] In the rise of the Church the Lord gave a revelation which said that "all things shall be done by common consent." And the Lord designs that every individual member shall take upon him or her the spirit of the Church, and be an active living member of the body. (JD, November 29, 1879, 21:45-46.)

D&C 26 2Joseph F. Smith: 2

D&C 26 2All things shall be done. . . by much prayer and faith

D&C 26 2President Smith. . . presented the authorities of the Church, first remarking that "we desire that the brethren and sisters will all feel the responsibility of expressing their feelings in relation to the propositions that may be put before you. We do not want any man or woman who is a member of the Church to violate their conscience. Of course, we are not asking apostates or non-members of the Church to vote on the authorities of the Church. We are only asking for members of the Church in good standing to vote on the propositions that shall be put before you, and we would like all to vote as they feel, whether for or against." (CR, October 1902, p. 83.)
