Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 28

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Oliver Cowdery, at Fayette, New York, September, 1830. Hiram Page, a member of the Church, had a certain stone and professed to be receiving revelations by its aid concerning the upbuilding of Zion and the order of the Church. Several members had been deceived by these claims, and even Oliver Cowdery was wrongly influenced thereby. Just prior to an appointed conference, the Prophet inquired earnestly of the Lord concerning the matter and this revelation followed. See History of the Church, vol. I, p. 109.—Joseph's position of presidency defined—Oliver warned against undue assumption—Oliver's mission to the Lamanites stated—He to labor with Hiram Page, whom Satan had deceived—Hiram Page not appointed by the Lord nor accepted by the people as a revelator to the Church.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

To our great grief, however, we soon found that Satan had been lying in wait to deceive, and seeking whom he might devour. Brother Hiram Page had in his possession a certain stone, by which he had obtained certain "revelations" concerning the upbuilding of Zion, the order of the Church, etc., all of which were entirely at variance with the order of God's house as laid down in the New Testament, as well as in our late revelations. As a conference meeting had been appointed for the 26th day of September, I thought it wisdom not to do much more than to converse with the brethren on the subject, until the conference should meet. Finding, however, that many, especially the Whitmer family and Oliver Cowdery, were believing much in the things set forth by this stone, we thought best to inquire of the Lord concerning so important a matter; and before conference convened, we received the following: [Section 28.] (HC 1:109-10, September 1830; Fayette, New York.)

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, Charles W. Penrose): 1-7

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7To the officers and members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7From the days of Hiram Page (D&C 28), at different periods there have been manifestations from delusive spirits to members of the Church. Sometimes these have come to the men and women who, because of transgression, became easy prey to the arch-deceiver. At other times people who pride themselves on their strict observance of the rules and ordinances and ceremonies of the Church are led astray by false spirits, who exercise an influence so imitative of that which proceeds from a divine source that even these persons, who think they are "the very elect," find it difficult to discern the essential difference. Satan himself has transformed himself to be apparently "an angel of light." [Sec. 129:8.]

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7When visions, dreams, tongues, prophecy, impressions or any extraordinary gift of inspiration, convey something out of harmony with accepted revelations of the Church or contrary to the decisions of its constituted authorities, Latter-day Saints may know that it is not of God, no matter how plausible it may appear. Also, they should understand that directions for the guidance of the Church will come, by revelation, through the head. All faithful members are entitled to the inspiration of the Holy Spirit for themselves, their families, and for those over whom they are appointed and ordained to preside. But anything at discord with that which comes from God through the head of the Church is not to be received as authoritative or reliable. In secular as well as spiritual affairs, saints may receive divine guidance and revelation affecting themselves, but this does not convey authority to direct others, and is not to be accepted when contrary to Church covenants, doctrine or discipline, or to known facts, demonstrated truths, or good common sense. [Sec. 42:13; 97:8.] No person has the right to induce his fellow members of the Church to engage in speculations or take stock in ventures of any kind on the specious claim of divine revelation, or vision, or dream, especially when it is in opposition to the voice of recognized authority, local or general. The Lord's Church "is a house of order." [Sec. 132:8.] It is not governed by individual gifts or manifestations, but by the order and power of the Holy Priesthood as sustained by the voice and vote of the Church in its appointed conferences. [Sec. 124:143-44.]

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7The history of the Church records many pretended revelations claimed by imposters or zealots who believed in the manifestations they sought to lead other persons to accept, and in every instance, disappointment, sorrow and disaster have resulted therefrom. Financial loss and sometimes utter ruin have followed. We feel it our duty to warn the Latter-day Saints against fake mining schemes which have no warrant for success beyond the professed spiritual manifestations of their projectors and the influence gained over the excited minds of their victims. We caution the saints against investing money or property in shares of stock which bring no profit to anyone but those who issue and trade in them. Fanciful schemes to make money for the alleged purpose of "redeeming Zion" or providing means for "the salvation of the dead" or other seemingly worthy objects, should not deceive anyone acquainted with the order of the Church, and will result only in waste of time and labor, which might be devoted now to doing something tangible and worthy and of record on earth and in heaven.

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7Be not led by any spirit or influence that discredits established authority and contradicts true scientific principles and discoveries, or leads away from the direct revelations of God for the government of the Church. The Holy Ghost does not contradict its own revealings. Truth is always harmonious with itself. Piety is often the cloak of error. [Sec. 52:14-16.] The counsels of the Lord through the channel he has appointed will be followed with safety, therefore, Oh! ye Latter-day Saints, profit by these words of warning. (IE, September 1913, 16:1148-49.)

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7John A. Widtsoe: 1-7

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7For a number of years I was engaged in reading the sermons of Brigham Young, having in mind a compilation of his wise sayings for the benefit of the saints. I was amazed to note how closely, how carefully, he followed the doctrine laid down by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who himself only taught the pure, unchanged Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. As I read on, studying the teachings of those who came after Brigham Young, I found the same thing to be true. I have listened in this tabernacle, for many years, to the words of President Heber J. Grant, and I have found him likewise a teacher of the same doctrine that was taught by Joseph Smith, by Brigham Young, and by the others who have preceded President Grant in his high office. There has been no deviation in his teachings from fundamental truth; not by a hair's breadth.

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7In this changelessness of fundamental teaching lies not only a testimony of the truth of this great work, but also a principle of comfort to all who belong to the Church. I belong to various scientific societies. In them I find that theories come and go. We all belong to various organizations, political parties, and we observe that from day to day the principles that guide the membership of these associations seem to vary, to change. I can cling safely to the Church, to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; it has steadying power, it does not change nor vary. It is the same today, yesterday and forever. . . .

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7Do not misunderstand me as I speak on this theme. Every man clothes his ideas in his own words. Joseph Smith did not speak as Heber J. Grant speaks. The principles, the ideas were the same, but the words used, the forms of expression, belong to the speaker; and every man has a right to express as best he can in the words God gives him, the eternal truths that he may obtain from a divine source.

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7Again, do not misunderstand me. I do not mean that this Church and kingdom is static, that we stand still. I believe in a living, growing Church, which is in need of and does receive revelation from day to day. Nothing is more certain to me than that we are founded on revelation from God, and that we are guided daily by such revelation. We shall have revelation for our guidance to the end of time; but such new revelations as may come will never supersede, destroy or abrogate the fundamental principles upon which this Church rests its body of doctrine. A new revelation merely adds and develops and more nearly completes that which has formerly been given.

SCD&C 28 1D&C 28 2D&C 28 3D&C 28 4D&C 28 5D&C 28 6D&C 28 7The conditions of our people, the Latter-day Saints, in the days of Ohio, Missouri and Illinois, were as different from the conditions of today, almost as night is from day. Our people then lived under pioneer conditions, with no knowledge of the things which have given us the most remarkable mechanical civilization of all earthly time. We cannot expect that the exact application of the eternal principles of the Gospel should be the same today as in the days of Ohio or Missouri, but we do expect that any new revelation will be very largely the application of the eternal principles of truth to present needs. I rejoice that, as far as I have been able to read the history of the Church and as I have lived life in the Church, I have seen from day to day such application of fundamental eternal unchanging laws of the Gospel to the needs of the changing existing today. (CR, October 1934, pp. 9-10.)

D&C 28 5George Q. Cannon: 5

D&C 28 5Thou shalt not write by way of commandment

D&C 28 5Oliver Cowdery. . . received at the same time that the Prophet Joseph did the Aaronic Priesthood. . . . He afterwards received, in common with Joseph, the administration of those who held the keys of the Apostleship in the flesh on the earth—that is, Peter, James and John. They administered unto him at the same time that they administered unto Joseph, upon the same occasion, and he became an Apostle with Joseph, being the second Apostle in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Now, it might be thought a man thus favored, favored to receive the Aaronic Priesthood, favored with the privilege of baptizing the Prophet of God, I say, that a man thus favored would have stood alongside of the Prophet and been of equal authority in giving the word of God in writing unto the people. But no. God drew a distinction and plainly told Oliver Cowdery that that which he wrote to this Church should not be by way of commandments to the Church, but by wisdom. The Lord said to him [Sec. 28:4, quoted]. It was only one man's privilege, one man's authority to stand pre-eminent in the earth at one time, holding the keys and giving the commandments of God—or rather the Lord—giving his commandments through him in writing to the Church. (JD, December 2, 1883, 24:363-64.)

D&C 28 6Joseph Smith: 6

D&C 28 6Thou shalt nor command him who is at thy head

D&C 28 6I will inform you that it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or anyone, to receive instructions for those in authority, higher than themselves; therefore, you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them; but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction, for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom. (HC 1:388, April 13, 1833.)

D&C 28 13George Q. Cannon: 13

D&C 28 13God gave revelations unto this Church in exceeding great plainness, and there was one principle that was emphatically dwelt on and enforced, namely, that there was but one channel, one channel alone, through which the word of God and the commandments of God should come to this people. The word of God was not to come from the people up. It was not vox populi, vox dei, but it was to be vox dei, vox populi—that is, the voice of God and then the voice of the people—from God downward through the channel that he should appoint, by the means that he should institute, that word should come to the people, and when obeyed by the people would bring the union and love and the strength consequent upon union and love. And this has been the peculiarity and the excellence of this work of God thus far in the earth. Its excellence has consisted in this. Its power, its glory, the glory that we have as a people, the glory that belongs to the Church of God consists in this peculiar feature, that the word of God to us comes from God and not from the people. It is received by the people, accepted by the people, submitted to by the people, and this has produced the union and the love, as I have said, that have characterized the word thus far in its progress in the earth. (JD, December 2, 1883, 24:362-63.)

D&C 28 13Delbert L. Stapley: 13

D&C 28 13If the members of the Church will follow this counsel and act together in prayer and true faith, the Holy Ghost will not permit them to yield to the influence of error and false teachings of those who seek to overthrow the work of God. The great Nephite prophet, Mosiah, warning his people against kingcraft, counseled them concerning the manner in which judges to govern them should be selected, and wisely advised:

D&C 28 13"Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore, this shall ye observe and make it your law—to do your business by the voice of the people." (Mosiah 29:26.)

D&C 28 13All wavering and disaffected individuals should remember the safeguards to faith and testimony given by the Lord through revelation, and, recognizing and working through constituted channels of priesthood authority, submit their views or claims and be willing to abide by the voice of the people, who, conforming to the above-quoted revelation [Sec. 26:2], are to decide the matter after exercising much faith and prayer. If they would do this before permitting themselves to follow a deviating or contrary course, and manifest the faith to abide by the voice of the Saints, they would not go astray nor depart from the right way, and their souls and those of their posterity would, through obedience to the commandments, be saved in the kingdom of God. (CR, October 1959, p. 73.)
