Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 30

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to David Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., and John Whitmer, at Fayette, New York, September, 1830, following the three days' conference at Fayette, but before the Elders of the Church had separated. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 115.—Individual instruction is given, and the fact of Oliver Cowdery's mission to the Lamanites is reiterated.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

At length our conference assembled. The subject of the stone previously mentioned was discussed (Section 28), and after considerable investigation Brother Page, as well as the whole Church who were present, renounced the said stone, and all things connected therewith, much to our mutual satisfaction and happiness. We now partook of the Sacrament, confirmed and ordained many, and attended to a great variety of Church business on the first of the two following days of the conference, during which time we had much of the power of God manifested amongst us; the Holy Ghost came upon us, and filled us with joy unspeakable; and peace, and faith, and hope, and charity abounded in our midst.

Before we separated we received the following: [Sections 30 and 31, follow.] (HC 1:115, September 1830; Fayette, New York.)

SCD&C 30 1D&C 30 2D&C 30 3D&C 30 4Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-4

SCD&C 30 1D&C 30 2D&C 30 3D&C 30 4A revelation was given (Sec. 30) to David, Peter, Jr., and John Whitmer, and instruction was given to each. To David Whitmer the Lord said: [Sec. 30:1-3, quoted.] He was further commanded to remain at his father's home and mend his ways and attend to his ministry in the Church. It seems a little strange that so soon after the wonderful manifestation which he had received and the witnessing of the outpouring of the Spirit at other times, that he would forget, but human nature is such that all of us need constant reminding of our responsibilities or we are likely to lapse into some indifference. The need of constant prayer and concentration of our thoughts on the things of the kingdom, and sincere attention to duty, is apparent with most of us, lest we slip. How frequently the Lord has had to caution his people against the weaknesses of the flesh! (CHMR, 1947, 1:136.)

D&C 30 2Marriner W. Merrill: 2

D&C 30 2You have not given heed. . . to those who were set over you

D&C 30 2According to my education and experience in the Church, and according to the teachings I have had and the suggestions through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, there is no man, I don't care what his standing is; he may be a president of a stake, or an apostle, no matter, he cannot safely gainsay the counsel of the Priesthood. If he does he will have it to meet some day just as sure as the sun rises and sets. . . .We must observe the will of Lord; we must observe the counsels of the Priesthood, no matter what the world may think in regard to these things; and we can do this in all humility and maintain our right and manhood, and maintain our fellowship with each other and with the Lord: but when we turn away from these things we are like the sow that was washed and returned to her wallowing in the mire. The Lord has established his work; he is about to establish his Kingdom; he has revealed the everlasting Gospel; and he has revealed the principle by which you and I may go back into his presence; but when we turn a deaf ear to these things, through some motive or other that may arise in our minds, we will have to atone for it sooner or later. (CR, April 1899, p. 16.)

SCD&C 30 5D&C 30 6D&C 30 7D&C 30 8Joseph Fielding Smith: 5-8

SCD&C 30 5D&C 30 6D&C 30 7D&C 30 8To Peter Whitmer, Jr., the Lord gave a commandment that he should take his journey with Oliver Cowdery on a mission to the Lamanites. From the very beginning the attention of the Prophet and his brethren had been drawn to the Lamanites. This was due, of course, to the fact that great promises had been made to them in the Book of Mormon that the Gospel would be given to them in this dispensation and eventually they would be restored to full fellowship and favor before the Lord. The enthusiasm of the brethren may have been premature, but nevertheless the Lord commanded such a mission at that time. It seems that it was not so much for the benefit of the Indians, or Lamanites, although that factor was very great, but to carry the message to the land which later was to be revealed as the land of Zion, where the City Zion will eventually be built. Peter Whitmer, Jr., was also one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon.

SCD&C 30 5D&C 30 6D&C 30 7D&C 30 8Peter was informed that he was to heed the words of his brother, Oliver Cowdery, and he was to share with him in all his afflictions, lifting his heart to the Lord in prayer and faith, for their deliverance. "I have given unto him power to build up my church among the Lamanites." Moreover, Peter was informed that there was none appointed to be Oliver's counselor, except Joseph Smith. Thus Peter understood that it was his duty to take, not to give, counsel while on this journey. The fact that Oliver Cowdery had shared with Joseph Smith in the conferring of Priesthood and authority on all occasions naturally gave to him the authority to stand second in the Church to Joseph Smith in the government of the Church. (CHMR, 1947, 1:136.)

D&C 30 8George Q. Cannon: 8

D&C 30 8Our only safety lies in diligently keeping the commandments of him who has hitherto been our protector, and in living such a life of holiness as will meet with his favour and approbation. (MS, January 3, 1863, 25:9.)

SCD&C 30 9D&C 30 10D&C 30 11Joseph Fielding Smith: 9-11

SCD&C 30 9D&C 30 10D&C 30 11John Whitmer was commanded to proclaim the Gospel from that time henceforth as with the voice of a trump. His "whole life was to be in Zion" and he was not to fear man but devote his entire time to the cause of the Gospel. Later he was to be called to take the responsibility of keeping the history from the shoulders of Oliver Cowdery [Sec. 47:1-4]. (CHMR, 1947, 1:136-37.)

D&C 30 11George Q. Cannon: 11

D&C 30 11I say to you this day, in the presence of God and the holy angels and of this assembly, if we expect to attain the fulfillment of the promises God has made to us, we must be self-sacrificing. There is no sacrifice that God can ask of us or his servants whom he has chosen to lead us that we should hesitate about making. In one sense of the word it is not sacrifice. We may call it so because it comes in contact with our selfishness and our unbelief; but it ought not to come in contact with our faith. (CR, April 1899, p. 65.)
