Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 31

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Thomas B. Marsh, September, 1830. Thomas B. Marsh had been baptized earlier in the month, and had already been ordained an Elder in the Church when this revelation was given.—Commended for obedience and faithfulness—Assured as to the welfare of his family—Appointed to preach and administer—Promised the guidance of the Comforter in his ministry.

D&C 31 9First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund): 9

D&C 31 9Revile not against those that revile

D&C 31 9Let no one suppose that "Mormonism," so-called, is here to make war upon men, or upon creeds, governments, and institutions that men revere. It sustains law, order, liberty and truth, the world over. The Latter-day Saints are friends, not enemies, to mankind. That we have a message to deliver we know; and, God being our helper, we will deliver it, come life or death, come weal or woe! But we purpose doing this in the spirit of peace, in the spirit of patience and brotherly love, forgiving our enemies, and returning good for evil; oppressing no man for refusing to listen to our testimony, nor ridiculing what he holds sacred, however false or foolish it may appear to us. The liberty of conscience is inviolable and we stand ready to defend all men in the exercise of this sacred, God-given right. We may be abused and slandered for exercising this right ourselves, but heaven forbid that we should ever deny it to others! Despite the human weakness that all men possess, and which prompts them to retaliate when they feel themselves wronged, we will endeavor, with the help of the Lord, to follow his divine injunction: "When men revile you, revile not again." [1 Peter 2:23.] Our plain and simple duty is the preaching of the Gospel, the gathering of scattered Israel, the redemption of Zion, and the salvation of the living and the dead. We have no warfare to wage against our fellow men, no wrongs that we wish to avenge. We leave that to him who has said, "Vengeance is mine; I will repay." [Rom. 12:19.] May he be merciful to those who misrepresent and bring trouble upon his people. (DN, December 1907.)

D&C 31 9George A. Smith: 9

D&C 31 9Govern your house in meekness, and be steadfast

D&C 31 9The wife of Thomas B. Marsh, who was then President of the Twelve Apostles, and Sister Harris concluded they would exchange milk, in order to make a little larger cheese then they otherwise could. To be sure to have justice done, it was agreed that they should not save the strippings, but that the milk and strippings should all go together. Small matters to talk about here, to be sure, two women's exchanging milk to make cheese.

D&C 31 9Mrs. Harris, it appeared, was faithful to the agreement and carried to Mrs. Marsh the milk and strippings, but Mrs. Marsh, wishing to make some extra good cheese, saved a pint of strippings from each cow and sent Mrs. Harris the milk without the strippings.

D&C 31 9Finally, it leaked out that Mrs. Marsh had saved strippings, and it became a matter to be settled by the Teachers. They began to examine the matter, and it was proved that Mrs. Marsh had saved the strippings, and consequently had wronged Mrs. Harris out of that amount.

D&C 31 9An appeal was taken from the Teacher to the Bishop, and a regular Church trial was had. President Marsh did not consider that the Bishop had done him and his lady justice, for they decided that the strippings were wrongfully saved, and that the woman had violated her covenant.

D&C 31 9Marsh immediately took an appeal to the High Council, who investigated the question with much patience, and I assure you they were a grave body. Marsh, being extremely anxious to maintain the character of his wife, as he was the President of the Twelve Apostles, and a great man in Israel, made a desperate defense, but the High Council finally confirmed the Bishop's decision.

D&C 31 9Marsh, not being satisfied, took an appeal to the First Presidency of the Church, and Joseph and his counselors had to sit upon the case, and they approved the decision of the High Council.

D&C 31 9This little affair, you will observe, kicked up a considerable breeze, and Thomas B. Marsh then declared that he would sustain the character of his wife, even if he had to go to hell for it.

D&C 31 9The then President of the Twelve Apostles, the man who should have been the first to do justice and cause reparation to be made for wrong, committed by any member of his family, took that position, and what next? He went before the magistrate and swore that the "Mormons" were hostile towards the State of Missouri.

D&C 31 9The affidavit brought from the government of Missouri an exterminating order, which drove some 15,000 Saints from their homes and habitations, and some thousands perished through suffering the exposure consequent on this state of affairs. (JD, April 6, 1856, 3:282-84.)

SCD&C 31 11D&C 31 12D&C 31 13Francis M. Lyman: 11-13

SCD&C 31 11D&C 31 12D&C 31 13Those who enter into covenant with the Lord, having humbled themselves before him and repented of their sins, as a result of their faith, and have taken upon them the name of Jesus Christ, and have undertaken to serve him to the end, having repented of all their sins, they receive that witness and testimony, and that Spirit abides with them always through their faithfulness. It gives them stability of character; it gives them understanding and light that is not possessed otherwise, and that does not remain with Latter-day Saints unless they continue to be faithful and very humble, meek and lowly of heart. The Spirit of the Lord is easily offended, easily grieved, and it is quite an undertaking for men to so live that that Spirit can always be a fountain of inspiration, of revelation and light to them. (CR, October 1912, pp. 42-43.)

D&C 31 12Heber C. Kimball: 12

D&C 31 12What good do your prayers do when your works do not correspond? Men may talk about praying, and exhort the people to pray; and if you do not live in a manner to fulfill your prayers, what do they avail you? Faith is dead without works, just as much as my body is dead without my spirit. When my spirit leaves my body, my body is dead; but put them together, and they make a soul—a spirit in a tabernacle. What is the use of our professing to be Saints unless we live our religion? By our faithfulness and by our good works we shall obtain knowledge. . . .

D&C 31 12About the time he [Thomas B. Marsh] was preparing to leave this Church, he received a revelation in the Printing Office. He retired to himself, and prayed, and was humble, and God gave him a revelation, and he wrote it. There were from three to five pages of it; and when he came out he read it to Brother Brigham [Young] and me. In it, God told him what to do, and that was to sustain Brother Joseph and to believe that what Brother Joseph had said was true. But no; he took a course to sustain his wife and oppose the Prophet of God, and she led him away. . . .

D&C 31 12Thomas B. Marsh was once the President over the Quorum of the Twelve—over Brother Brigham, me, and others; and God saw fit to give him a revelation to forewarn him of the course he would take; and still he took that course. We told him that if he would listen to that revelation he had received, he would be saved; but he listened to his wife, and away he went. His wife is now dead and damned. She led him some eighteen years; and as soon as she died, he came to Winter Quarters—now Florence—and has written to us, pleading for mercy. We have extended it to him, and he will probably be here this season or the next. (JD, July 12, 1857, 5:28-29.)

SCD&C 31 12D&C 31 13Thomas B. Marsh: 12-13

SCD&C 31 12D&C 31 13Many have said to me, "How is it that a man like you, who understood so much of the revelations of God as recorded in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, should fall away?" I told them not to feel too secure, but to take heed lest they also should fall, for I had no scruples in my mind as to the possibility of men falling away. [Sec. 20:32-34.]

SCD&C 31 12D&C 31 13I can say, in reference to the Quorum of the Twelve, to which I belonged, that I did not consider myself a whit behind any of them, and I suppose that others had the same opinion; but, let no one feel too secure; for, before you think of it, your steps will slide. You will not then think nor feel for a moment as you did before you lost the Spirit of Christ; for when men apostatize, they are left to grovel in the dark. . . .

SCD&C 31 12D&C 31 13Had I known as much of the Church of Jesus Christ and its doctrines before I apostatized as I now know, I think I could not have back-slidden. . . .

SCD&C 31 12D&C 31 13I see the propriety of God's vesting the authority in one man, and in having a head, or something tangible to see, hear, and understand the mind and will of God. When I saw this, I said, it is consistent: Christ is the great head of the Church. Christ is the head of his Church in the same relationship as every head is to the body to which it belongs; for every head must have eyes to see, a mouth to speak, and ears to hear. Well, Jesus Christ is the head of the Church, and he has got a man to represent him on earth—viz., President Brigham Young. Jesus Christ is still the head of the Church; and his will to men on the earth is known by means of the mouthpiece of God, the Prophet, and Seer. (JD, September 6, 1857, 5:206, 208-9.)
