Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 32

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson, October, 1830. Great interest and yearning desires were felt by the Elders respecting the Lamanites, of whose predicted blessings the Church had learned from the Book of Mormon. In consequence, supplication was made that the Lord would indicate his will as to whether Elders should be sent at that time to the Indian tribes in the West. The revelation followed. See History of the Church, vol. I, p. 118.—The missionaries admonished to confine themselves to the expounding of the written word, as they shall be given understanding thereof.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

The revelation formerly given through the Prophet to Oliver Cowdery [Sec. 28:14-16], enunciating the divine decree concerning the Lamanites and the work to be accomplished among them, created great interest in the minds of the Elders of the Church. The desire to learn more of this important matter was intensified by the harmony which prevailed during the conference [Sept. 1830], and the flow of the Spirit resulting therefrom. Joseph and his brethren realized the purposes of God toward the Indians of this land were great and far-reaching, and that the time would come when they must receive the Gospel and enjoy its blessings. Many of the Elders expressed a desire to take up the work of the ministry among their brethren bound in darkness and ignorance through the curse laid upon their fathers; but before appointing anyone to aid Oliver and Peter Whitmer in this mission, Joseph inquired of the Lord. [Oct. 1830.] (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 78-79.)

SCD&C 32 1D&C 32 2D&C 32 3D&C 32 4D&C 32 5George Q. Cannon: 1-5

SCD&C 32 1D&C 32 2D&C 32 3D&C 32 4D&C 32 5His [the Lord's] answer was a revelation appointing unto Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson that they should go with Oliver and Peter into the wilderness, among the Lamanites. Our Lord and Savior promised them that he would go with them and be in their midst, and that nothing should prevail against them; but they were commanded to pretend to no power or revelation except that which was given to them by God, and unfolded by the Holy Spirit to their understanding. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, p. 19.)

D&C 32 2John A. Widtsoe: 2

D&C 32 2He shall go with my servants. . . among the Lamanites

D&C 32 2These missionaries [Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Ziba Peterson], left in the fall of 1830. On the way they stopped at Kirtland, Ohio, and the neighboring villages. There they preached the newly restored gospel with astonishing results. In Kirtland and neighborhood were hundreds of settlers who were seekers after truth. Alexander Campbell and his flock were there. Some of these, Lyman Wight, Isaac Morley, and Titus Billings, belonged to a group which attempted to have all things in common. There also Parley P. Pratt presented to Sidney Rigdon, his old friend and teacher, a copy of the Book of Mormon.

D&C 32 2Before long several persons applied for baptism. Sidney Rigdon, a Campbellite writer and eloquent preacher, entered the waters of baptism. Branches were organized. The field there seemed fertile for the preaching, of the restored gospel. The missionaries spent several weeks in the Kirtland territory to expound the gospel to interested listeners.

D&C 32 2However, the missionaries had been called to go to the Indian territory. Winter was coming, so about November 1st, they left the congenial Kirtland area and moved westward. On the way they proselyted and left copies of the Book of Mormon here and there.

D&C 32 2Then the winter of 1830-31, the severest in the memories of men, descended upon them. The Mississippi River was frozen over, and the usual carriage or riding travel was impossible. But despite the weather, and under great suffering, they walked through snow and over ice for three hundred miles.

D&C 32 2At last they reached Independence, Missouri. Since they had disposed of all their copies of the Book of Mormon, Parley P. Pratt was selected to return for a new supply.

D&C 32 2Meanwhile, under restrictions set up by the Indian agents, the missionaries had little access to the Indians. But they preached long and loud to the Missouri settlers. To support themselves they did such work as was available. They set up a tailor shop in Independence; some of their patrons became defenders of the Latter-day Saints later when persecution raged.

D&C 32 2All in all, this mission bore rich fruit. (Joseph Smith, 1951, pp. 136-37.)

D&C 32 4John Taylor: 4

D&C 32 4We, as Latter-day Saints, are indebted to the revelations of God, given unto Joseph Smith, for the knowledge of the very first principles of the doctrine of Christ, and he could not have known it unless it had been revealed to him. One thing I did know of myself before I came into this Church, and that is more than a great many know of themselves, namely that I was a fool, and did not know anything unless God revealed it. It takes a great deal of hammering to get that into some men's minds. The main questions in my mind, when this Gospel came were, "Is this true?" "Is this from God or is it not?" "Has God indeed spoken as this man says he has?" If he has not, it is all a fiction, and a farce, and delusion, like the other "isms" that exist in the world; if he has, it is for me to obey, no matter what the consequences may be.

D&C 32 4There is one thing that has always been satisfactory to my mind in relation to this Gospel, namely, there has never been one principle revealed, at any time, but what has been instructive and in accordance with the Scripture, which we consider to be of divine origin. Never one principle but what could be substantiated by the word of God, although we did not know it before, and the world does not know it now. (JD, May 6, 1870, 13:225-26.)
