Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 34

Revelation given through Joseph Smith, the Prophet, to Orson Pratt, at Fayette, New York, November 4, 1830. The recipient was nineteen years old at the time. He had been converted and baptized when he first heard the preaching of the restored Gospel by his brother, Parley P. Pratt, six weeks before. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 127.—Commended for obedience—Commanded to preach and to prophesy as the Holy Ghost shall give utterance—Certainty of the Lord's advent.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

In the fore part of November, Orson Pratt, a young man nineteen years of age, who had been baptized at the first preaching of his brother, Parley P. Pratt, September 19th (his birthday), about six weeks previous, in Canaan, New York, came to inquire of the Lord what his duty was and received the following answer: [Section 34, follows.] (HC 1:127-28, November 1830; Fayette, New York.)

SCD&C 34 1D&C 34 2D&C 34 3Joseph F. Smith: 1-3

SCD&C 34 1D&C 34 2D&C 34 3My son Orson. . . . Wherefore you are my son

SCD&C 34 1D&C 34 2D&C 34 3The Gospel has been preached to us, and we have essayed to obey it, that we might become the sons and daughters of God—heirs of God and joint-heirs with his Son. We can never attain to the blessings of the Gospel by merely becoming acquainted with it and then sitting down and doing nothing ourselves to stem the current of evil that is preying upon us and upon the world. (CR, April 1900, p. 40.)

D&C 34 4Orson Pratt: 4

D&C 34 4Blessed are you because you have believed

D&C 34 4I remained therefore, apart from all of them [churches], praying continually in my heart that the Lord would show me the right way.

D&C 34 4I continued this for about one year; after which, two Elders of this Church came into the neighborhood. I heard their doctrine, and believed it to be the ancient Gospel; and as soon as the sound penetrated my ears, I knew that if the Bible was true, their doctrine was true. They taught not only the ordinances, but the gifts and blessings promised the believers, and the authority necessary in the Church in order to administer the ordinances. All these things I received with gladness. Instead of feeling, as many do, a hatred against the principles, hoping they were not true, fearing and trembling lest they were, I rejoiced with great joy, believing that the ancient principles of the Gospel were restored to the earth—that the authority to preach it was also restored. I rejoiced that my ears were saluted with these good tidings while I was yet a youth, and in the day, too, of the early rising of the kingdom of God. I went forward and was baptized. I was the only individual baptized in that country for many years afterward. I immediately arranged my business and started off on a journey of two hundred and thirty miles to see the Prophet. I found him in the house of old father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca County, State of New York,—the house where this Church was first organized, consisting of only six members. I also found David Whitmer, then one of the three witnesses who saw the angel and the plates. . . .

D&C 34 4I called upon the Lord with more faith than before, for I had then received the first principles of the Gospel. The gift of the Holy Ghost was given to me; and when it was shed forth upon me, it gave me a testimony concerning the truth of this work that no man can ever take from me. It is impossible for me, so long as I have my reasoning faculties and powers of mind, to doubt the testimony I then received as among the first evidences that were given, and that, too, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost. (JD, July 10, 1859, 7:177-78.)

SCD&C 34 5D&C 34 6D&C 34 7D&C 34 8D&C 34 9D&C 34 10Orson Pratt: 5-10

SCD&C 34 5D&C 34 6D&C 34 7D&C 34 8D&C 34 9D&C 34 10He [Joseph Smith] inquired of the Lord, and obtained a revelation for your humble servant. He retired into the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in the house where this Church was organized in 1830. John Whitmer acted as his scribe, and I accompanied him into the chamber, for he had told me that it was my privilege to have the word of the Lord; and the Lord in that revelation, which is published here in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, made a promise which to me, when I was in my youth, seemed to be almost too great for a person of as humble origin as myself ever to attain to. After telling in the revelation that the great day of the Lord was at hand, and calling upon me to lift up my voice among the people, to call upon them to repent and prepare the way of the Lord, and that the time was near when the heavens should be shaken, when the earth should tremble, when the stars should refuse their shining, and when great destructions awaited the wicked, the Lord said to your humble servant: "Lift up your voice and prophesy, and it shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost." This was a particular point in the revelation that seemed to me too great for me ever to attain to, and yet there was a positive command that I should do it. I have often reflected upon this revelation, and have oftentimes inquired in my heart—"Have I fulfilled the commandment as I ought to have done? Have I sought as earnestly as I ought to obtain the gift of prophecy, so as to fulfill the requirement of heaven?" And I have felt sometimes to condemn myself because of my slothfulness and because of the little progress that I have made in relation to this great heavenly and divine gift. I certainly have had no inclination to prophesy to the people unless it should be given to me by the inspiration and power of the Holy Ghost; to prophesy out of my own heart is something perfectly disagreeable to my feelings, even to think of, and hence I have oftentimes, in my public discourses, avoided, when a thing would come before my mind pretty plain, uttering or declaring it for fear that I might get something out before the people in relation to the future that was wrong. (JD, February 7, 1875, 17:290-91.)

SCD&C 34 5D&C 34 6Brigham Young: 5-6

SCD&C 34 5D&C 34 6And I wish we had more Elders to go and preach just such sermons by the power of God, that is, "I know that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, that this is the Gospel of salvation, and if you do not believe it you will be damned, every one of you."

SCD&C 34 5D&C 34 6That is one of the most important sermons that ever was preached, and then if they could add anything by the power of the Spirit, it would be all right. When a man teaches that doctrine by the power of God in a congregation of sinners, it is one of the loudest sermons that was ever preached to them, because the Spirit bears testimony to it. That is the preaching which you hear all the time, viz.——to live so that the voice of God's Spirit will always be with you, and then you know that what you hear from the heads of the people is right. (JD, March 29, 1857, 4:298-99.)

SCD&C 34 7D&C 34 8D&C 34 9Wilford Woodruff: 7-9

SCD&C 34 7D&C 34 8D&C 34 9War, pestilence, famine, earthquakes and storms await this generation. These calamities will overtake the world as God lives, and no power can prevent them. Therefore I say to the Elders of Israel, be faithful. We have had the priesthood given to us, and if we fail to use it right, we shall be brought under condemnation. Therefore, let us round up our shoulders and bear off the kingdom. (JD, June 1880, 21: 127.)

SCD&C 34 7D&C 34 8D&C 34 9D&C 34 10D&C 34 11D&C 34 12Orson Pratt: 7-12

SCD&C 34 7D&C 34 8D&C 34 9D&C 34 10D&C 34 11D&C 34 12In regard to the future, it has been a duty devolving upon me, in connection with hundreds of others, to declare not only the Gospel, but to portray before the people future events. There are great things in the future, and we are sometimes apt to forget them. We have been looking, for some time past, for the Lord to accomplish and fulfill the times of the Gentiles; or the times allotted to them, during which the testimonies of his servants should go forth among them; or in other words, the times of the warning of the Gentile nations, the gathering out of their midst, a few here and there, of the believing instructions that are to be poured out without measure upon the Gentile nations. These things have been sounded so long in the ears of the Latter-day Saints that I have sometimes thought they have become like a pleasing song, or like a dream, and that they scarcely realize that these great events are at hand, even at the doors. But if we can depend upon the word of the Lord, if we can depend upon modern revelation which God has given—there is a time of tribulation, of sorrow, of great judgment, of great wrath and indignation, to come upon the nations of the earth, such as has not been since the foundation of the world. And these things are not far off, but are near at hand, and who, in that day, that has any sympathy in their hearts, any feelings of humanity but will mourn and sorrow over the calamities that will fall upon the nations. I know that these things are true. (CR, April 1880, p. 86.)
