Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 35

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, December, 1830. As a preface to his record of this revelation the Prophet wrote: In December Sidney Rigdon came to inquire of the Lord, and with him came Edward Partridge; the latter was a pattern of piety, and one of the Lord's great men. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 128.—How men may become sons of God—Sidney is promised that through him the Holy Ghost shall be given, as by the Apostles of old—Directed to assist the Prophet Joseph, and assured of the eventual redemption of Israel.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

In December, 1830, two men came from Kirtland, Ohio, to visit the Prophet at Fayette. They were Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge. Both had accepted the gospel, as declared to them by the western missionaries, and Sidney Rigdon had been baptized. After reaching Fayette, Edward Partridge demanded and received baptism under the Prophet's hands. These two men offered to Joseph, for the work of the Lord, their time, their talents, and all they possessed. Like all the early members of the Church, having not yet gained full understanding of the purposes of God, having not yet gained confidence in their own ability to rightly determine their conduct, they desired that the Lord should give them his special commands. Joseph prayed for revelation on their behalf, and was speedily answered. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, p. 83.)

D&C 35 2Brigham Young: 2

D&C 35 2As the Father is one in me. . . we may be one

D&C 35 2How is it that the Latter-day Saints feel and understand alike, are of one heart and one mind, no matter where they may be when they receive the Gospel, whether in the north or the south, the east or the west, even to the uttermost parts of the earth? They receive that which was promised by the Savior when he was about to leave the earth, namely, the Comforter, the holy unction from on high which recognizes one God, one faith and one baptism, whose mind is the will of God the Father, in whom there dwelleth unity of faith and action, and in whom there cannot be division or confusion; when they receive this further light, it matters not whether they have seen each other or not, they at once become brothers and sisters, having been adopted into the family of Christ through the bonds of the everlasting covenant, and all can then exclaim, in the beautiful language of Ruth, "Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God!" [Ruth 1:16.] (JD, October 8, 1876, 18:259.)

D&C 35 2Charles W. Penrose: 2

D&C 35 2Jesus Christ . . . who was crucified far the sins of the world

D&C 35 2Now, we want to teach these things to our children, train them up to believe in the living and true God, the Author of our being, our Father in heaven, and in Jesus Christ, his Son, who died for us, and without whose redemption, as we read in the Book of Mormon, our spirits would have been banished forever from the divine presence, and our bodies would have mouldered in the dust forever. But through that atonement wrought out by Jesus Christ, and by our obedience to his commandments, we shall come forth from the dust and stand upon our feet and have all things that we have made ourselves fit for by our own acts. Forgiveness of sins, redemption from personal sin, is a doctrine of Christ to be obtained in the way that he has appointed. He died that we might live, and thus he atoned for the sin of Adam. He died that we might live and attain glory if we would repent and obey his commandments and receive the blessings in the way he has appointed; and our mission in the world here, what we have come on the earth to do, is to live that gospel and carry it to the ends of the earth and send it forth to all people, that all nations may hear the glorious sound of the glad tidings of salvation to the human race. (CR, April 1898, pp. 20-23.)

D&C 35 2Charles W. Penrose: 2

D&C 35 2As the Father is one in me

D&C 35 2There is the oneness of Deity, the three in one; not as some preachers try to expound it, in the doctrines of the outside world, in the Article of Faith that they have, making them one immaterial spirit, no body, no real personage, no substance. On the contrary, they are three individuals, one in spirit, one in mind, one in intelligence united in all things that they do, and it takes the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to make the perfect Trinity in one, three persons and one God or Deity, one Godhead. (CR, April 1921, pp. 13-14.)

SCD&C 35 3D&C 35 4D&C 35 5D&C 35 6Matthias F. Cowley: 3-6

SCD&C 35 3D&C 35 4D&C 35 5D&C 35 6A striking instance of divine purpose in the labors of men outside the true Church is pointed out in a revelation given in December, 1830, to Joseph Smith, Jr., and Sidney Rigdon. The Lord said: [Sec. 35:3-6, quoted.]

SCD&C 35 3D&C 35 4D&C 35 5D&C 35 6The revelation given December, 1830, from which the above is quoted, was upon the occasion of the first visit of Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The labors of Sidney Rigdon, referred to in the quotation, must have alluded to his ministry in the Campbellite church, for he had been in the Church of Christ only about six weeks when this revelation was given, having embraced the Gospel at the hands of Parley P. Pratt and fellow missionaries near Kirtland, Ohio, late in October or early November, 1830.

SCD&C 35 3D&C 35 4D&C 35 5D&C 35 6As is well understood, the followers of Alexander Campbell preach faith, repentance and baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. These views Sidney Rigdon espoused as being better than what he already had, and when the true Gospel, in its fulness, with authority from God to administer the ordinances thereof, found him, he gladly obeyed the same. In about three weeks from the time Brother Pratt and co-laborers entered Kirtland, 127 persons were baptized. Subsequently the numbers were augmented to about 1,000 souls. In the providence of the Lord, Kirtland soon became the gathering place of the Saints, the facilities there being greatly enhanced by so many people embracing the Gospel and thus making a foothold for the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Saints who should follow him from the East. There the Kirtland Temple was built. Cowley's Talks on Doctrine, 1902, pp. 447-78.)

SCD&C 35 5D&C 35 6Franklin D. Richards: 5-6

SCD&C 35 5D&C 35 6A man cannot preach with effect and power to another the forgiveness of sins through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, or baptism for the remission of sins unless he has himself been baptized for the remission of sins and has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ himself. No man can administer in the ordinances of the Gospel of Christ with effect and with power unless he has first been made partaker of them himself. (CR, October 1897, pp. 24-25.)

SCD&C 35 5D&C 35 6Joseph F. Smith: 5-6

SCD&C 35 5D&C 35 6It is well, in my judgment, that the Latter-day Saints do not lose sight of the great privilege that has been bestowed upon them. No man can become a citizen of the Kingdom of God but by entering in at the door: there are thousands, tens of thousands, aye, millions of people who will never become citizens of the Kingdom of God in this world because they fail to exercise the agency and the power that has been given to them in the right direction. Nevertheless, they enjoy many of the blessings that are bestowed upon the world in common. The sun shines upon the evil and the good; but the Holy Ghost descends only upon the righteous and upon those that are forgiven of their sins. The rain descends upon the evil and upon the good; but the rights of the Priesthood are conferred, and the doctrine of the Priesthood distills as the dews of heaven upon the souls of those only that receive it in God's own appointed way. The favor of heaven, the acknowledgement of the Almighty of his children upon the earth as his sons and his daughters can only be secured through obedience to the laws which he has revealed. Riches or the wealth of the world cannot purchase these things. (JD, 1883, 24:175-76.)

SCD&C 35 5D&C 35 6George Q. Cannon: 5-6

SCD&C 35 5D&C 35 6A great many, to prove that baptism and laying on of hands are not necessary, have cited the case of Cornelius, who, though he was not baptized, received the Holy Ghost. [Acts 10.] The case of Cornelius is the only case of the kind on record, and there were strong reasons why it should be as it was with him. The Gospel and its ordinances were administered only to the Jews; Cornelius was a Gentile, and between the two races strong prejudices existed, the Jews looking upon the Gentiles as inferior to them. Cornelius and his household were the first Gentiles to whom the Gospel was preached. They received it, and the Lord, to show the Apostles that the Gentiles were entitled to the ordinances of salvation as well as the Jews if they were willing to comply with the requirements of the Gospel, conferred the Holy Ghost upon Cornelius and his family. When Peter saw this family he said, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that heareth him and worketh righteousness is accepted with him." [Ibid., 10:34-35.] And when afterwards, he heard them speak with tongues and magnify God, he said, "Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we." [Ibid., 10:47.] And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Peter did not say, Cornelius, you have received the Holy Ghost as well as we have, and there is no necessity for you to obey any further ordinances, which, under the circumstances, if he had considered baptism or the laying on of hands non-essential, he would have been very likely to do; but instead of that, he commanded them to be baptized. Peter took this, as the Lord intended it, as an evidence that the Gentiles as well as the House of Israel were entitled to the Gospel. And he had them baptized, and without doubt laid his hands upon them to confirm upon them the gift they had received. Had Cornelius, at that hour, stood upon his dignity and said, "There is no necessity for me to be baptized for the remission of my sins, God having given me the Holy Ghost without obeying that ordinance, and having already received the Holy Ghost, I have no need to have hands laid upon me," there is not a doubt in my mind but what that precious and inestimable gift would have been withdrawn from him, and he would not have enjoyed it after. It could only be continued to him on condition of his obeying the ordinances which God had placed in his Church and which he required all the inhabitants of the earth to submit to without hesitation; and without doubt Cornelius wisely went forward and obeyed those ordinances.

SCD&C 35 5D&C 35 6This was the manner in which the Apostles preached the Gospel to the inhabitants of the earth in those days. They did not say to the people, "You must seek the Holy Ghost and probably the Lord will give it to you if you will only exercise faith enough"; they would comply with certain requirements if they should receive the Holy Ghost. The only condition was their sincerity and faithfulness in obeying the requirements. (JD, August 15, 1869, 14:50-51.)

D&C 35 6George F. Richards: 6

D&C 35 6They shall receive the Holy Ghost. . . even as the apostles of old

D&C 35 6The people of the world of mankind today have not that Holy Ghost that was enjoyed by those holy men of God who gave the scriptures. If they had the Holy Ghost in the same degree of power that was had by those holy men who gave us the scriptures, then they would understand the scriptures just as did those men who gave the scriptures to us.

D&C 35 6We are not only to receive the Holy Ghost, being born again, the way the Lord has designed that it should be and has been in the days of the primitive Church, but we are to live and labor as to have the constant companionships of the Holy Ghost, and he will not dwell in unholy tabernacles. (CR, October 1944, p. 88.)

SCD&C 35 7D&C 35 8D&C 35 9D&C 35 10D&C 35 11Orson F. Whitney: 7-11

SCD&C 35 7D&C 35 8D&C 35 9D&C 35 10D&C 35 11They who doubt the possibility of miracles are indeed without the power to perform them. But this does not prove that believers lack that power. Miracles are the fruits of faith—"These signs shall follow them that believe." [Mark 16:17.] The gist of the matter is this: These doubters have done away with God, or have tried to do away with him, and consequently are unable to conceive of a higher power than they themselves possess. . . .

SCD&C 35 7D&C 35 8D&C 35 9D&C 35 10D&C 35 11Miracles are extraordinary results flowing from superior means and methods of doing things. When a man wants light he strikes a match, or presses a button, or turns a switch, and lo! there is light. When God wants light, he says: "Let there be light." It is simply a matter of knowing how to do things in a superior way, and having the power to do them. Man is gradually acquiring this power. It is a far call from the tallow dip to the electric light. But the end is not yet. Improvements will continue to be made, and some day, perhaps men may be able to make light just as the Lord makes it. Paradoxically, it might be said that the time will come when miracles will be so common that there will be none.

SCD&C 35 7D&C 35 8D&C 35 9D&C 35 10D&C 35 11The Latter-day Saints are not strangers to the miraculous workings of divine power. Our history as a people is replete with such occurrences. I could relate many experiences of my own in support of this assertion, and so could these, my brethren, seated here upon the stand. . . .

SCD&C 35 7D&C 35 8D&C 35 9D&C 35 10D&C 35 11Some years ago I was engaged to deliver a lecture in one of the towns south of this city, and was on my way to the lecture hall when I received a message from the bishop of the ward, asking me to come and administer to his little daughter, who was critically ill. Her doctor had said that she could not live till morning. Taking with me another elder, I proceeded to the bishop's home, and we administered to the dying girl. Next morning a telephone message informed me that a marvelous change had taken place. The young patient, who had not slept for days prior to being blessed by us, immediately thereafter had sunk into a sweet and refreshing slumber. She slept twelve hours, and woke up normal, and continued so. The doctor was astounded, and the parents, of course, were overjoyed. The girl, then fifteen years of age, and now twenty-four, is an active member of the ward in which she resides, has a good position and goes to and from her work as well and as happy as if she had never known a day's illness.

SCD&C 35 7D&C 35 8D&C 35 9D&C 35 10D&C 35 11Her physician had said that she could not live till morning and no doubt he was right, from his viewpoint. Medical science had so decreed, and but for the interposition of Divine Providence, that decree would probably have gone into effect. According to the lesser law, she should not live. But a greater law said: "She shall live." And the lesser could not operate in the presence of the greater.

SCD&C 35 7D&C 35 8D&C 35 9D&C 35 10D&C 35 11Miracles belong to no particular time or place. Wherever and whenever there is a legitimate demand for the exercise of divine power, that power will act, and marvels will result. We worship a God of miracles, and he changeth not, but is the same yesterday, today and forever. (Mormon 9:11, 17-20.) There is but one valid reason for the absence of miracles among any people, and that is the absence of faith. "All things are possible to them that believe." [Mark 9:23.] (CR, April 1925, pp. 17, 20-22.)

SCD&C 35 8D&C 35 9Jedediah M. Grant: 8-9

SCD&C 35 8D&C 35 9I want to bear my testimony that mine eyes have seen the sick healed in the way the Gospel recommends; I have seen the ears of the deaf opened, and they have heard; I have seen the lame man walk, and leap like a hart; and I have seen others rise up suddenly from their sickbed, healed of a consuming fever.

SCD&C 35 8D&C 35 9In Montrose, near Nauvoo, hundreds of families were sick nigh unto death, and some were given up to die. The Prophet Joseph Smith took some of the Elders with him, and went over there, and said to the sick, "I command you, in the name of the Lord God, to rise up and walk." And he went from house to house, and made every man, woman, and child to walk, and they followed him to the next sick family, and they are witnesses here to testify to it. There are men now upon the face of the earth who, by the visions of the Almighty, have seen convoy after convoy of angels. Can you find these things outside of the Latter-day Saint Church? No; you cannot. (JD, December 17, 1854, 2:232.)

SCD&C 35 8D&C 35 9Heber C. Kimball: 8-9

SCD&C 35 8D&C 35 9As to the circumstance [above] Brother Jedediah M. Grant was speaking of in Montrose, I was with Brother Joseph, and so was Brother Brigham and many others, and hundreds were healed, and leaped out of their beds, and followed us. If you do not believe it, call on many of those that were sick nigh unto death at that time, and are now living in these valleys, enjoying good health. How many sick have been healed in old England? I have been many a time in houses where people were sick nigh unto death with smallpox and with other complaints, and they were healed by the power of God; I have taken them to the water, when they have been on the verge of the grave, and baptized them, and they have been healed. "What, of the smallpox?" Yes; and there are numbers of people here that were sick nigh unto death, and Brother Orson Hyde is a witness that they were just ready to die, and they are now here in a robust state of health. (Orson Hyde, "It is true.") True? Yes, as true as that God reigns in the heavens; and there are thousands more in the Church who know it is true. The testimony of Brother Grant and other men is just as true, and will be valid just as much as the testimony of Peter, James, and John, for they speak the truth as it is in Jesus Christ. . . .

SCD&C 35 8D&C 35 9I wanted to bear testimony, in connection with Brother Grant, of the truth of his statements with regard to the healing power of God manifested in Montrose, for I went with the Prophet, and am an eyewitness. Has not this Gospel the same power it had eighteen hundred years ago? It has, for God has renewed it unto us, and conveyed it to us through Joseph Smith, by the ministration of an angel. (JD, December 17, 1854, 2:233-34.)

D&C 35 9Luke Johnson: 9

D&C 35 9They shall heal the sick

D&C 35 9Soon after Joseph Smith moved from the state of New York my father, mother and Ezra Booth, a Methodist minister, went to Kirtland to investigate "Mormonism." My mother had been laboring under an attack of chronic rheumatism in the shoulder, so that she could not raise her hand to her head for about two years; the Prophet laid hands upon her, and she was healed immediately. (MS, December 31, 1864, 26:834.)

D&C 35 12Joseph F. Smith: 12

D&C 35 12There are. . . certain blessings which God bestows upon the children of men only upon the condition of the rightful exercise of this agency. For instance, no man can obtain a remission of his sins but by repentance and baptism by one having authority. If we would be free from sin, from its effects, from its power, we must obey this law which God has revealed, or we never can obtain a remission of sins. Therefore, while God has bestowed upon all men, irrespective of condition, this agency to choose good or evil, he has not and will not bestow upon the children of men a remission of sins but by their obedience to law. Therefore the whole world lies in sin and is under condemnation, inasmuch as light has come unto the world and men will not avail themselves of that light to put themselves in a proper position before the Lord. And this condemnation rests with tenfold force upon all those that have yielded obedience to this law, and have once received a remission of their sins, but have returned unto sin, and have forgotten or disregarded the covenants they made in the waters of baptism. (JD, April 8, 1883, 24:175.)

D&C 35 12Hugh B. Brown: 12

D&C 35 12While the Church, which was organized under divine direction, is the kingdom of God on earth, its membership consists of men and women who are not yet made perfect. It is a mixed society with an international complexion, subject in varying degrees to the weaknesses of humanity. It does not claim to be a picture gallery where every portrait is a masterpiece; therefore, Church membership requires continued tolerance, charity, and love of fellow men.

D&C 35 12We do not claim to have achieved perfection; we often fall short of our ideals; but with additional revelations from the Lord, and with the gift of the Holy Ghost to help us, we hope it may be said of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints what Peter said to the Church of Jesus Christ of former-day Saints:

D&C 35 12"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into the marvelous light." [1 Peter 2:9.] (CR, April 1958, pp. 109-10.)

SCD&C 35 13D&C 35 14Joseph Fielding Smith: 13-14

SCD&C 35 13D&C 35 14How wonderfully this promise has been fulfilled! [Sec. 35:13-14.] There have not been many of the great and mighty, according to the notions of the world, who have come into the Church. Most of those who have arisen to prominence have been humble and from the ranks of the poor. Educated men today, as in the days of Paul, seem to think that the "marvelous work and wonder" which the Lord has revealed is beneath their notice. They cannot be bothered with "purported" revelations from the Lord, or with foolish ordinances such as the Lord requires.

SCD&C 35 13D&C 35 14For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, nor many noble, are called: But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are: That no flesh should glory in his presence. (1 Cor. 1:26-29.)

SCD&C 35 13D&C 35 14Never in the history of the world has this truth been so greatly manifest as in the preaching of the Gospel by the weak and humble Elders of the Church. They have gone forth into strength which the Lord promised them and they have confounded the wisdom of the wise and the understanding of their prudent men has been hid. (Isa. 29:14.) Think of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was without training or education, only in the simple grades, so far as the learning of the world is concerned. Yet the Lord called him and educated him and he has confounded the entire religious world and brought to naught their false doctrines. (CHMR, 1947, 1:149.)

SCD&C 35 17D&C 35 18Wilford Woodruff: 17-18

SCD&C 35 17D&C 35 18How could he, an illiterate boy, do that which the whole of the learning of the Christian world for seventeen centuries failed to do? Because he was moved upon by the power of God, he was instructed by those men who, when in the flesh, had preached the same Gospel themselves, and in doing this he fulfilled that which Father Adam, Enoch, Moses, Elias, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Jesus and his Apostles all prophesied about. . . .

SCD&C 35 17D&C 35 18Here is laid the foundation of the fulfillment of that mighty flood of prophecy delivered since the days of Father Adam down to the last Prophet who breathed the breath of life. There has been more prophecy fulfilled in the last forty three years upon the face of the earth, than in two thousand years before. These mighty prophecies. . . like a band of iron, governed and controlled Joseph Smith in his labors while he lived on the earth. He lived until he received every key, ordinance and law ever given to any man on the earth, from Father Adam down, touching this dispensation. He received powers and keys from under the hands of Moses for gathering the House of Israel in the last days; he received under the hands of Elias the keys of sealing the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers; he received under the hands of Peter, James and John, the Apostleship, and everything belonging thereto; he received under the hands of Moroni all the keys and powers required of the stick of Joseph in the hands of Ephraim; he received under the hands of John the Baptist the Aaronic Priesthood, with all its keys and powers, and every other key and power belonging to this dispensation, and I am not ashamed to say that he was a Prophet of God, and he laid the foundation of the greatest work and dispensation that has ever been established on the earth. (JD, October 8, 1813, 16:266-67.)

D&C 35 19John Taylor: 19

D&C 35 19The Holy Ghost, that knoweth all things

D&C 35 19This same Comforter has been given, in connection with the Gospel in these days, for our enlightenment, for our instruction, for our guidance, that we may have a knowledge of things that are past, of the dealings of God with the human family, of the principles of truth that have been developed in the different ages, of the position of the world and its relationship to God in those different ages, of its position in years that are past and gone, and of its present status. It is also given for our enlightenment, that we may be enabled to conduct all things according to the mind and will of God, and in accordance with his eternal laws and those principles which exist in the heavens and which have been provided by God for the salvation and exaltation of a fallen world; also for the manifestation of principles which have been and will be developed in the interest of man, not only pertaining to this world, but also that which is to come; through which medium the Lord will make known his plans and designs to his Priesthood and his people in his own due time. (JD, May 18, 1884, 25:178-79.)

D&C 35 20George Q. Cannon: 20

D&C 35 20The Lord revealed many comforting and exalting truths to Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge. To Sidney he gave a special command that he should write for Joseph. The Lord made known to Sidney what Joseph already understood—that the Scriptures should be given, even as they were in God's own bosom, to the salvation of his elect. And soon after this time, Joseph began a new translation of the Scriptures. While he labored, many truths, buried through scores of ages, were brought forth to his understanding, and he saw in their purity and holiness all the doings of God among his children, from the days of Adam unto the birth of our Lord and Savior. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 83-84.)

D&C 35 21George Q. Cannon: 21

D&C 35 21If men and women will be pure before the Lord in all things, to the extent of their ability, their progress in the Church of God and in the knowledge of God will be very rapid. Pure-minded people readily comprehend every principle that is advanced. They have no difficulty in understanding the truth when presented before them, nor in obeying its principles. Such persons never apostatize. God is bound by his promise to preserve them, and they can put unlimited confidence in him, knowing that he will deliver them from every evil. (MS, March 14, 1863, 25:169.)

D&C 35 25John Taylor: 25

D&C 35 25Why is it that you are here today? and what brought you here? Because the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four quarters of the earth have been committed to Joseph Smith, and he has conferred those keys upon others that the gathering of Israel may be accomplished, and in due time the same thing will be performed to the tribes in the land of the north. (JD, May 1884, 25:179.)

D&C 35 27Brigham Young: 27

D&C 35 27Fear not

D&C 35 27Do you know that it is the eleventh hour of the reign of Satan on the earth? Jesus is coming to reign, and all you who fear and tremble because of your enemies, cease to fear them, and learn to fear to offend God, fear to transgress his laws, fear to do any evil to your brother, or to any being upon the earth, and do not fear Satan and his power, nor those who have only power to slay the body, for God will preserve his people. (JD, October 6, 1863, 10:250.)

D&C 35 27Charles W. Penrose: 27

D&C 35 27The kingdom is yours

D&C 35 27I rejoice in the knowledge that God has set up his Church and Kingdom on the earth in the last days for the last time, and has so organized it that it shall continue and abide and shall not be overcome. The Lord says, "It is my good pleasure, little flock, to give unto you the Kingdom"; and the Kingdom is ours if we will obey these precepts and these commandments and counsels, and walk in the way of life, and be guided by those who are appointed. Let those who are appointed to labor in this ministry labor with all diligence, and give this Church all their powers and strength. (CR, April 1913, p. 64.)

D&C 35 27Francis M. Lyman: 27

D&C 35 27Behold, I come quickly

D&C 35 27Can we not afford to do this now ["to be good, conscientious and honest with the Lord"], so that when the Bridegroom comes we shall be prepared to meet him: for he will come, he has always come when he has promised. He has visited the earth in this dispensation and has established his authority and power among men, and the millennium, the reign of righteousness, is to be ushered in; and it is liable to come in our day. The redemption of Zion is also liable to come in our day. There is doubtless a set time for the redemption of Zion and for the coming of the Son of Man. The time has not been made known to us, and is not likely to be until he comes. . . . We hope to be prepared, and we hope the people will be prepared, but it will come suddenly, and you will know it as soon as we know it. We have the spirit of that coming, and we have the spirit of the redemption of Zion. We have the spirit that indicates that in the near future the Lord will appear. (CR, April 1900, p. 8.)
