Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 36

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Edward Partridge, December, 1830. See heading to Section 35.—The recipient instructed to preach—Every man may be commissioned in the ministry if he will comply with the Lord's requirements.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

In December Sidney Rigdon came to inquire of the Lord, and with him came Edward Partridge; the latter was a pattern of piety, and one of the Lord's great men. Shortly after the arrival of these two brethren, thus spake the Lord: [Section 35.] And the voice of the Lord to Edward Partridge was: [Section 36, follows.] (HC 1:128, 131, December 1830; Kirtland, Ohio.)

D&C 36 2First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant): 2

D&C 36 2Incomparable delight and happiness fill the soul of the faithful Saint, who has the testimony of Jesus and the Spirit of the living God to enlighten his understanding. Happiness supreme and love divine fill his bosom, as he seeks to impart the gladsome intelligence to his fellow species, that they may also be partakers with him in the glorious cause, and share in its blessings. Thus our holy religion absorbs every feeling, desire, ambition, motive, and action of our natures, and renders every association in life tributary thereto; it forms the vitality of our very existence; it enters not only into our spiritual but also into our temporal organization, and controls us in all our affairs. This is true of every person who has tasted the good work of life, has received the Holy Ghost, and continues to walk in the light, and be led by its gentle influence. This is salvation in the kingdom of God, it is glory celestial, and exaltation. This is the work that makes angry the adversary, who fears the overthrow of his kingdom and power upon the earth, that causes Satan to rage and seek to destroy the Saints of the Most High, as he did in the days of Jesus and of his Apostles and followers. (MS, August 11, 1855, 17:497-504.)

D&C 36 2David O. McKay: 2

D&C 36 2The peaceable things of the kingdom

D&C 36 2The peace of Christ does not come by seeking the superficial things of life, neither does it come except as it springs from the individual's heart. Jesus said to his disciples: "Peace I leave with you. My peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth, give I unto you." [John 14:27.] Thus the Son of Man as the executor of his own will and testament gave to his disciples and to mankind the "first of all human blessings." It was a bequest conditioned upon obedience to the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is thus bequeathed to each individual. No man is at peace with himself or his God who is untrue to his better self, who transgresses the law of right either in dealing with himself by indulging in passion, in appetite, yielding to temptations against his accusing conscience, or in dealing with his fellow men, being untrue to their trust. Peace does not come to the transgressor of law; peace comes by obedience to law, and it is that message which Jesus would have us proclaim among men. (CR, October 1938, p. 133.)

D&C 36 6Joseph Fielding Smith: 6

D&C 36 6He [Edward Partridge] was baptized by the Prophet in December 1830, while on the visit to Fayette, and was commanded to proclaim the Gospel with a loud voice along with others who were ordained, to cry repentance saying: [Sec. 36:6, quoted.] This expression is found in Jude (3), and the Lord said to John (Rev. 3) "Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white; for they are worthy." This is symbolic language yet is plain to understand. This is an untoward generation, walking in spiritual darkness and the punishment for sin is spoken of as punishment in fire. Garments spotted with flesh are garments defiled by the practices of carnal desires and disobedience to the commandments of the Lord. We are commanded to keep our garments unspotted from all sin, from every practice that defiles. We are therefore commanded to come out of the world of wickedness and forsake the things of this world. Every man who will embrace the truth and receive it in humility of heart was entitled to be ordained and set forth, to teach the truth. (CHMR, 1947, 1:150.)

D&C 36 8Rudger Clawson: 8

D&C 36 8My temple

D&C 36 8We have two great churches, one in heaven, the other upon earth. They are moving along parallel lines, and the temple of God, as it appears to me, is the connecting link that connects the heavens with the earth, because it is through the temple that we will be able to reach our dead, and not otherwise. To pray for the dead may not be of any real assistance to them. To actually help them we must do a work for them. (CR, April 1933, pp. 77-78.)
