Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 37

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, December, 1830. Herein is given the first commandment respecting gathering in this dispensation.—The future migration of the Church westward—Duties of the Elders in strengthening the Church.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

It may be well to observe here, that the Lord greatly encouraged and strengthened the faith of his little flock, which had embraced the fulness of the everlasting Gospel, as revealed to them in the Book of Mormon, by giving some more extended information upon the Scriptures, a translation of which had already commenced. Much conjecture and conversation frequently occurred among the Saints, concerning the books mentioned, and referred to, in various places in the Old and New Testaments, which were now nowhere to be found. [Jude 3, 14, 15; Colossians 4:16; 1 Corinthians 5:9.] The common remark was, "They are lost books!" but it seems the Apostolic Church had some of these writings, as Jude mentions or quotes the Prophecy of Enoch, the seventh from Adam. To the joy of the little flock, which in all, from Colesville to Canandaigua, New York, numbered about seventy members, did the Lord reveal the following doings of olden times, from the prophecy of Enoch: [Moses, ch. 7, quoted.]

Soon after the words of Enoch were given, the Lord gave the following commandment: [Section 37, follows.] (HC 1:131-39, December 1830; Fayette, New York.)

SCD&C 37 1D&C 37 2D&C 37 3D&C 37 4George Q. Cannon: 1-4

SCD&C 37 1D&C 37 2D&C 37 3D&C 37 4But before the close of December 1830, after Sidney had been aiding Joseph some little time, the Lord required the Prophet to temporarily cease his work of translation. The enemy of all truth was drawing his forces around about Fayette to achieve the destruction of the Prophet, and the downfall of the newly-founded Church. But they were to be foiled. Fayette was not the region where the Lord designed his people to settle. Joseph's mind had been led to look to the western country for that purpose. Contact with Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge confirmed his inclination in that direction. The time had now arrived when it appeared necessary for the accomplishment of God's purposes, that his people (now increased to several score,) should have an abiding-place. It was made known to Joseph by revelation from the Lord, where this new resting-place should be. [V. 3.] He himself, did not expect to escape personal suffering or persecution by this new move; nor was this in the providence of God concerning him. But he knew that every migration made by him under the direction of the Almighty had been followed by prosperity and increase to the work, and he, therefore, obeyed the command to move to the place designated by the Lord without hesitation or doubt.

SCD&C 37 1D&C 37 2D&C 37 3D&C 37 4In the revelation now referred to [Sec. 37], it was commanded that the people of God should assemble in the State of Ohio, and there await the return of Oliver Cowdery and his fellow-missionaries from their eventful journey into the wilderness. Thus early in the history of the Church was the destiny of the people outlined. Kirtland was to be a stake of Zion: blessed by the presence of God's anointed Prophet and the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ: glorified by a temple built to the name of the Most High; and worthy to receive the ministrations in person of the Only Begotten Son of the Eternal Father. And yet it was to be but a temporary resting-place; for even while the Saints were to gather to Kirtland, the western missionaries were viewing the region in Missouri, yet to be known as the centre stake of Zion, which was to be built up and beautified for the visible presence of our Lord. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 84-85.)

D&C 37 1John A. Widtsoe: 1

D&C 37 1The use of the Bible by L.D.S. missionaries led, however, to one of the most notable labors of Joseph Smith. The teachings of the Book of Mormon, and the revelations he had received, convinced Joseph that in the Bible were many errors, such as unauthorized additions, incomplete statements, and faulty translations. This seemed to him, a lover and expounder of truth, out of keeping with the sacred nature of the volume.

D&C 37 1Therefore, after placing the matter before the Lord he began the so-called "inspired translation" of the Bible. In June, 1830, less than three months after the Church was organized, there was revealed to him the "Visions of Moses," which gave a more complete account of the events mentioned in the book of Genesis, and set forth many lost doctrines; for example, the meaning of the fall of Adam and Eve, long misunderstood because of the imperfections of existing translations of the Bible, was cleared, and shown to be a necessary act in the development of the Lord's plan of salvation. [Moses, chapters 2-8.]

D&C 37 1Towards the end of the year 1830, with Sidney Rigdon as assistant, he began a somewhat full "explanation and review" of the Old and New Testaments. The work then done is a convincing evidence of Joseph's inspiration.

D&C 37 1Thousands of the changes were made, all conforming to common sense, and many in full harmony with later modern scholarship. Disputed meanings were made clear, and new doctrines expounded.

D&C 37 1Here are some examples: The Bible says about conditions in the days of Noah: "It repented the Lord that he had made man on earth, and it grieved him at his heart." [Gen. 6:6.] The inspired translation reads: "It repented Noah, and his heart was pained, that the Lord had made man on earth, and it grieved him at his heart." [Moses 8:25.] The Bible says that "Melchizedek. . . without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually." [Heb. 7:3.] The inspired translation clears up this mass of confusion by saying: "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life. And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually." Melchizedek, confusedly mentioned in the Bible, was given intelligent, biographical notice. Other like explanations abound in this really amazing document.

D&C 37 1Joseph Smith may well be accounted one of the early students who sought to restore the Bible to its original form and simplicity. All this which came as helps to the missionaries in the field was opposed by the ministers whose Bible teaching left the people confused and in a state of uncertainty. (Joseph Smith, 1951, pp. 138-40.)
