Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 38

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Fayette, New York, January 2, 1831, at a conference of the Church.—Jesus Christ proclaims himself as the Creator—Doom of the wicked depicted—Goodly inheritance promised to the righteous—Definite promise of endowment with power from on high—The riches of eternity extolled—Diligent service required of every member of the Church.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

Before organizing his company for the migration from Seneca County, New York, into Ohio, the Prophet called a conference of the Church to be held in Fayette on the 2nd day of January, 1831. With the opening of the year, the Prophet saw a glorious prospect for the welfare of the kingdom. And at this conference all present seemed to partake of his faith and of the power of the Holy Spirit. In a revelation [Section 38] given for the comfort and sustenance of the Saints on this occasion, the Lord made known that in secret chambers there was much plotting for the destruction of the Saints of God. The command was renewed that they should go into Ohio, and some of the reasons for this movement were made known. Encouragement was also given to the people that the Lord intended to give unto them a land of promise—a land upon which there should be no curse when the Lord should come. If they would seek it with all their hearts the Lord made a covenant with them that it should be the land of inheritance for themselves and their children, not only while the earth shall stand, but in eternity, no more to pass away. It is upon this and kindred promises that is founded the hope so tenaciously clung to by the Latter-day Saints amid all the vicissitudes of their checkered career, that they will yet inherit that land where the centre stake of Zion is to be built. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, p. 85.)

SCD&C 38 1D&C 38 2D&C 38 3D&C 38 4First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, Charles W. Penrose): 1-4

SCD&C 38 1D&C 38 2D&C 38 3D&C 38 4In all his dealings with the human family, Jesus the Son has represented, and yet represents Elohim his father in power and authority. This is true of Christ in his pre-existent, antemortal, or unembodied state, in which he was known as Jehovah; also during his embodiment in the flesh; and during his labors as a disembodied spirit in the realm of the dead; and since that period in his resurrected state. To the Jews he said: "I and my Father are one" (John 10:30; see also 17:11, 22); yet he declared "My Father is greater than I" (John 14:28); and further, "l am come in my Father's name" (John 5:43; see also 10:25). The same truth was declared by Christ himself to the Nephites (see 3 Nephi 20:32 and 28:10), and has been reaffirmed by revelation in the present dispensation. (D&C 50:43.) Thus the Father placed his name upon the Son; and Jesus Christ spoke and ministered in and through the Father's name; and so far as power and authority, and Godship are concerned his words and acts were and are those of the Father.

SCD&C 38 1D&C 38 2D&C 38 3D&C 38 4We read, by way of analogy, that God placed his name upon or in the Angel who was assigned to special ministry unto the people of Israel during the exodus. Of that Angel the Lord said: "Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him." (Exodus 23:21.) (AF, 1924, pp. 470-71.)

SCD&C 38 1D&C 38 2D&C 38 3 Joseph Smith: 1-3

SCD&C 38 1D&C 38 2D&C 38 3The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence, or ever "the morning stars sang together" for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with him, one eternal "now"; he knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be connected with the human family, their weakness and strength, their power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and iniquity; he comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; he knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; he was acquainted with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; he ordered all things according to the council of his own will; he knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world, or in the world to come. (HC 4:597, April 15, 1842.)

D&C 38 2James E. Talmage: 2

D&C 38 2The same which knoweth all things

D&C 38 2Divine revelation of what is to come is proof of foreknowledge. God, therefore, knows, and has known from the beginning, what shall be, even to the end of the world. The transgression of Adam was foreknown. . . .The earthly life, ministry, and sacrificial death of the Savior were all foreseen, and their certainty was declared by the mouths of holy prophets. . . .

D&C 38 2But who will venture to affirm that foreknowledge is a determining cause? God's omniscience concerning Adam cannot reasonably be considered the cause of the Fall. Adam was free to do as he chose to do. God did not force him to obey the divine command. Neither did God's knowledge compel false Judas to betray the Christ, nor the recreant Jews to crucify their Lord.

D&C 38 2Surely the omniscience of God does not operate to make of men automatons; nor does it warrant the superstition of fatalism. The chief purpose of earth life, as a stage in the course of the soul's progression, would be nullified if man's agency was after all but a pretense, and he a creature of circumstance compelled to do as he does. . . .

D&C 38 2By way of illustration, consider the man versed in meteorology, who by due consideration of temperature, air pressure, humidity, and other essential data, is able to forecast weather conditions. He speaks with, the assurance of long experience in foretelling a storm. The storm comes, bringing benefit or injury, contributing to the harvest perhaps or destroying the ripening grain; but, whether it be of good or ill effect, can he who prophesied of the approaching storm be held accountable for its coming?. . .

D&C 38 2The Father of our spirits has a full knowledge of the nature and disposition of each of his children, a knowledge gained by observation and experience in the long ages of our primeval childhood, when we existed as unembodied spirits, compared with individuality and agency—a knowledge compared with which that gained by earthly parents through experience with their children in the flesh is infinitesimally small. In that surpassing knowledge God reads the future of child and children, of men individually and of men collectively. He knows what each will do under given conditions, and sees the end from the beginning. His foreknowledge is based on intelligence and reason. He foresees the future of men and nations as a state that naturally and surely will be; not as a state of things that must be because he has arbitrarily willed that it shall be.

D&C 38 2"Known unto God are his works from the beginning of the world." (Acts 15:18.) (The Vitality of Mormonism, 1919, pp. 318-20.)

SCD&C 38 1D&C 38 2D&C 38 3Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-3

SCD&C 38 1D&C 38 2D&C 38 3The Lord has stated that his progression is in building worlds and bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, and this goes on forever thus increasing his power, dominion and glory, but not his intelligence or knowledge, or virtue, or wisdom, or love, for these things are, as the scriptures teach, in a state of perfection. (CHMR, 1947, 1:156.)

D&C 38 1John Taylor: 1

D&C 38 1The Great I AM

D&C 38 1He is called in Scripture the I AM, in other words, I AM THAT I AM [Ex. 3:14], because of those inherent principles, which are also eternal and unchangeable; for where those principles exist, he exists. (Mediation and Atonement, 1950, pp. 161-62.)

D&C 38 2Joseph Smith: 2

D&C 38 2The same which knoweth all things

D&C 38 2. . . God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fulness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent [all-powerful], omnipresent [everywhere present], and omniscient [all knowing]; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell. . . .

D&C 38 2. . .Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God has all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him. (Lectures on Faith, Lecture 2, Paragraph 2; Lecture 4, Paragraph 11.)

D&C 38 4Wilford Woodruff: 4

D&C 38 4The Zion of Enoch

D&C 38 4He [Enoch] perfected a city, which was called the city of the Zion of God. But behold and lo, the nations of the earth awoke and found that Zion had fled! [Moses 7:69.] The Lord took it to himself; took it away from the earth. The people were righteous; they had become sanctified and the Lord took them away out of the power of the wicked. Zion could not remain on the earth; there was not power sufficient to withstand the assaults of the wicked; or if there was, the time had not come when the Lord would make use of the children of men; or there were not enough of the children of men willing to take hold and manifest those principles in their lives so that they could remain on earth. (JD, December 12, 1869, 13:162.)

D&C 38 4Anthon H. Lund: 4

D&C 38 4By the virtue of the blood which I have spilt

D&C 38 4This earth was prepared for us; this was the school we had to pass through; and the Lord, seeing what would take place, prepared the Lamb, "slain from the foundation of the world" [Rev. 18:8] to atone for men and regain all that was lost in the fall. Jesus accepted of this mission. The sacrifice that was to be made for the human family could only be made by one who had not sinned himself. It would have to be done by One who voluntarily offered to do this, in order that justice might be satisfied and mercy be extended to the sinner. We learn in the revelations of the Lord that the fall extended to all, and that the grievous consequences of the fall were both temporal and spiritual. Jesus came; he made the sacrifice. He did it willingly. He was without blemish or fault. No sin was found in him, and as such he was proper subject for the sacrifice. (CR, April 1912, p. 12.)

D&C 38 6Brigham Young: 6

D&C 38 6Every departed spirit is subject to the laws that govern the spirit world. There are wicked men in the spirit world. Millions of them will have the privilege of receiving the Gospel in the spirit, that they may be judged according to men in the flesh, and no doubt but many will reject the Gospel there. (JD, December 10, 1868, 13:76.)

SCD&C 38 7D&C 38 8D&C 38 9Joseph Fielding Smith: 7-9

SCD&C 38 7D&C 38 8D&C 38 9If we would carry out that which the Lord revealed, as he had revealed it, then all things would be perfect; for the organization is a perfect organization, the theory of it, the plan of it, is without flaw, and if we followed all the orders that have been given to us in the priesthood and otherwise, if we would put into practice the great doctrines which have been revealed in the revelations contained in the Holy Scriptures, it would only be a matter of a very short time until this great people would be in the same condition, absolutely, as were the people in the city of Enoch. We would be able to walk with God, we would be able to behold his face, because then faith would abound in the hearts of the people to the full extent that it would be impossible for the Lord to withold himself, and he would reveal himself unto us as he has done in times past. (CR, April 1921, p. 40.)

D&C 38 9John Taylor: 9

D&C 38 9Be prepared

D&C 38 9We never ought to do a thing that we would be afraid of God seeing us do; and if we are not afraid of God seeing us, we should not be afraid of man seeing us. (JD, September 20, 1857, 5:263.)

SCD&C 38 10D&C 38 11D&C 38 12D&C 38 13D&C 38 14Joseph Fielding Smith: 10-14

SCD&C 38 10D&C 38 11D&C 38 12D&C 38 13D&C 38 14In January, 1831, a conference was held in Fayette. Ordinary business was transacted and a revelation given in which the Lord made known the reason for the removal of the Church to the West. [Sec. 38:12, quoted.] This was because "all flesh is corrupted" and the powers of darkness prevail. The Lord revealed that the wicked were plotting in secret chambers the destruction of Joseph Smith and the Church. (Essentials in Church History, 1950, p. 121.)

SCD&C 38 10D&C 38 11D&C 38 12Wilford Woodruff: 10-12

SCD&C 38 10D&C 38 11D&C 38 12There is no prophecy of Scripture of any private interpretation, but holy men of old spoke as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and their words will be fulfilled to the very letter, and it certainly is time that we prepare ourselves for that which is to come. Great things await this generation—both Zion and Babylon. All these revelations concerning the fall of Babylon will have their fulfillment. Forty-five years ago, in speaking to the Church, the Lord said—[Sec. 38:10-11, quoted.] This causes silence to reign, and all eternity is pained. The angels of God are waiting to fulfill the great commandment given forty-five years ago, to go forth and reap down the earth because of the wickedness of men. How do you think eternity feels today? Why there is more wickedness, a thousand times over, in the United States now, than when that revelation was given. The whole earth is ripe in iniquity; and these inspired men, these Elders of Israel, have been commanded of the Almighty to go forth and warn the world, that their garments may be clear of the blood of all men. (JD, October 8, 1875, 18:128.)

D&C 38 10Joseph F. Smith: 10

D&C 38 10Ye are clean, but not all

D&C 38 10I do not suppose that you think or that anyone will think that we esteem ourselves as perfect, or as different and apart from other people of the world. We are, indeed, I am sorry to say, altogether too much like the rest of the world in many respects. We are people with like passions, like weaknesses, like imperfections—no doubt, results of human nature—as the rest of mankind. But the difference lies here: We have made a covenant in our hearts with God, the Eternal Father, that we will forsake sin; that we will eschew the very appearance of evil, as far as we possibly can; that we will overcome to the utmost our weakness and proneness to evil and wrong-doing; that we will seek light from all sources of light and intelligence; that we will seek knowledge that comes from above, and hold our ears open to listen to the words of truth, to the voice of understanding, and to the voice of inspiration that comes from the Lord, or that may come from man, inspiring men to do better, to improve, to advance in the scale of righteousness and of intelligence in the world; and that we will keep ourselves, as far as it is possible for us to do so, clean and pure and unspotted from the sins of the world. That is the difference. We have covenanted with God that we will do this, and we expect that God will require us to keep this covenant that we have made with him, and that we will strive with all our might to live consistent lives before the Lord and keep his laws. (CR, April 1904, pp. 2-3.)

D&C 38 12Melvin J. Ballard: 12

D&C 38 12The angels are waiting. . . to gather the tares

D&C 38 12I am willing to accept this statement. [Sec. 86:4-11.] I believe it. I am convinced that the Latter-day Saints are the "wheat," and they have been, and are being gathered out of the midst of the "tares" of the earth. They are the salt of the earth, and the gathering of the wheat from the midst of the tares is almost completed. There remains but the gleaning of the wheat; and when the wheat is gathered the tares shall be bound in bundles, and the burning time remaineth for them. The Lord gathered this people out from the midst of the nations of the earth to preserve them from the desolations that would come.

D&C 38 12I bear witness to you that the angels of God, who hold the power delegated to them to pour out his judgments upon the wicked, marvel at God's leniency and patience to this generation. That is why they cried: "Why are we not permitted to go forth?" They are stayed and held back. (CR, October 1920, p. 78.)

SCD&C 38 16D&C 38 17D&C 38 18D&C 38 19D&C 38 20Brigham Young: 16-20

SCD&C 38 16D&C 38 17D&C 38 18D&C 38 19D&C 38 20All those who wish to possess true riches, desire the riches that will endure. Then look at the subject of salvation, where you will find true riches. They are to be found in the principles of the Gospel of salvation, and are not to be found anywhere else. . . .The only true riches in existence are for you and me to secure for ourselves a holy resurrection; then we have command of the gold and the silver, and can place it where we please, and in whose hands we please. . . .

SCD&C 38 16D&C 38 17D&C 38 18D&C 38 19D&C 38 20The power which belongs to the true riches is gained by pursuing a righteous course, by maintaining an upright deportment towards all men, and especially towards the household of faith, yielding to each other, giving freely of that which the Lord has given to you, thus you can secure to yourselves eternal riches; and gain influence and power over all your friends, as well as your enemies. . . .

SCD&C 38 16D&C 38 17D&C 38 18D&C 38 19D&C 38 20Remember, that true riches—life, happiness, and salvation, is to secure for ourselves a part in the first resurrection, where we are out of the reach of death, and him that hath the power of it; then we are exalted to thrones, and have power to organize element. Yes, they that are faithful, and that overcome, shall be crowned with crowns of eternal glory. They shall see the time when their cities shall be paved with gold; for there is no end to the precious metals, they are in the native element, and there is an eternity of it. If you want a world of the most precious substance, you will have nothing to do but say the word, and it is done. You can then say to the elements, "produce ye the best oranges, lemons, apples, figs, grapes, and every other good fruit." (JD, August 14, 1853, 1:269, 272, 273, 276.)

D&C 38 16Rudger Clawson: 16

D&C 38 16So, my brethren and sisters, if there are to be distinctions among us, they must not be based on our financial condition, but rather upon the principle of righteousness. One man is better than another if he is more righteous than the other. One man is more acceptable to the Lord than another if he lives nearer to the Lord than the other.

D&C 38 16The prophet Jacob points out very clearly the manner in which it would be safe for his people to seek after riches. First seek the kingdom of God and its righteousness, and all other things will be added. Then if we seek for riches we will do it with the intent to accomplish good and to use them for the benefit and blessing of mankind and for the establishment and upbuilding of the Church and Kingdom of God.

D&C 38 16The poor we have always with us. It was said by Abraham Lincoln that God must love the poor because he has made so many of them. The Savior seemed to think a great deal of the poor. He came to preach the Gospel to them, to administer to their wants, to heal the sick, to cast out devils, to open the eyes of the blind. His life and his ministry was devoted to the poor. You will find, if you study closely the revelations of God found in the Book of Covenants, that a great amount of space is devoted to the poor. [Secs. 42:30-42, 71; 56:16-18; 58:8-11; 78:3; 82:12; 83:6; 109:55; 136:8.] We are reminded of them continually; that we shall divide our substance with them. The fast day has been instituted, in part, for that purpose. It has been estimated that if the entire people of the Latter-day Saints would give to the poor the value of the two meals that they refrain or should refrain from partaking of upon that day, the poor of this church would be well provided for. (CR, April 1899, p. 4)

D&C 38 16George Q. Cannon: 16

D&C 38 16The poor have complained before me

D&C 38 16When wealth multiplies, the people get lifted up in the pride of their hearts, and they look down on their poor brethren and despise them, because they are better educated, have better manners, and speak better language—in a word, because they have advantages which their poor brethren and sisters have not. There is sin in this, and God is angry with a people who take this course. He wants us to be equal in earthly things, as we are in heavenly. He wants no poor among his people; he does not want the cry of the oppressed to ascend from the midst of the Latter-day Saints, and God forbid that it ever should! God forbid that the cry of any should ever ascend from the midst of the Latter-day Saints because of oppression or because of the lack of any blessing necessary for comfort! God wants us to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and impart our substance for their support. But he does not want the poor to envy the rich. That is just as great a sin on their part as for the rich to oppress them. They must not envy the rich; they must not look on their brethren and sisters and envy them that which they have. [Sec. 56:17-18.] That is sinful, that is wrong, and the man or woman who indulges in it, indulges in a wrong spirit. God wants us to build each other up in righteousness. He wants us to love one another and to seek one another's benefit. This is the spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. He has revealed it unto us, and we must cultivate it. (JD, September 8, 1872, 15: 156.)

SCD&C 38 21D&C 38 22James E. Talmage: 21-22

SCD&C 38 21D&C 38 22We have seen that according to the words of holy prophets ancient and modern, Christ is to come in a literal sense and so manifest himself in person in the last days. He is to dwell among his saints, "Yea, even I will be in the midst of you." [3 Nephi 20:22; 21:25.] He declared to the people on this continent, whom he promised to establish in the land of the New Jerusalem; and similar assurances were given through the prophets of the east. [Ezek. 37:26-27; 2 Cor. 6:16.] In this prospective ministration among his gathered saints, Jesus Christ is to be at once their God and their King. His government is to be that of a perfect theocracy; the laws of righteousness will be the code, and control will be administered under one authority, undisputed because indisputable. . . .

SCD&C 38 21D&C 38 22The kingdom of heaven including the Church, and comprising all nations, will be set up with power and great glory when the triumphant King comes with his heavenly hosts to personally rule and reign on the earth, which he has redeemed at the sacrifice of his own life.

SCD&C 38 21D&C 38 22As seen, the kingdom of heaven will comprise more than the Church. The honorable and honest among men will be accorded protection and the privileges of citizenship under the perfect system of government which Christ will administer; and this will be their lot whether they are members of the Church or not. Law-breakers and men of impure heart will receive judgment according to their sin; but those who live according to the truth as they have been able to receive and comprehend it will enjoy the fullest liberty under the benign influences of a perfect administration. The special privileges and blessings associated with the Church, the right to hold and exercise the Priesthood with its boundless possibilities and eternal powers, will be, as now they are, for those only who enter into the covenant and become part of the Church of Jesus Christ. (AF, 1950, pp. 363, 368.)

D&C 38 21Joseph Fielding Smith: 21

D&C 38 21The commandment came to the members of the Church in January, 1831: [Sec. 38:21, quoted.] This will be when he descends in the clouds of heaven in power and glory. Let all people know that the parable of the fig tree is being fulfilled today. The tree puts forth its leaves and the summer is nigh. We are told that when we see these things we may know that in this generation, when these things take place, all that has been said concerning the coming Christ will be fulfilled. (Progress of Man, 1940, p. 490.)

D&C 38 21First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant): 27

D&C 38 21In union there is strength, but how can a people become united while their interests are diversified? How can they become united in spiritual matters, and see eye to eye, which they can only partly understand, until they become united in regard to temporal things, which they do comprehend? (MS, July 8, 1854, 16:427.)

D&C 38 27Francis M. Lyman: 27

D&C 38 27It is a great mystery to the people of the world how the Latter-day Saints hold so unitedly together as a people, why there is such a fraternal, binding feeling existing between them. Quite generally they look upon it as the result of compulsory power, exercised by the leaders of the Church. How incorrect this idea is! What holds this people together so solidly, and what makes them willing to labor for the salvation of the children of men, at the sacrifice of their own worldly affairs and interests, is answered in the text I have just read to you. [3 Nephi 11:20-36.] The Lord has spoken to us today by the inspiration of his Spirit. He has been present with us by his Spirit. Every Latter-day Saint has been moved upon by that same Spirit, and record has been borne in our hearts that we have listened to the word and the will of the Lord. That is the power, the secret power, that binds our hearts together and makes them respond as one, no matter where we may be. We may be thousands of miles apart, yet we are in unison, because bound together and inspired by the one Spirit. It is the same Spirit which binds the Father and the Son and makes them one. As the Father and the Son are one, so are we one. This is accomplished through our faith, repenting of our sins, cleansing our hearts, and living lives of purity before him. We may make a good start, but if we fail to continue in our good works and in our devotion to the Lord, that Spirit will diminish within us, and as his influence grows less within us, we are inclined to divide one against the other and receive the spirit of the world. Then it is that every man is for himself, following the imaginations of his own heart instead of being guided by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. I would like us to understand and realize this. (CR, April 1904, pp. 10-11.)

D&C 38 27George Q. Cannon: 27

D&C 38 27The Lord desires to have us a united people, the people that will listen to his voice. And what does this mean? Does it mean tyranny? Does it mean oppression? Does it mean the taking away of any human being's rights? Does it encroach upon the liberty of any soul? No, it does not. It never has. It never will, because the Priesthood of the Son of God is not a tyrant. The operations of that Priesthood are beneficent under all circumstances. Look at the prosperity of this people. See how God has blessed them when they have listened to counsel and been guided aright. All our prosperity is traceable to this. Our misfortunes are traceable to our disobedience and neglect. Everyone knows this that has any faith whatever in the work of God. There is nothing asked of any man that he cannot do with the utmost pleasure and with the freest exercise of his agency. It has been so from the beginning, and it will be so to the end. (CR, April 1898, p. 35.)

D&C 38 27Harold B. Lee: 27

D&C 38 27I refer to the importance of unity and oneness of the Latter-day Saints.

D&C 38 27As I have pondered the importance of this matter, I have recalled some of the blessings we could enjoy if we would be united as a people. If we would be united in paying our fast offerings and observing the law of the fast as fully as the Lord has taught it, and if we were united in carrying out the principles of the welfare program as they have been given to us by our leaders today, we would be free from want and distress and would be able fully to care for our own. Our failure to be united would be to allow our needy to become the pawns of politicians in the public mart.

D&C 38 27If we were fully united as a people in our missionary work, we would rapidly hasten the day when the gospel would be preached to all people without and within the boundaries of the organized stakes of Zion. If we are not united, we will lose that which has been the lifeblood and which has fed and stimulated this Church for a generation.

D&C 38 27If we were fully united in keeping the law of sacrifice and paying our tithes as we have been schooled today, we would have sufficient to build our temples, our chapels, our schools of learning. If we fail to do that, we will be in the bondage of mortgage and debt.

D&C 38 27If we were united as a people in electing honorable me to high places in our civil government, regardless of the political party with which we have affiliation, we would be able to safeguard our communities and to preserve law and order among us. Our failure to be united means that we permit tyranny and oppression and taxation to the extent of virtual confiscation of our own property.

D&C 38 27If we are united in supporting our own official newspapers and magazines which are owned and operated by the Church and for Church members, there will always be in this Church a sure voice to the people, but if we fail to be united in giving this support, we permit ourselves to be subject to abuse, slander, and to misrepresentation without any adequate voice of defense.

D&C 38 27If we were united in safeguarding our youth from promiscuous associations that foster marriages out of the Church and out of the temples, by having socials and recreations as a united people, as has been the practice from our pioneer days, we would be building all our Latter-day Saint homes on a sure and happy foundation. Our failure to be united in these things will be our failure to receive eternal blessings that otherwise could be ours.

D&C 38 27If we were united in safeguarding the Church from false doctrines and error and in standing as watchmen upon the tower as teachers and leaders in watching over the Church, then we would be free from these things that cause many to stumble and fall and lose their faith. If we are not thus united, the wolves among us will be sowing the seeds of discord, disharmony, all tending to the destruction of the flock.

D&C 38 27If we were united in our temple work and in our genealogical research work, we would not be satisfied with the present temples, only, but we would have sufficient work for temples yet to come, to the unlocking of the doors of opportunity to those beyond who are our own kin, and thus ourselves become saviors on Mount Zion. Our failure to be united will be our failure to perpetrate our family homes in the eternity. So we might multiply the blessings that could come to this people if they were fully united in the purposes of the Lord. . . .

D&C 38 27If we are not united, we are not his. Here unity is the test of divine ownership as thus expressed. If we would be united in love and fellowship and harmony, this Church would convert the world, who would see in us the shining example of these qualities which evidence that divine ownership. Likewise, if in that Latter-day Saint home the husband and wife are in disharmony, bickering, and divorce is threatened, there is an evidence that one or both are not keeping the commandments of God.

D&C 38 27If we, in our wards and our branches, are divided, and there are factions not in harmony, it is but an evidence that there is something wrong. If two persons are at variance, arguing on different points of doctrine, no reasonable, thinking persons would say that both were speaking their different opinions by the Spirit of the Lord. . . .

D&C 38 27If it is so important, then, that this people be a united people, we might well expect that upon this principle the powers of Satan would descend for their greatest attack. We might well expect, also, that if there be those of apostate mind among us, they would be inclined to ridicule and to scorn this principle of oneness and unity as being narrow-minded or as being unprogressive. We would likewise expect that those who are enemies would also seek to fight against that principle. . . .

D&C 38 27May I test your unity as Latter-day Saints? Have you received a witness of the Spirit to your souls testifying that this is the truth; that you know this is the Church and kingdom of God; that you have received by baptism and by the laying on of hands the power of the Holy Ghost by which that unity of testimony might be accomplished? Have you that testimony in your souls?

D&C 38 27May I ask you another question? Are you living each day so to improve your lives by living the principles and ordinances of the gospel that you are moving toward that day when you will overcome all things?

D&C 38 27Finally, do you believe that these men whom we have sustained in this conference are the men through whom the channels of communication from our Heavenly Father are open? Do you believe—as Enos, the grandson of the great prophet Lehi, declared in his writing when he said he went into the mountain and prayed and ". . . the voice of the Lord came into my mind, again saying:" (Enos 1:10.)—Do you believe that the voice of the Lord comes into the minds of these men? If you do, then you believe what the Lord said that:

D&C 38 27"Whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.)

D&C 38 27Some there are who are prone to say, "We will follow their counsel in spiritual matters but not in temporal affairs. If they counsel us in other than that which pertains strictly to the spiritual welfare of the people, we will not follow them." Have any of you ever heard such comments? (CR, April 1950, pp. 96-100.)

D&C 38 28Joseph F. Smith: 28

D&C 38 28The hatred of the wicked always has and always will follow the Priesthood and the saints. The devil will not lose sight of the power of God vested in man—the Priesthood. He fears it, he hates it, and will never cease to stir up the hearts of the debased and corrupt in anger and malice towards those who hold this power, and to persecute the saints, until he is bound. (JD, April 2, 1877, 19:24.)

D&C 38 29Wilford Woodruff: 29

D&C 38 29We cannot know the hearts of men, nor the will of God concerning nations, kingdoms and people only as it is revealed to us by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost. (JD, June 12, 1863, 10:215.)

D&C 38 30James E. Talmage: 30

D&C 38 30Treasure up wisdom in your bosoms

D&C 38 30It is not fair to blame the Lord, even in thought, because he gives us warning of what is to come. It is most irrational and illogical so to do. He, with his omniscience, knows what is to come to individuals and nations, and he gives warnings. Many of us take that warning to be an expression of divine determination to punish and to afflict. Well, others besides the Lord are subjects of ill-directed blame sometimes. I have suffered from it. On one occasion I undertook to warn a merry party of intending picnickers not to set out on their jaunt, because a storm was coming, a violent storm. I had consulted the instruments that told of its coming. But they knew better and they went, and they came back in some fashion. I wish you could have seen them. But the tragical part of it was they blamed it all on me.

D&C 38 30Shall it be that because the storm is predicted we should believe that the pre-knowledge so used is a determining cause? You know better. Let us be thankful for the warnings that the Lord has given and is giving, and prepare ourselves against the tempest.

D&C 38 30Oh, Latter-day Saints, we have to bear the conditions that have been foretold, and that are now being realized. Let us do it with faith and resignation, never faltering, knowing that the Lord will bring out all things well, for his word shall not fail, nor shall his purposes be turned aside. (CR, April 1933, p. 109.)

D&C 38 30Stephen L Richards: 30

D&C 38 30Treasure up wisdom in your bosoms

D&C 38 30We all prize wisdom. It is said to be the greatest of gifts. It is really the power to apply beneficent knowledge in all the decisions and vicissitudes of life. How we need wisdom in the composition of the troubles and difficulties of the world! How we need wisdom in our own affairs, with our families, our business and our associations. Almost every day is a day of decision—what to do; what choice to make. I don't know of a better way to secure the wisdom that we need than by keeping the commandments. We are enjoined by the commandments to study, to pray, to work and to serve, and be humble and contrite of spirit. The great promises are to the meek who shall inherit the earth. Wisdom is not to be found among the arrogant, the haughty and self-sufficient, nor among the sinful and the anti-Christs of the world. Wisdom is a gift to the prayerful student, to the faithful and the obedient, to those who repose their trust in the counsels of the spirit and the Priesthood of God. (CR, April 1949, pp. 143-44.)

D&C 38 30Joseph F. Smith: 30

D&C 38 30Ye shall not fear

D&C 38 30No man need fear in his heart when he is conscious of having lived up to the principles of truth and righteousness as God has required it at his hands, according to his best knowledge and understanding. (CR, April 1904, p. 2.)

SCD&C 38 32D&C 38 33D&C 38 34D&C 38 35D&C 38 36D&C 38 37Joseph Fielding Smith: 32-37

SCD&C 38 32D&C 38 33D&C 38 34D&C 38 35D&C 38 36D&C 38 37They [Saints] were commanded to assemble in Ohio, and there he would give unto them his law, and these things should be made known. They were to dispose of their property as best they could; farms that could not be sold should be rented, and men of wisdom were to be appointed to look after the interests of the poor and needy and send them forth to the place the Lord commanded them. (Essentials in Church History, 1950, p. 122.)

D&C 38 39Wilford Woodruff: 39

D&C 38 39Remember, my brethren, the greatest gift that God can bestow upon us [is] eternal life, and it is worth more than all the houses and lands or the gold and the silver upon the earth. For by and by we will go to the grave, and that puts an end to worldly possessions, as far as our using them is concerned. The grave finds a home for all flesh, and no man can take his houses and lands, his gold and silver, or anything else of a worldly character with him. We brought none of these things with us when we came from our previous state. As Bishop Hunter says, babies are born without shoes and stockings. All the knowledge that we can accumulate from experience and observation, and from the revelations of God to man, goes to show that the riches of this world are fleeting and transitory; while he that has eternal life abiding in him is rich indeed. [Sec. 6:7.] (JD, June 26, 1881, 22:234.)

D&C 38 39George Q. Cannon: 39

D&C 38 39There is something in the human heart of that character that when human beings are prospering they are apt to be lifted up in pride and to forget the cause or the source of their prosperity; and they are apt to forget God, who is the fountain of all their blessings, and to give glory to themselves. It requires a constant preaching of the word of God, a constant pleading with the people, a constant outpouring of the Spirit of God upon the people to bring them to a true sense of their real condition. Is it right that we should be prudent, that we should take care of those gifts and blessings which God has given unto us, that we should husband our resources, that we should be economical, and not extravagant? Certainly; this is right, this is proper; we should be culpable if we are not so. But with this there is also something else required, and that is, to keep constantly in view that the management and care of these things is not the object that God had in sending us here, that is not the object of our probation. . . . I have been in reduced circumstances; have been on missions when I did not know where to get a mouthful to eat; turned away by the people who dare not entertain me because of the anger that was kindled against us. I could stand by and weep, being a boy and away from all my friends. But I, nevertheless, was happy. I never enjoyed myself in my life as I did then. I know that happiness does not consist in the possession of worldly things. Still it is a great relief when people have the means necessary for the support of themselves and families. If they possess these things and the Spirit of God with them, they are blessed. (JD, July 25, 1880, 22:100-1.)

D&C 38 39Anthon H. Lund: 39

D&C 38 39If one man acquire more of this world's goods than another, let it not lift him up and make him feel that it makes him better than his brother. Remember that the Lord withstands the proud; and purse-pride I think is meaner than any other pride. Yet it is natural to us. There should not arise class distinctions among the Latter-day Saints. We should love one another, and be one. You do not see any class distinction between those who labor in the Temples. The Temple is a place where the atmosphere is entirely free from a feeling of one being above another. When our missionaries go out to preach the Gospel, sometimes a young man of rich parents will be associated with the son of poor parents, but they do not feel that there is any distinction between them. They go out tracting and holding meetings together, they pray together, and live together as brethren. The difference between them in worldly means is forgotten, and they try to be united in the work they have in hand. Now, as the missionaries feel abroad, as you feel when you go into the Temples of God, so you should feel in your everyday lives. (CR, April 1901, pp. 21-22.)

SCD&C 38 40D&C 38 41Joseph F. Smith: 40-41

SCD&C 38 40D&C 38 41The one thing now that I desire to impress upon the minds of my brethren of the Holy Priesthood is that we should live so near to the Lord, be so humble in our spirits, so tractable and pliable, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, that we will be able to know the mind and will of the Father concerning us as individuals and as officers in the Church of Christ under all circumstances. And when we live so that we can hear and understand the whisperings of the still small voice of the Spirit of God, let us do whatsoever that Spirit directs, without fear of the consequences. It does not make any difference whether it meet the minds of carpers or critics, or of the enemies of the kingdom of God, or not. Is it agreeable to the will of the Lord? Is it compatible with the spirit of the great latter-day work in which we are engaged? Is the end aimed at likely to advance the Church and to strengthen it in the earth? If its trend is in that direction, let us do it, no matter what men say or think. (CR, October 1903, p. 86.)

D&C 38 40George F. Richards: 40

D&C 38 40One might ask: Why all the activity we see in the Church, in the ministry abroad, in the ministry at home, in the stakes and wards, in the priesthood quorums and auxiliary associations, in genealogy and temple work, in Church school and seminary work, etc. ? The answer might be briefly given thus: The salvation of man depends upon it. It is the work and glory of God to accomplish the salvation of his children, by the plan of the Gospel which he has revealed. The religious activities seen in the Church and in which we are engaged are for the purpose, and are assisting the Lord in the noblest work, the most important service in which man may be engaged. If we be not called officially into the service, there are many things we can do of our own volition which will contribute to our happiness and salvation and to the happiness and salvation of others. (CR, April 1936, p. 79.)

D&C 38 40David O. McKay: 40

D&C 38 40In the Church, increased participation in Church activity indicates a desire to be a partaker of spirituality, the highest acquisition of the soul, and young people desire it. (CR, April 1961, p. 7.)

D&C 38 40Franklin D. Richards: 40

D&C 38 40Prepare and accomplish the things which I have commanded

D&C 38 40I recollect the first time I went to stop with President [Brigham] Young. When it came to prayer time, he asked Brother Franklin to pray. I was but a boy, and I turned to him and said, "President Young, I would rather you pray; you can pray better than I can." "Oh! Well," said he, "you can pray well enough; you try it." So I knelt down and prayed the best I could. Thus we have to prepare ourselves and be ready for every duty as we go along. (CR, April 1899, p. 46.)

D&C 38 42Charles W. Penrose: 42

D&C 38 42[The gospel] must be proclaimed to every nation, kindred, tongue and people: to professors of religion and non-professors, to preachers and their congregations, to pastors and their flocks, to the king upon his throne and to the peasant in his cottage, to the presidents of republics, and in fact to all peoples on the face of the earth. All must hear the warning voice: Repent of your sins, O ye inhabitants of the earth! Turn away from your corruptions wherewith you have defiled yourselves and the earth on which you dwell, or woe unto you, for I the Lord God will cleanse the earth as with the besom of destruction. Repent, before judgment shall overtake you. Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and you shall be cleansed from sin, and a new heart shall be put into you. You shall be born of the water and be made new creatures in Christ Jesus. You shall be born of the Spirit, the Holy Ghost shall be given unto you as a gift from God, which shall be a light to your feet and a lamp to your path, by which you can be brought into communion with the Father and the Son and the heavenly hosts, by which light and intelligence can be flashed from the celestial kingdom to your souls, and by which you may know you are accepted of God! This Gospel must be preached to all the world by the servants of God. (JD, July 17, 1881, 22:167.)
