Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 40

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon, at Fayette, New York, January, 1831. Preceding the record of this revelation, the Prophet wrote: As James Covill rejected the word of the Lord, and returned to his former principles and people, the Lord gave unto me and Sidney Rigdon the following revelation:

Joseph Smith: Introduction

As James Covill rejected the word of the Lord, and returned to his former principles and people, the Lord gave unto me and Sidney Rigdon the following revelation, explaining why he obeyed not the word: [Section 40 follows.] (HC 1:145, January 6, 1831, Fayette, New York.)

SCD&C 40 1D&C 40 2D&C 40 3Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-3

SCD&C 40 1D&C 40 2D&C 40 3This man James Covill received a most wonderful revelation and blessing, provided he would turn to the Lord and in humility and faith seek to bring forth and establish Zion. "And again," the Lord said to him in conclusion, "it shall come to pass that on as many as ye shall baptize with water, ye shall lay your hands, and they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and shall be looking forth for the signs of my coming and shall know me. Behold, I come quickly. Even so. Amen." [Sec. 39:23-24.]

SCD&C 40 1D&C 40 2D&C 40 3We are led to believe that in this promised blessing, this foolish man was convinced of the truth, for it is clear that the Lord revealed to him things which he and the Lord alone knew to be the truth. However, when he withdrew from the influence of the Spirit of the Lord and had time to consider the fact that he would lose the fellowship of the world, and his place and position among his associates, he failed and rejected the promises and blessings which the Lord offered him. In a revelation explaining why he failed, the Lord said: [Sec. 40:1-3, quoted.]

SCD&C 40 1D&C 40 2D&C 40 3How many others there have been, and now are, who have rejected the word of the Lord because of the love of the world and the fear of men, to mortals may never be made known. Evidently they are legions, some have frankly admitted, others have turned away and have developed a spirit of extreme bitterness towards the Church. (CHMR, 1947, 1:159-60.)

SCD&C 40 1D&C 40 2D&C 40 3George Q. Cannon: 1-3

SCD&C 40 1D&C 40 2D&C 40 3The Apostle says, "Where no law exists there is no transgression" [Rom. 4:15], but when the Gospel came in its purity and plainness, and they did not receive it, then commenced their condemnation. This was the condemnation of the people in the days of Jesus. When light came into the world they were condemned because they rejected it. "This is condemnation," says Jesus, "that light is come into the world and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil." [John 3:19.] Ministers of religion and others who have been partly convinced of the truth when they have looked at the difficulties they would have to encounter and the sacrifices, as they considered them, which they would have to make, have shrunk from it, not having the courage to take upon them, I was going to say the shame of Jesus Christ, but they have been afraid and ashamed to take upon them his name, and to bear the odium which is cast upon the servants of God. There are many instances, doubtless, in your own experience of this kind; and they have gone backward from the time they rejected the truth; they have lost the favor of man, which they rejected the truth to obtain, have been disgraced in the sight of their fellow men and have met with the very things they desired to shun. Because of the rejection of the truth by men, the anger of the Lord is kindled against them and his judgments come upon them. (MS, February 21, 1863, 25:118.)

D&C 40 2Orson F. Whitney: 2

D&C 40 2Fear of persecution

D&C 40 2There are still others who love the truth and who recognize it, but they dare not espouse it; they are afraid of the social consequences. This whole broad land, this whole broad world, is sprinkled with such people. When the principles of the Gospel are presented to them they say, in surprise and astonishment: "Is that Mormonism? I never dreamed it. Why, that is true—I believe it with all my heart." And the tears spring to their eyes as they acknowledge it. But they don't come out in the open and fight for it. Why not? Judge ye.

D&C 40 2"They are slaves who fear to speak For the fallen and the weak; They are slaves who will not choose Hatred, scoffing and abuse, Rather than in silence shrink From the truth they needs must think; They are slaves who dare not be In the right with two or three." (CR, April 1915, p. 102.)

D&C 40 2Joseph F. Smith: 2

D&C 40 2The cares of the world caused him to reject the word

D&C 40 2That there are many good people in the world who believe the principles of the gospel as taught by the Latter-day Saints, and yet, through circumstances and environment, are not prepared to publicly accept the same, is evidenced by the following letter written by a reverend gentleman to a kinsman and a member of the Church in Idaho, and which the Era is permitted to use. The names of the parties immediately interested, for obvious reasons, are omitted. The letter follows:

D&C 40 2". . . Fortunately or unfortunately for me, I say, I believe you people are right in following the word given with such wonderful power and certainty as witnessed by the disinterested men who saw with their own eyes and heard with their own ears, at the beginning. Who can believe these, with Joseph and Hyrum Smith, were all liars and worse? I cannot. But here, dear cousin, is a question for you, and your elders: What is to become of such as me, who believes this about you, and yet are tied and bound by circumstances such as mine? Here I have been a minister for fifty-five years, and an ordained priest in the English church, the church of our forefathers, thirty-eight years. I have exercised this ministry all those years, unbroken—I cannot change now if I would. I am an old man seventy-eight years next birthday (March 10, 1835, I was born). Yes, let there be no mistake about my belief. I preach three sermons every week and execute other ministerial duties, but I never preach anything contrary to the doctrine of 'Mormonism" not designedly but necessarily, because I see the fundamentals of Holy Scripture are the same as those restored by what people call 'Mormonism'. . . "

D&C 40 2In answer to the question, "What is to become of such as me?" Let it be said that every person will receive his just reward for the good he may do and for his every act. But let it be remembered that all blessings which we shall receive, either here or hereafter, must come to us as a result of our obedience to the laws of God upon which these blessings are predicated. Our friend will not be forgotten for the kindness he has extended to the work and the servants of the Lord, but will be remembered of him and rewarded for his faith and for every good deed and word. But there are many blessings that result from obeying the ordinances of the gospel, and acknowledging the priesthood authorized of the Father and restored to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that cannot be obtained until the person is willing to comply with the ordinances and keep the commandments revealed in our day for the salvation of mankind. The true searcher will see and understand this truth and act upon it, either in this world or the world to come, and not until then, of course, may he claim all the blessings. The earlier he accepts, the earlier will he obtain the blessings, and if he neglects to accept the laws in this world, knowing them to be true, it is reasonable to suppose that disadvantages will result that will cause him deep regret. (IE, November 1912, 16:70-72.)
