Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 1 ( 1963)

Section 41

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to the Church, at Kirtland, Ohio, February 4, 1831. The Kirtland branch of the Church at this time was rapidly increasing in numbers, and the Saints generally were striving to live according to the commandments of the Lord; but, the Prophet states, some strange notions and false spirits had crept in among them. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 146.—Commandment regarding the observance of the law of the Lord—Promise of greater knowledge as to the government of the Church—Edward Partridge named as the first Bishop unto the Church.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

In the latter part of January, 1831, Joseph departed for Kirtland. . . .

The branch of the Church at Kirtland had become numerically strong, for it numbered nearly one hundred members. But they had been led into strange errors and darkness. False spirits had crept in and had manifested themselves in the subjugation of the physical and mental power of their victims—as Newel Knight had formerly been controlled and possessed by the evil powers at Colesville. [See Sec. 24:13.] The Saints at Kirtland, not having had experience to enable them to distinguish between the powers of light and the powers of darkness, and believing these things to be divine manifestations, were yielding to them and imperiling their earthly and eternal salvation, when the Prophet came and by his presence and prayers and faith of those Elders who accompanied him, banished these dark influences from the congregation of the Saints. When the faith of the Saints was aroused and exercised, the miracle which had been wrought at Colesville was here repeated. Joseph, by the power of God, rebuked the vile one and his crew; and his brother Hyrum, under the Prophet's direction, laid his hands on the sufferers' heads and cast out the devils.

Immediately following the reconciliation wrought among the Saints of God by their faith and these miracles, a revelation [Section 41] was given from the Lord directing what the Elders should do to receive his law, that they might know how to govern his Church, and informing them that he who received his law and doeth it is his disciple; but he that saith he receiveth it and doeth it not, is not his disciple, and should be cast out from among them; and also appointing unto Edward Partridge that he should be ordained a bishop, to leave his own affairs and devote his time to the service of the Lord. This was on the 4th of February 1831. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 85-87.)

Orson F. Whitney: Introduction

Another instance of Joseph's use of the seeric gift connects with the occasion of his arrival at Kirtland, Ohio, where the Church at an early day established its headquarters. A few months prior to that time, Oliver Cowdery and three other Elders on their way to preach the Gospel to the Lamanites, or Indians, had tarried for a season at Kirtland, where they converted a number of the white dwellers in that region. Among these were Sidney Rigdon, Newel K. Whitney, and others who became prominent in the "Mormon" community. The Saints in Ohio, learning that the Church would probably move westward, began to pray for the coming of the Prophet.

The prayer was soon answered. About the first of February, 1831, a sleigh, driven into Kirtland from the East, drew up in front of the mercantile store of Gilbert and Whitney. A stalwart young man alighted and walked into the store. Approaching the junior partner and extending his hand cordially, as if to an old and familiar acquaintance, he saluted him thus: "Newel K. Whitney, thou art the man!"

The merchant was astonished. He had never seen this person before. "Stranger," he said, "you have the advantage of me; I could not call you by name as you have me."

"I am Joseph the Prophet," said the stranger, smiling. "You have prayed me here, now what do you want of me?"

Joseph Smith, while in the State of New York, had seen Newel K. Whitney, in the State of Ohio, praying for his coming to Kirtland, and therefore knew him when they met. The purpose of this vision, in all probability, was to pave the way for a meeting between the Prophet and the man who was to have the honor of entertaining him during the first weeks after his arrival in Ohio. (Saturday Night Thoughts, 1921, pp. 42-43.)

SCD&C 41 1D&C 41 2D&C 41 3D&C 41 4Joseph F. Smith: 1-4

SCD&C 41 1D&C 41 2D&C 41 3D&C 41 4I desire now to read a few words in relation to the duty which devolves upon the men who have been speaking during this conference. I will read a portion of the 41st Section of the Doctrine and Covenants. [Sec. 41:1-4, quoted.]

SCD&C 41 1D&C 41 2D&C 41 3D&C 41 4The Lord here especially demands of the men who stand at the head of this Church and who are responsible for the guidance and direction of the people of God, that they shall see to it that the law of God is kept. It is our duty to do this. . . . The Lord requires of us that we shall see that his law is kept among the people. This is one of the principal reasons why we are talking to you we are. (CR, October 1899, p. 41.)

D&C 41 4Joseph Fielding Smith: 4

D&C 41 4"I will be your ruler." In the Church of Jesus Christ, it is our Redeemer who is the ruler. Many times we have heard President Joseph F. Smith, and other Presidents, say, when they have been addressed, or spoken of, as being the head of the Church, that this was not the case. No man stands at the head of the Church but Jesus Christ, whose Church it is. This is vital to the true Church. The President of the Church on earth is the representative and "mouthpiece" of our Lord, appointed to conduct the affairs of the Church in this mortal sphere. "I will be your ruler when I come," said the Lord. In the meantime his officers are to see that his law is kept. Here we may apply the parable of the talents. It is the duty of his servants to magnify his work through their diligence, faith and obedience to every principle and commandment; and this responsibility does not rest solely upon the President of the Church, neither upon the general authorities of the Church, but it must be shared by every man who holds the Priesthood. In fact, it goes beyond even this, for every member of the Church, both men and women, share in this responsibility, by obedience and righteous living and the teaching of the truth by example as well as by precept. (CHMR, 1947, 1:164.)

D&C 41 5Howard W. Hunter: 5

D&C 41 5He that receiveth my law. . . is my disciple

D&C 41 5The pathway to exaltation is well defined. We are told to have faith—faith in the Lord Jesus Christ—and repent of those things which are not according to his teachings. After this change of mental attitude, and with firm resolution, we must declare ourselves by going into the waters of baptism, thereby making a covenant with the Lord to keep his commandments. Can we thereafter be a secret disciple? Can we stand on the sidelines and merely observe? This is a day for action. This is the time for decision, not tomorrow, not next week. This is the time to make our covenant with the Lord. Now is the time for those who have been non-committal or who have had a half-hearted interest to come out boldly and declare belief in Christ and be willing to demonstrate faith by works. (CR, October 1960, p. 109.)

D&C 41 6Joseph Smith: 6

D&C 41 6To every ordained member, and to all, we say, be merciful and you shall find mercy. Seek to help save souls, not to destroy them: for verily you know that "there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents than there is over ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance." [Luke 15:7.] Strive not about the mysteries of the kingdom; cast not your pearls before swine, give not the bread of the children to dogs, lest you and the children should suffer, and you thereby offend your righteous judge. (HC 2:230, June 1835.)

SCD&C 41 7D&C 41 8Joseph Fielding Smith: 7-8

SCD&C 41 7D&C 41 8After the Prophet arrived in Kirtland, and away from the opposition and hate that was so prevalent in and around Fayette, New York, the Lord called upon him to commence a very important work, that of revising the Bible and restoring to the words of the ancient Hebrew prophets many of the things that had been taken away. He was without a home and without any kind of office. For a time he boarded with the Whitney family. The Lord said to the members of the Church: [Sec. 41:7, quoted.] It was also necessary that Sidney Rigdon be cared for in some manner, as he was to be scribe for the Prophet in his great undertaking. Under all the conditions, some of them very unfavorable, it is remarkable what was accomplished. (CHMR, 1947, 1:164-65.)

D&C 41 9John Taylor: 9

D&C 41 9Called. . . appointed by the voice of the Church

D&C 41 9We believe in two principles—one is the voice of God, the other is the voice of the people. For instance, we believe that nobody but God could set the religious world right, we believe that none but God could have given any man correct information in regard to doctrine and ordinances. We believe that God did instruct Joseph Smith in relation to both, and also pertaining to the government of his people here on the earth. How are this people selected and set apart? Joseph Smith was selected by the Lord, and set apart, and ordained by holy angels. How with the others? By the authority which God conferred on Joseph he selected, set apart, and ordained others to the various orders and organizations of the Priesthood. . . . The position we occupy is this: the Holy Ghost, which has been given to all who have obeyed the Gospel and have lived faithful to its precepts, takes of the things of God and shows them forth through a living Priesthood to a people enlightened and instructed by the spirit of revelation from God, and the people thus enlightened, instructed and blessed by the spirit of light, voluntarily and gladly sustain the Priesthood who minister unto them. When Joseph Smith was upon the earth, he did not force himself upon the people as these kings and emperors do, but he presented himself before them every six months, at the annual or semi-annual conference, and the people had a chance to lift up their hands to receive or reject him. That was the position occupied by Joseph Smith, and those associated with him, in guiding the affairs of the Church and kingdom of God upon the earth, and it is precisely so with President [Brigham] Young. He stands here as the representative of God to the people, as the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He is, or ought to be, full of light, life, revelation and the power of God, and he is, and bears testimony to it. He ought to be able to lead the people in the paths of life, and he is. He is the choice of God, and what more? He is the choice of the people of God. Has he a right to say, "I am chosen, I am elected, I am President, and I will do as I darned please, and help yourselves?" No, he presents himself before you, and if there is, say, a man who has ought against him, he has the privilege of holding up his hand to signify the same. That is the position of our President—he is brought to a test every six months, as it rolls around, before the assembled conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is the same with the Twelve, the President of the Stake, the High Council, the Presidents of Seventies, and with all the leading officers of the Church—they are all put to this test twice a year, and the people have the privilege of voting for or against them just as they please. (JD, October 7, 1872, 15:215-16.)

D&C 41 12Brigham Young: 12

D&C 41 12Read the history of the world and you will find that when God has blessed a people and placed his name upon them, and they afterwards became disobedient, the whole catalogue of curses pronounced by him upon his unworthy children have come upon them and they have been blotted out. Those who do not profess to know anything of the Lord are far better off than we are, unless we live our religion, for we who know our Master's will and do it not will be beaten with many stripes; while they who do not know the Master's will and do it not will be beaten with few stripes. This is perfectly reasonable. We cannot chastise a child for doing that which is contrary to our wills, if he knows no better; but when our children are taught better and know what is required of them, if they then rebel, of course, they expect to be chastised, and it is perfectly right that they should be. (JD, June 27, 1873, 16:111-12.)

D&C 41 12Joseph F. Smith: 12

D&C 41 12These words. . . beware how you hold them

D&C 41 12We know that every man will be judged according to the deeds done in the body; and whether our sin be against our own peace and happiness alone or whether it affects that of others, as the Lord lives we will have to make satisfaction or atonement; God requires it, and it is according to his providences and we cannot escape it. (JD, December 7, 1879, 21:13.)
