Russell M. Nelson, Perfection Pending, and Other Favorite Discourses ( 1998)

FUNDAMENTALS AND INITIATIVES

I see the proper balancing of two considerations—fundamentals and initiatives—as one of the great challenges of life. Let us first turn our attention to the fundamentals.

FUNDAMENTALS

I have learned that the wise physician asks himself at least two basic questions when confronted with any patient who is ill. Question number one: Will this illness subside with the passage of time, or will it become steadily more severe? For example, if a patient has a broken rib, it will get better with the passage of time. On the other hand, if a patient has a broken mitral valve in the heart, the patient will steadily deteriorate and die.

Question number two is considered if the answer to question number one is an ominous prognosis. If the illness is indeed steadily progressive, can that deteriorating course be changed by medical or surgical intervention? In the instance of a fractured mitral valve, the downhill progression can be reversed with surgical repair or placement of that broken valve.

The conscientious physician devotes much of his study to learn the natural laws that govern the area of his concern. We could say the same for the aerospace engineer or the jet pilot whose understanding of the physical laws of "foil" and "lift" is vitally important.

Divine Law. Let us mentally portray the first fundamental principle as a circle of divine law. Divine law is incontrovertible. It includes not only the laws of physics and physiology, but divine commandments as well. It pertains to things of eternal and ever-lasting worth, such as family, father, mother, children, ordinances, covenants, and doctrine. Divine law is the most basic of the fundamentals, obedience to which may begin the building of a life of greatness. Reference is made in the scriptures to this first fundamental:

"All kingdoms have a law given;

"And there are many kingdoms; for there is . . . no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom.

"And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions."<#>1

Rules. The second fundamental principle is also basic to success. It is the circle of rules. This ring includes the laws of man that can be made and also changed by human endeavor. In the Church, we are subject to rules written in the General Handbook of Instructions. Not only do we obey our own Church rules, but we also heed those of the society in which we live. We charge our members to be "subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates," and to obey, honor, and sustain the law.<#>2

Government by law—both in word and practice—is the strength and bulwark of any democracy. No individual is to be above or below the law. This circle of rules must be added to the fundamentals upon which we build our lives.

Policies. The next fundamental principle is that of policies. Policies are established, for example, by governing boards and presidential bodies, who may also change those policies. In the Church, we believe in continuing revelation to presiding leaders who have been given authority and responsibility. The men you sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators respond to inspiration from Him who said, "Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same."<#>3

Guidelines. Next, consider the importance of guidelines. Guidelines can be written to assist those at work, at school, at home, or at church. I know a man who really understands guidelines. He assists the General Authorities by studying all proposals to purchase or improve real property for the Church. I asked him once how he was able to formulate so many important recommendations he must make to the Brethren. He simply replied, "I work within my guidelines."

If we examine these rings from another perspective, perhaps we can see what he meant. He establishes guidelines well within the circle of policies set by the Brethren. They, in turn, function within rules of the Church and civil government. And those rules are well within bounds set by divine law.

Style. Now let us discuss the final fundamental—that of style. This circle includes personality, determination, and spirit. A scripture uniquely applies to personal style:

"He that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant. . . .

"Men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

"For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves."<#>4

As we crown this stack with the ring of style, note the importance of the central rod that is firmly attached to the basic ring of divine law. (See Figure 1.) This tie-rod may be likened to the scriptural term "the iron rod."<#>5

Figure 1. Fundamentals

Variations in personal style should range within established guidelines, implemented policies, official rules, and divine law.

When properly stacked, these rings resemble a pyramid in shape. If our behavior is centered in Christ—and the iron rod attaches us firmly at any level of our activity to the fundamentals of God's commandments and things of eternal worth—then we won't so likely be tipped over by winds of adversity.

The heaviest weight in the pyramid is on the bottom. That gives great stability. In a way, it is similar to the heavy ballast in the bottom of an ocean liner, placed there so the ship won't be blown over in a storm.

Periodically we learn of individuals who either are not well anchored or are obsessed with a particular idea that extends beyond the limits imposed by guidelines, policies, rules, or even divine law. Such a style may be portrayed as eccentric. This is an unstable situation that leads to wobbly imbalance. (See Figure 2.)

Figure 2. Eccentric Style

INITIATIVE

Having considered the fundamentals, let us turn our attention now to individual initiative. This topic relates to one's freedom to act as a citizen in society or as a responsible member of the Church. The image of the cone of individual initiative takes the inverted shape of the pyramidal cone of fundamentals. It is shaped more like a top. (See Figure 3.)

As individuals, we have no latitude to break the commandments of God. They are absolutes for our conduct. "Thou shalt not commit adultery," for example, is an irrevocable commandment and part of divine law.

There is a little more room for initiative under the rules by which we live. Handbooks can be edited; new statutes can be passed; even a constitution can be amended.

New policies can be even more easily established—but only by those who formulated them in the first place.

Guidelines give even greater freedom for adaptation to particular circumstances.

The zone of greatest individual initiative is in the ring of style. We previously referred to the word of the Lord that "he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant."<#>6 So we are expected to exercise much individual initiative.

Figure 3. Individual Initiative

Inasmuch as this cone of individual initiative is to be put in motion, imagine rapidly rotating it to resemble a spinning top or a whirling gyroscope. A top spins well on a sturdy pivot-point. It also spins well only if there is no lopsided projection to deform its shape.

In our model, the laws of physics dictate that the forces generated by the spin provide lift in both outward and upward directions. (See Figure 4.)

To me, this teaches a lesson. If individual initiatives are free from abrasive burrs and well based on a firm foundation, there is great potential for personal spiritual growth.

The Lord said, "What manner of men ought ye to be? . . . Even as I am."<#>7 How can one's personal progress approach that of the Lord's hopes for us? It is by exercising individual initiative upward and outward, while remaining within the limits of the fundamental bounds and conditions we have discussed.

Figure 4.

APPLICATION OF THE THEORY

So much for the theory. This strategy can be applied to the lives of real people.

In the 3 March 1990 issue of the Church News, there was a report of the official recognition of the Church by the government in Czechoslovakia. A photograph showed Elder Hans B. Ringger and me meeting with Dr. Josef Hromadka, deputy prime minister of that country. The fourth person in that picture was Ji&rcheck;í &Scheck;nederfler, district president of the Church in Czechoslovakia. The accompanying account was truly historic! But another unpublished story preceded that story.

As General Authorities of the Church, we had been petitioning for official recognition in Czechoslovakia for a number of years. When Elder Ringger and I met with the minister of religious affairs of the country for the first time, we asked him what must be done in order to gain official recognition that would allow members of the Church in Czechoslovakia to meet in dignity and in full compliance with the law. He replied, "First, you will have to submit statutes indicating your religious beliefs. And they must be submitted not by you `foreigners,' but by members of your Church here in Czechoslovakia. One of those members must be willing to meet with us and submit those statutes in person. Following that, we will consider your request."

Bear in mind that at this time, some citizens of Czechoslovakia were incarcerated in jail for expression of religious belief or dissident thought. (In fact, shortly before Vaclav Havel became the new president of the Czechoslovakian Republic, he was among those prisoners.) Not only that, but for nearly four decades, our faithful Latter-day Saints had met quietly only in their homes.

After our meeting with the minister of religious affairs, Elder Ringger and I conferred privately with our district president, Ji&rcheck;í &Scheck;nederfler, and his wife, Olga. We explained what was required. Then we asked him, "Are you willing to expose yourself as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? Are you willing to take the risk, knowing that it might mean jail or death if you were to identify yourself as the leader of the Church in this country?" We assured him that as his ecclesiastical authorities, we could not and would not make that request of him. We could only ask him to determine what his own conscience would allow him to do.

Bravely he replied, "Of course I will do it! I will reveal myself. I will meet with the magistrate. I will take the statutes to him personally. I will submit myself to his mercy." Then he concluded, "I will take whatever risk is necessary and even pay with my life, if needed, for the cause of the Lord and His Church because I know the gospel is true!" His wife gave her approval as tears of love moistened her eyes.

God bless Brother and Sister &Scheck;nederfler for their courage. They are the unsung heroes in the drama that made this significant announcement possible. Because of them, the Church has entered a new era of growth in the Czech Republic. A mission was reestablished there in July 1990 after an absence of forty years.

Brother and Sister &Scheck;nederfler are each noble examples of individual initiative balanced on fundamentals. They have been magnified and made great in the eyes of God and their fellow-men.

Valiant action occasionally entails risk. One's reputation—one's very life—may be put on the line. Modern scripture suggests that this may be required of each of us. In speaking of our day when the Lord would come to make up His jewels, He spoke of the trials to which His Saints may be subjected:

"They must needs be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who was commanded to offer up his only son.

"For all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified."<#>8

In a way, every leader in the Church has to endure trials. Every stake president, bishop, elders quorum president, and teacher has similar and challenging opportunities for individual initiative. When balanced in motion and upon sound fundamental principles, deeds of greatness can result.

THE SPIRIT OF THE LAW

It is one thing to become expert in the letter of the law. But even more challenging is the ability to master the spirit of the law. President Ezra Taft Benson often told us that the most important thing about our work in the Church is the Spirit.

A similar expression was uniquely voiced in 1990 by Dr. Hromadka, then deputy prime minister of the Republic of Czechoslovakia. We conversed with him about the challenges faced by a new government in a land where so much is needed. We asked if we, as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, could be of any help to his people. He knew that our Church is well recognized for its efforts in providing humanitarian relief throughout the world. We shall never forget his reply. He said, "We don't need material goods or technology. We need a new spirit. We need moral values. We need the Judeo-Christian ethic back in our curriculum. Please help us to make this a time of spiritual renewal for our nation!"

The new president of Czechoslovakia, Vaclav Havel, won the admiration of his audience when he addressed a joint session of the United States Congress. He did not hold an empty hat in hand. He asked only for spiritual assistance—not just for himself, but also for his neighbor.

This man who had been unjustly imprisoned for so long and could have felt unkindly toward his captors said, "I cannot hate; I will not hate." As he spoke to the combined assembly of the United States Congress, he made this impassioned plea for spiritual help:

"The worst thing is that we are living in a decayed moral environment. We have become morally ill, because we have become accustomed to saying one thing and thinking another. We have learned not to believe in anything, not to have consideration for one another and only to look after ourselves. Notions such as love, friendship, compassion, humility, and forgiveness have lost their depth and dimension, and for many of us they represent merely a psychological idiosyncrasy, or appear to be some kind of stray relic, something rather comical in the era of computers and space rockets."

What a marvelous message! President Havel's hopes for love, friendship, compassion, humility, and forgiveness hark right back to counsel given through the ages by living prophets of God. They have stressed the importance of practicing those principles broadly and especially within the walls of our own homes.

BALANCE BETWEEN FUNDAMENTALS AND INITIATIVES

A society with no other scale than a legal one is not worthy of sons and daughters of God. Any morality based solely on the letter of the law falls short of the great potential of the human soul.

I plead for a proper balance between fundamentals and initiatives. Actions based on eternal principles enlarge the soul. Through such actions, in fact, we literally can become more like the Lord. We need not be boastful, but we can literally achieve the goal Jesus Christ expressed for us. "What manner of men ought ye to be?" He asked. Then He answered His own question: "Even as I am."<#>9 As we try to pattern our lives after the Savior's, we will be exhilarated, enlarged, ennobled, and magnified beyond our fondest dreams.

I testify that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that His restored church provides the pathway by which we can achieve balanced growth in this life and eternal glory in the life to come.

NOTES
