The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the September 2005 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Choose the Right Way and Be Happy” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1. Tell the children about an important message you have received, such as the birth of a child or another happy family event. How was the message sent? How would you send an important message today? Show picture 5-7 from the Primary picture packet (Statue of Angel Moroni on Temple). Ask the children who is in the picture. Why is he blowing a trumpet? What important message does he have to send to the world? Using material from JS—H 1:27–67, tell the story of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Write questions that review the story on separate slips of paper (see Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 68–70), and put them in a sack. Sing a song or hymn while passing the questions up and down the rows. Randomly stop the music, and invite the child who is holding the sack to choose and answer a question with help from children on either side of him or her. Continue singing and passing the questions until all have been answered. Assign each class and its teacher a scripture from the Book of Mormon to review. (Pick scriptures rich in doctrine, such as those in 2 Ne. 31; Mosiah 2–5; 3 Ne. 11–13, 3 Ne. 18; and so on.) With the help of the teacher, have each child identify a brief doctrine in the scripture that would be a great message to the world, such as “pray in your families” (3 Ne. 18:21). Invite each child to come to the front of the room and repeat his or her message to the world from the Book of Mormon.

2. Ahead of time and after counseling with the bishop or branch president, invite two or three members to share their testimonies of the blessing of paying tithing. (If possible, include a young adult or a child.) Teach the principle of tithing. Point out that tithing is one of the basic requirements in the Faith in God program (see Faith in God guidebook, p. 4), as well as the focus of an activity in the “Developing Talents” section (p. 10). Invite a member of the bishopric or branch presidency to come and discuss with the children what tithing is used for. Help each child decorate a small box, can, or envelope in which to save his or her tithing. Give each child a tithing form, and teach him or her how to fill it out. Explain that we pay our tithing to a member of the bishopric or branch presidency and meet with the bishop or branch president for tithing settlement. Introduce those who are prepared to share their testimonies of the blessing of tithing, and invite them to share their experiences.

3. Explain that a person’s name is important, both to the person and to those who love him or her. Tell the children about your name and its significance. Were you named after someone? Why did your parents choose that name? Invite two or three children to tell about their names. Have the children recite from My Gospel Standards: “I will use the names of Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ reverently. I will not swear or use crude words.” To help us remember Him, Jesus Christ is known by many names. Assemble the following on a tray: (1) rock, (2) bread, (3) vine or a picture of one, (4) drawing or picture of the sun, (5) small world globe or Gospel Art Picture Kit 600—The World, (6) Gospel Art Picture Kit 403—The First Vision, (7) representation of shepherd’s staff or small sheep, (8) Gospel Art Picture Kit 227—Jesus Praying in Gethsemane, and (9) crown. Each of these items represents a name of Jesus Christ found in the following scripture references: Rock—Hel. 5:12, Bread of Life—John 6:47–48, Vine—John 15:5, Light of the World—John 8:12, Creator—Mosiah 3:8, Beloved Son—JS—H 1:17, Good Shepherd—John 10:11, Savior—D&C 43:34, King—D&C 45:59. List the references—but not the names—on the board. Invite the children to read the scripture references, and identify the names of Jesus that the items represent. Discuss what the various names of Jesus Christ teach us about Him. Remind the children that when we are baptized and when we take the sacrament, we take the Lord’s name upon us. Bear testimony that we keep our covenants as we use the names of Heavenly Father and Jesus reverently and by not swearing or using crude words.
