September 21–22, 1823: The angel Moroni visited Joseph Smith and told him about the gold plates.

September 1, 1901: President Heber J. Grant (1856–1945) dedicated Japan for the preaching of the gospel.

September 7, 1958: President David O. McKay (1873–1970) dedicated the London England Temple.

September 23, 1995: President Gordon B. Hinckley presented for the first time the proclamation on the family, in a general Relief Society meeting.

If you have an item you think would look great on this page, why not send it to us? We’re always looking for fun ideas. Remember to send photos too, if you have some to go with your brief article. You can submit your article, quiz, or tip to:

Did You Know?

Liahona

50 E. North Temple St. Rm. 2420

Salt Lake City, UT 84150-3220, USA

Or e-mail: liahona@ldschurch.org

Teens from the Nausori Fiji, Suva Fiji, and Suva Fiji North Stakes wear special ponchos when they perform acts of service in the community. The logos on these ponchos display the name of the Church so people will know what brings these youth together to give of themselves.

Students of the Fiji LDS Church College, a secondary school sponsored by the Church, recently took part in a seminary week of service. Along with service projects at a school, a hospital, a health care clinic, a vocational training center for children with disabilities, and the Suva Fiji Temple, there were scripture-based programs and activities on campus.

If you want to be a good leader, the Savior taught that first you must become a good servant and follower. In the New Testament, even Jesus Christ’s Apostles sometimes had a hard time understanding this principle. In Mark we read that they “disputed among themselves, who should be the greatest” (Mark 9:34).

So the Savior called the Twelve Apostles together and told them, “If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all” (Mark 9:35).

Follow the example of the Savior, and lead out in your quorums, classes, families, and communities by serving others.
