The prophecy that the everlasting gospel will be preached to all the inhabitants of the earth is being fulfilled, and the Liahona magazine is part of that fulfillment. I receive with excitement the words of President Gordon B. Hinckley.
Zenón Cabrera C., Llallagua Branch, Llallagua Bolivia District

When my Liahona comes, I read it all in one day. I especially enjoy reading about the spiritual experiences of other members. Those experiences keep me moving forward.
Ruth Caballero, Pedro Juan Caballero Third Branch, Pedro Juan Caballero Paraguay District

Whenever I read the Liahona, my mind is calmed. I love the Gospel Classics section. The words of the prophets and Church leaders touch my heart and have brought great blessings to my life.
Liao Alin, Tai Tung Branch, Hua Lien Taiwan District

The Liahona has helped me so much while I have been on my mission. The articles from Church leaders help me give good advice to members, investigators, and companions. I can also do missionary work by mail by sending my friends articles from the magazine. In this way I can obey the counsel of our leaders to spread the gospel however we can.
Elder Abraham Ordaz, Mexico León Mission

I read every issue of the Liahona with delight. Those who share their experiences and testimonies help me find answers to questions just when I need them the most. The Liahona is a treasure.
Olga Khripko, Zaporozhe Tsentralny Branch, Dnepropetrovsk Ukraine District

Dressing modestly is a challenge in today’s world. How do you ensure that your everyday wear, exercise clothing, or formal wear is modest? How have you promoted modesty in your family or ward and stake (branch and district)? Send your comments to Modesty, Liahona, Room 2420, 50 East North Temple Street, Salt Lake City, UT 84150-3220, USA; or e-mail to liahona@ldschurch.org.

Remember that friend at work who occasionally asks questions about the Church? That less-active family you home teach? That child or family member who needs strengthening? That returned missionary who learned a new language on his or her mission? They are all perfect candidates for a gift subscription to the Liahona.
You can order and receive the Liahona for yourself or as a gift in any of the following languages (frequency varies by language): Albanian, Armenian (East), Bulgarian, Cambodian, Cebuano, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Fijian, Finnish, French, German, Haitian, Hungarian, Icelandic, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Kiribati, Korean, Latvian, Lithuanian, Marshallese, Mongolian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Samoan, Sinhala, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish, Tagalog, Tahitian, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Tongan, Ukrainian, and Vietnamese.

Contact your ward or branch leaders or your local distribution center for subscription and ordering information.
