Individually in the following pages and collectively on page 9, the latter-day prophets, seers, and revelators teach of the Savior and bear witness that He lives.

“He lives, the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind, whose Atonement came as an act of grace for the entire world. … He has done for us what we could not do for ourselves. He has brought meaning to our mortal existence. He has given us the gift of eternal life. … God be thanked for the gift of His Son, the Redeemer of the world, the Savior of mankind, the Prince of Life and Peace, the Holy One” (“A Testimony of the Son of God,” Liahona and Ensign, Dec. 2002, 4–5).

“[Jesus Christ] is a teacher of truth—but He is more than a teacher. He is the Exemplar of the perfect life—but He is more than an exemplar. He is the Great Physician—but He is more than a physician. He is the literal Savior of the world. … I testify to you that He lives and that through Him, we too shall live” (“The Way of the Master,” Liahona and Ensign, Jan. 2003, 7).

“As the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh, Jesus inherited divine attributes. He was the only person ever born into mortality who could perform this most significant and supernal act. As the only sinless Man who ever lived on this earth, He was not subject to spiritual death. Because of His godhood, He also possessed power over physical death. Thus He did for us what we cannot do for ourselves” (“The Atonement: Our Greatest Hope,” Liahona, Jan. 2002, 20; Ensign, Nov. 2001, 19).

“I bear witness of the Lord Jesus Christ. He lives. He is our Redeemer and is our Savior. He presides over this Church. He is no stranger to His servants here, and as we move into the future with quiet confidence, His spirit will be with us” (“The Peaceable Followers of Christ,” Liahona, Dec. 1998, 24; Ensign, Apr. 1998, 67).

“[Jesus Christ’s] atoning sacrifice for all mankind is the centerpiece of the history of our Father in Heaven’s children here on earth. Each of us who accepts the divine plan must accept the role of our Savior and covenant to keep his laws that our Father has developed for us. As we accept Christ in spirit and in deed, we may win our salvation” (“Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper,” Ensign, May 1996, 53).

“It is imperative that we do our utmost to expand our understanding of [Jesus Christ’s] premortal commission, His earthly ministry, His unjust crucifixion, the agony of His suffering, His final sacrifice, and His resurrection. Each of us is profoundly indebted to Him, for we were purchased by the shedding of His own precious blood” (“Jesus of Nazareth,” Ensign, May 1994, 75).

“We cannot really learn any deep or lasting things about Jesus unless we take His yoke upon us. Then, though on our small scales compared to His, the relevant experiences will teach us keenly and deeply about Him and His divine attributes. There is nothing abstract about it at all. It becomes a very personal thing for us” (“Jesus, the Perfect Mentor,” Ensign, Feb. 2001, 13).

“Just as a well-educated musician can recognize the composer of a symphony by its style and structure, so a well-educated surgeon can recognize the Creator of human beings by the similarity of style and structure of our anatomy. … This similarity provides additional evidence and deep spiritual confirmation of our divine creation by our same Creator” (“Jesus the Christ: Our Master and More,” Liahona and Ensign, Apr. 2000, 6).

“When we have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, we must have trust in him. We must trust him enough that we are content to accept his will, knowing that he knows what is best for us. … We understand the meaning of the Savior’s words: ‘If ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me’ (Moro. 7:33)” (“Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,” Ensign, May 1994, 99–100).

“God our Eternal Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, have spoken again from the heavens and have called prophets and Apostles to teach the fulness of the everlasting gospel. … That is a glorious thing to know. … It changes the course of your life to a safer one because it provides an anchor that helps hold you fast to the teachings of the gospel” (“Steadfast in Christ,” Ensign, Dec. 1993, 50).

“In a premortal council at which we were all present, [the Savior] led the forces of good against those of Satan and his followers in a battle for the souls of men that began before this world was formed. That conflict continues today. We were all on the side of Jesus then. We are on the side of Jesus today” (“Christians in Belief and Action,” Ensign, Nov. 1996, 71).

“I know that the Savior lives, that He is a resurrected, glorified personage of perfect love. I witness that He gave His life that we might live with Him eternally. He is our hope, our Mediator, our Redeemer” (“He Lives,” Liahona, Jan. 2000, 108; Ensign, Nov. 1999, 89).

“Jesus Christ … is the Light of the Atonement fulfilled in the Garden of Gethsemane and on Golgotha, who took upon Himself the sins of the world, that all mankind may obtain eternal salvation. He is the Light of the empty tomb. … He is my Light, my Redeemer, my Savior—and yours” (“Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light,” Liahona, July 2002, 79–80; Ensign, May 2002, 71–72).

“I testify of God’s love and the Savior’s power to calm the storm. Always remember in that biblical story [of Peter walking on the water] that [Christ] was out there on the water also. … Only one who has fought against those ominous waves is justified in telling us—as well as the sea—to ‘be still’ [Mark 4:39]. Only one who has taken the full brunt of such adversity could ever be justified in telling us in such times to ‘be of good cheer’ [John 16:33]” (“An High Priest of Good Things to Come,” Liahona, Jan. 2000, 43; Ensign, Nov. 1999, 37).

“Jesus Christ is the light and the life of the world. If we do not choose to move toward Him, we will find that we have moved away. … Whether or not you choose to keep your covenant to always remember Him, He always remembers you” (“Always,” Ensign, Oct. 1999, 12).
