More than 2,000 years ago Mary and Joseph traveled to Bethlehem. Joseph tried to find a place for them at an inn, but there was no room. They found a stable where Mary could give birth.

This was the first Christmas. There were no large family gatherings. There were no decorations. There were no brightly wrapped presents. But there were carols and singing and rejoicing. The angels in heaven joined in a great chorus of rejoicing and praise at the birth of the Son of God (see Luke 2:13–14). Heavenly Father gave us a great gift. He sent His Son, Jesus Christ.

Jesus gave us the gift of the Atonement and eternal life. Jesus Christ is our Savior and Redeemer. He gave the gift of a perfect example for us to follow. He showed us the gift of love and taught us to love one another.

We can also give gifts of service and love. Jesus said, “If ye love me, keep my commandments” (John 14:15). We can show our love for Jesus by keeping His commandments and serving others, not just at Christmastime but throughout the year.

Cut out the gifts on page F11 along the solid lines. Fold on the broken lines; then tape the lids down. Punch a hole at the top of each gift, and attach string. Hang the gifts where you can see them. Every few days, open a “gift” and do the activity inside. Remember, you can give these gifts throughout the year!

Speak kind words.
Read the Christmas story with a family member or friend.
Express gratitude by writing a thank-you letter.
Write your own gift here.
A Gift of Love

1.  Show a picture of the Last Supper. Before Jesus’ Crucifixion, He gave His Apostles the sacrament so they would have a way to always remember Him and so they could have His Spirit with them. Read together Luke 22:19. Show a picture of Christ visiting the Nephites. Following His Resurrection, Jesus taught the Nephites to partake of the sacrament. Read together 3 Ne. 18:6–7, 11. Jesus Christ taught the disciples that when they partook of the sacrament, they were renewing their baptismal covenants to always remember Him, to take His name upon them, and to keep His commandments. Show pictures of blessing and passing the sacrament today. We can participate in the same ordinance that Jesus taught. The sacrament prayers tell us that if we remember Jesus Christ and keep His commandments, we will always have His Spirit with us. Read the sacrament prayers in Moro. 4:3 and Moro. 5:2. Remind the children that without the Atonement, which we remember as we take the sacrament, we would not celebrate Christmas. Sing a song or hymn.

2.  Post on the board the pictures suggested in the idea above, and discuss each one. Above the pictures write “Sunday.” Discuss ways the children can remember Jesus. On Sunday we can think of Him at church, during the sacrament, and as we sing Primary songs. Divide the children into six groups, and give each group a day of the week (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, or Saturday). Invite them to write or draw ways they can remember the Savior throughout the week (for example, forgiving others, choosing the right, keeping the commandments, being kind, being grateful). Give each group a chance to share. Then say “I will remember Jesus by _______ .” Toss a beanbag to one child. Have the child complete the phrase and toss the beanbag to another child. Repeat. Remind the children that we can remember the Savior throughout the week.

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed out from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on the world map.
