Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Preface

"And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church," Alma said, "have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14.) These questions, though posed in 83 B.C. to the people of Zarahemla in ancient America, have everlasting relevance to men and women of all ages in all places. Religion deals with things of eternal import, with things of the heart, with the change each of us must undergo to become more godlike and thus more serviceable in the Lord's kingdom.

Because he is a living God, our Heavenly Father is forevermore involved in this matter of change. In the beginning he spoke, chaotic matter responded, and the heavens and the earth were formed. The placement of Adam and Eve and all forms of life on earth thereby changed the nature of existence on this planet. Because of the fall of our first parents and because men and women are often enticed to wander from the strait and narrow path, the Father sent his Only Begotten Son to further alter the course of events on earth—to reverse what would otherwise continue as a movement toward dissolution. The Savior came into the world to change things, both cosmically and individually.

This is a book about change. Betterment. Improvement. More directly, it is a book about the transformation of the human soul by and through the redeeming mercy and atoning power of Jesus Christ. It is a study of the miracle we know as spiritual rebirth, the manner in which we are made alive in Christ. Underlying all that is said herein are two propositions: first, that we too often tend to live beneath our spiritual privileges and to settle for twilight when sunlight is readily available; and second, that our God is ever ready to extend his remarkable blessings to us in a variety of ways and thereby seeks to bring about a "mighty change" in us through several channels. In short, he who is omniscient and omnipotent is hardly limited to one avenue or course of action in our lives; spiritual change or conversion may take many forms. I am persuaded that one day, when we are able to review "the video" of our own life and times, all of us will marvel at the manner in which the omniloving One orchestrated the events and worked his wonders in our lives in truly mysterious ways.

In the preparation of this work I am indebted to many persons. Lori Soza has, as always, been extremely helpful in reviewing the manuscript, making suggestions for improvement, and readying it for publication. Sheri Dew and Ron Millett at Deseret Book have encouraged the project. Suzanne Brady struck that elusive editorial balance between improving upon what was written and yet allowing the published work to reflect accurately and appropriately the views and feelings and style of the writer. As she has done in several earlier projects, Suzanne has simply made this a better book. Though teachers, students, faculty colleagues, and members of the Church throughout the country have done much to challenge me to reach for deeper understanding and then articulate more clearly what I feel on these matters; though so many people have done so much to assist me in this endeavor; and though I have earnestly sought to be in harmony with the standard works and the teachings of latter-day apostles and prophets, I alone am responsible for the conclusions drawn from the evidence cited. This work is a private endeavor and thus not an official publication of either The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or Brigham Young University.
