Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Prologue

Not long after I completed my master's degree, I went to work as a counselor for a social services agency. One day a young woman called to ask if she could meet with me. When we sat across from each other a few days later, she indicated that her bishop had asked that she receive professional counseling.

"What's the problem?" I asked.

"I don't seem to be able to say no," she responded.

I was perplexed. "To whom?"

She bowed her head and answered quietly, "To men." She then related one of the most pathetic yet horrifying stories I have ever heard. I learned that she was eighteen years old, that she was a Latter-day Saint who had been reared in the Church, that she had first been immoral as a fourteen-year-old, and that since then she had been involved with more men than she could remember, some whose names she did not even know.

"How do you feel now?" I inquired.

"Fine, thank you," she answered.

"No, I mean, how do you feel about what you have done, about your sins?" "Oh, yes," she said. "Well, I think I felt bad the first several times it happened, but I haven't really felt anything for three or four years."

"Is your bishop working with you on repentance?" I asked.

She stated that he was trying to do so but wanted some help from me. (I later phoned the bishop, who had been dumbfounded over her lack of contrition and thought perhaps her sins might also betray some serious psychological problems.)

I wasn't quite sure what to do, but I did know that she could not make much progress until she felt the seriousness of her actions, so I said, "Your assignment for next week is to pray, to pray really hard—in fact, to pray harder than you have ever prayed before."

She asked, "What do I pray for?"

"Well, you certainly need to pray for forgiveness, but first of all I would recommend that you pray to see things as they really are."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean you need to pray to feel what you ought to feel."

"You mean I should pray to feel bad? Brother Millet, no one prays to feel bad."

"Well," I said, "that's what you need to do—pray to feel absolutely yucky!"

She shook her head in disbelief but agreed to do so.

A week later she returned. I asked, "How do you feel? Do you feel any sorrow or guilt? Are we making any progress? Did you do what I asked you to do?"

She assured me that she had completed her assigned tasks but nothing had happened. This same scenario was repeated for six more weeks. On six separate occasions I learned that she had been praying, attending church, and visiting with her bishop, but nothing had changed in her heart. By the seventh week I was at a loss about what to do. She entered the room in a rather playful mood.

"What are we going to do today?" she asked.

I paused for about half a minute and then said, "I think we're going to read scriptures today."

She said, "Oh, that sounds like fun."

I picked up my triple combination and with a prayer in my heart let it fall open, hoping that perhaps the Lord might direct us that way.

My scriptures opened to Alma 36, and I began reading about the conversion of Alma the Younger. A few minutes into the reading, I sensed that something was happening in the room. After I read the words "the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror" (v. 14), the young woman fell out of her chair onto the floor and began to cry hysterically. She kept saying in a pained voice, "I didn't know! I didn't know! I didn't know!"

I panicked. What do I do? Do I run for help? Have I really messed her up now? Is she worse off than when she first came in to see me? Frozen in my chair, I did nothing but wait.

After about ten minutes, the young woman picked herself up, sat upright in the chair, and looked at me with a totally different countenance. It was very clear that a different person sat before me.

"How do you feel?" I asked.

"I feel awful," she said.

I remember looking at her, smiling, and saying, "I'm so happy for you."

She began from that day to make progress. Feeling had returned. Remorse and pain of conscience had returned. In a way, her soul had returned. She was a real human being again. Appropriate disciplinary measures were taken by her bishop, repentance went forward, and within a year she was a fully functioning and faithful member of the Church. This young woman had undergone a change, a mighty change.

Although hers may have seemed an unusual case and her change was unusually dramatic, she, like each of us who sins, needed to feel the pains of hell before she could once again feel the powers of heaven. Her rise to new life in Christ was preceded by her descent into reality and a sobering confrontation with herself and her sins. She could have been placed on a behavior modification program or subjected to a system of punishment in which she received an electrical shock whenever she entertained immoral thoughts. But what this young woman needed was a change of heart, a change that only God could bring to pass.

This book is about that change of heart—about the regeneration of our nature and our character, about spiritual rebirth, about becoming new creatures in Christ, about becoming sons and daughters of the Lord. This new birth is made possible for us through the love and mercy of Jesus Christ. In the words of President Heber C. Kimball, it is "an improvement, or an advancement in the things of God. By some it is said to be the change and renovation of the soul by the Spirit and grace of God. Then, again, it is called the new birth" (in Journal of Discourses, 10:77).

There came to Jesus by night a man named Nicodemus, a "ruler of the Jews," presumably a member of the Sanhedrin, a man who was "a master in Israel," meaning a master teacher or an acknowledged scholar among the Jews. He and others had been impressed with the miracles of Jesus. He said: "Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him." Jesus then did two things. First, he pointed out to Nicodemus that more was required of him than a verbal recognition of Jesus as a miracle worker. And second, he anticipated the unasked question that must have lurked in the shadows of Nicodemus' mind: "What must I do to inherit eternal life?" Jesus answered: "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God" (John 3:1-3).

This was no new idea, no novel concept revealed for the first time, for the doctrine of rebirth was as old as the world. God had spoken to Adam and Eve: "I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying: That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory" (Moses 6:58-59; emphasis added).

Jeremiah had spoken of a time when the Lord would again propose a covenant to his covenant people, when he would "put [his] law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts," when Jehovah would truly be their God and Israel would be his people (Jeremiah 31:33). Likewise, the Lord had spoken through Ezekiel: "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh" (Ezekiel 36:25-26).

Even in the book of Jubilees, an apocryphal work, the concept of a new birth was to be found: "But after this they will return to me in all uprighteousness and with all of their heart and soul. And I shall cut off the foreskin of their heart and the foreskin of the heart of their descendants. And I shall create for them a holy spirit, and I shall purify them so that they will not turn away from following me from that day and forever. And their souls will cleave to me and to all my commandments. And they will do my commandments. And I shall be a father to them, and they will be sons to me" (Jubilees 1:23-25).

Nicodemus either did not understand what Jesus was teaching, or he sought to prolong an otherwise interesting discussion, for he asked: "How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born?" (John 3:4). According to President Marion G. Romney, Nicodemus "did not know who Jesus was. All he could see in the Son of God was a great teacher. This was all he could be expected to see, however, because he based his knowledge of who Jesus was upon what he had seen and heard of the Master's miracles. . . .

"Although Nicodemus was wise in the things of the world, he could not understand this simple statement of truth" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1981, 18-19).

Jesus responded to Nicodemus' questions: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5).

The Christian world is largely divided over this matter of the new birth. A large segment of Christianity today believes that being born again consists of having a personal spiritual experience with Jesus. Another large segment of Christianity believes that being born again consists of receiving the sacraments (ordinances) of the church.

And what do the Latter-day Saints believe? Where do we stand on this vital issue? Is it enough to receive the revelation that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to earth through a modern prophet? Or is it sufficient to receive the proper ordinances? The Prophet Joseph Smith stated simply but powerfully that "being born again, comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 162).

The choice seer explained on another occasion that it is one thing to see the kingdom of God and another to enter into that kingdom. A person must have "a change of heart" to see the kingdom; that is, he or she must be awakened spiritually to recognize the truth, recognize that the Church of Jesus Christ is the custodian of the truth and of the required ordinances, and recognize that the fulness of salvation is to be had through acceptance of those principles and ordinances. Further, the Prophet taught, a person must "subscribe the articles of adoption"—the first principles and ordinances of the gospel—to enter into the kingdom (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 328).

Testimony is not enough. True conversion includes acting upon the revealed witness and submitting to those divine statutes that make it possible for us to be born again and thereby adopted into the family of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Daniel Tyler heard the Prophet Joseph Smith explain that the birth spoken of in John 3:3 "was not the gift of the Holy Ghost, which was promised after baptism, but was a portion of the spirit, which attended the preaching of the gospel by the elders of the Church. The people wondered why they had not previously understood the plain declarations of scripture, as explained by the elders, as they had read them hundreds of times. When they read the Bible [now] it was a new book to them. This was being born again, to see the Kingdom of God. They were not in it, but could see it from the outside, which they could not do until the Spirit of the Lord took the vail from before their eyes. It was a change of heart but not of state; they were converted, but were yet in their sins. Although Cornelius [Acts 10] had seen an holy angel, and on the preaching of Peter the Holy Ghost was poured out upon him and his household, they were only born again to see the Kingdom of God. Had they not been baptized afterwards they would not have been saved" ("Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27 [1 February 1892]: 93-94).

Although the new birth is made possible by the atoning sacrifice of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the third member of the Godhead, the Holy Ghost, is vital in bringing about that change. He is a revelator, a comforter, a teacher, a sanctifier, a sealer. Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote that the Spirit "quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings, and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form, and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation, and social feeling. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being" (Key to the Science of Theology, 61).

The spiritual transformation of the individual that we know as the new birth is a movement from darkness to light, from death to life. "It is the spirit that quickeneth," the Savior taught; "the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life" (John 6:63). Truly, "the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6). It is that life, that new life in Christ, about which we will now speak.
