Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 1

Good News

A few years ago I sat in the celestial room of the Provo Temple, basking in the light of that holy place and rejoicing in the goodness of God. As the years have passed, I have been drawn to the temple to such an extent that I find myself looking for more and more opportunities to attend. The temple has become, in a sense, my second home, a place where I resort for peace, a place where I am able to bracket out of a busy life things—things that are of lesser worth when compared to such matters as covenants, ordinances, families, and eternal life.

On this particular occasion, I was thinking about my wife and children and was praying that the Lord would sanctify my marriage and unite my family. Without warning, there entered onto the stage of my mind one of the most hideous and awful thoughts I had ever had, one that caused me to feel extremely uncomfortable, especially given where I was at the time. Shuddering, I quickly chased the thought away and spent the next fifteen minutes wondering why such a thing should happen. Why there? Why then? Was I so unclean, so impure that I could bring this kind of evil influence into one of the holiest places on earth? What was wrong with me?

I have often reflected on that experience. Over the years I have earnestly tried to keep my thoughts clean, to ponder on goodness, to avoid places or conversations or images or forms of media that lead to impurity. I am not a holy man, but I long with all my heart to become holy. I am not totally pure, but I pray and yearn to become such one day. All of us in the Church want to be better than we are, and so naturally when evil enters our path or crosses our minds, we are ill at ease. We feel guilty, even if we don't harbor the thought or enjoy the temptation. But why do such things happen?

Perhaps one reason why I had such an experience in the temple is simple: I am unclean, impure, given over to the passions and pulls of this world. That option is not terribly comforting to me, but it may be the case with many of us. Of course, some people are consumed with evil thoughts because their lives are immersed in evil deeds, but I doubt that many of us fit in that category of carnal, sensual, and devilish. Yet we all wrestle with the effects of the Fall. Having taken upon us the name of Christ by covenant through baptism and having sought to cultivate the Spirit of the Lord in our lives, we are probably not natural men and women. We may, however, be spiritual men and women seeking to survive in a fallen world. Adam and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit. They fell. Their fall affected all of creation, all of it. And we feel those effects.

Latter-day Saints view the Fall with an optimism that is uncharacteristic of most of the Christian world. It is an optimism born of the conviction that Adam and Eve went into the Garden of Eden to fall, that the Fall was as much a part of the foreordained plan of the Father as the Atonement. We believe they did precisely what needed to be done, that the Fall "had a twofold direction—downward, yet forward. It brought man into the world and set his feet upon progression's highway" (Orson F. Whitney, in Cowley and Whitney on Doctrine, 287). Because of this, we do not speak of our first parents' actions in Eden as sin: theirs was a transgression. Because of this, we do not believe in a doctrine of human depravity, that men and women are essentially so vile, so morally filthy, that they simply cannot choose to do good. Because of this, we do not believe in an original sin that entails upon the posterity of Adam and Eve, an original sin that requires infant baptism. Rather, through modern revelation we know that by virtue of the atoning sacrifice of our Lord and Savior, God forgave Adam and Eve their transgression in Eden, such that "the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they [the children] are whole from the foundation of the world" (Moses 6:54). In other words, the posterity of Adam and Eve—including all of us who live some six thousand years after the Fall—are neither responsible nor accountable for what Adam and Eve did.

But to say that we are not responsible for their transgression is not to say that we are unaffected by it. We are. As Stephen Robinson has suggested, the Fall affects us physically, spiritually, mentally, emotionally, and morally (Following Christ, 52-59). It affects the way we see the world, how we feel about things in the world, how we judge and discern, and what we want in life. After having declared to Adam that children are not responsible for their parents' actions, God continued: "Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good" (Moses 6:55). Again, we do not believe that men and women are born in sin, as do so many in the Christian world. We believe, as the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to John Wentworth, that "men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression" (Articles of Faith 2). And yet the scripture plainly states that we are "conceived in sin." For one thing, we are conceived into a world of sin. Second, conception becomes the means, the vehicle by which a fallen nature—mortality, what the scriptures call "the flesh"—is transmitted to the posterity of Adam and Eve. Through conception the seeds of sin and death make their way into humanity. Although a child is not sinful when it is born, the seeds of sin and death are present within its body.

Lehi taught that all men and women are lost and fallen and will remain so forevermore, unless and until they rely upon the redeeming power of Jesus Christ (1 Nephi 10:4-6; 2 Nephi 2:21). An angel explained to Benjamin that the natural man—the unregenerate man, the man or woman who has not been cleansed and enlivened by the Holy Ghost—will remain an enemy to God unless he puts off the natural man, puts on Christ, and thereby acquires the attributes of godliness (Mosiah 3:19). Natural men and women are not only working against God but are working against themselves, against their own best good. Alma warned an errant son that natural men are "without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness" (Alma 41:11).

Knowing about the Fall and its effects upon us is critical. Knowing of the forces in the world and within the human heart is vital. How I view the Fall will affect how I view Christ and the Atonement. If I understate or underestimate the Fall, I will not fully appreciate the breadth and depth and reach of our Lord's atonement. I am much less inclined to take the medicine if I do not appreciate the seriousness of the sickness. President Ezra Taft Benson observed that "just as a man does not really desire food until he is hungry, so he does not desire the salvation of Christ until he knows why he needs Christ. No one adequately and properly knows why he needs Christ until he understands and accepts the doctrine of the Fall and its effect upon all mankind" (A Witness and A Warning, 33).

Jesus is far more than a celestial cheerleader; he is my only hope for peace here and eternal life hereafter. Jesus is far more than a spiritual adviser; he is the sinless Son of Man who bids me to become as he is. Jesus is far more than a model of sane living; his is the power by which I may be reclaimed, regenerated, and renewed, changed into a new creature, a new creature alive in Christ.

In short, even good people occasionally have bad thoughts. They are tempted to covet, to lust, to pout, to take offense, to get angry, to react, to retaliate. And yes, they may even be plagued by an inappropriate thought in a place like the temple. They grieve, and they second-guess themselves. They suspect that perhaps they are more carnal than they had supposed. Most of us are simply human. We are mortal. We are in "the flesh," in a telestial world struggling mightily to live a celestial standard. No less a man than Nephi wrestled with his nature: "Notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord," he declared, "in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities. I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me. And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins" (2 Nephi 4:17-19).

Nephi was a pure man, a holy man. He was a devoted disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ, a friend of God. He was a person whose words "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded" (1 Nephi 3:7) have become a powerful motivation for Saints of all ages to choose the right. He was one whose heart was softened by the Lord (1 Nephi 2:16), a man who delighted in the scriptures and in the God of his salvation (2 Nephi 4:15-16). But he was a human being, a good man living in a fallen world. And because he lived in this world, he was subject to the effects of the Fall. He knew his weakness, the utter impossibility of making it alone, and the absolute necessity of divine assistance. His sensitivity to the Spirit made him especially sensitive to any feeling or attitude or action that was in the slightest way amiss, off the mark of perfection.

Then how did Nephi make it? How did he deal productively with feelings of inadequacy? How can we make it? Note Nephi's words: "Nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support; he hath led me through mine afflictions in the wilderness. . . . He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh" (2 Nephi 4:19-21).

Nephi's trust was in the omniscient One, the omniloving One, the One who understands and knows our soul's deepest longings. Nephi knew, as should we, that as long as we are in the flesh we will be taunted by the world. President Brigham Young asked: "Will sin be perfectly destroyed? No, it will not, for it is not so designed in the economy of Heaven." He continued: "Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. Sin has entered into the world, and death by sin. I think we shall more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death" (in Journal of Discourses, 10:173; emphasis added).

The Fall was a cosmic blessing that carries with it challenging consequences. Our bodies are subject to disease, decay, and death. Our minds are often deflected from the right and frequently reason after the manner of the world. Our feelings are too often prey to fallen emotions. And try as we might to do what's right, we are, like Nephi, beset on all sides with spiritual snares. But there is hope—not nebulous wishing for a distant utopia but rather a settled and substantive hope in deliverance from death and sin through One who faced and overcame both. There is hope in Christ. President Young testified: "It requires all the atonement of Christ, the mercy of the Father, the pity of angels and the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ to be with us always, and then to do the very best we possibly can, to get rid of this sin within us, so that we may escape from this world into the celestial kingdom" (in Journal of Discourses, 11:301).

Good news is always so much more appreciated when we know what might have been. Indeed, the Book of Mormon prophets often speak of how bleak and horrid and empty and worthless things would have been if the Lord Jesus had not done what he did in our behalf (2 Nephi 9:8-9; Alma 42:11). The good news is that we are not alone. We need not languish in guilt and frustration. The good news is that we need not be content with the spiritual status quo, satisfied to stay where we are. The good news is the gospel, the glad tidings that a God has come to earth to do what no mortal—not the greatest apostle or the mightiest prophet—could ever do (D&C 76:40-42). The good news is that through the atoning blood of Christ, and by the power of the Holy Ghost, we can be born again, born from above, "born of God, changed from [our] carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters." What a joyous message: We may become "new creatures" in Christ (Mosiah 27:25-26). As President David O. McKay explained: "What the sun in the heavenly blue is to the earth struggling to get free from winter's grip, so the gospel is to sorrowing souls yearning for something higher and better than mankind has yet found" (Gospel Ideals, 3).

That something is a rebirth, a renewal. The Fall brought death, and Christ brought life, not only in the form of resurrection but also in the form of spiritual regeneration. Those who are born again have come alive to God and to godliness, have broken forth from the tomb of spiritual death, from complacency and inertia. They no longer walk "in darkness at noon-day" (D&C 95:6). The dawning of a new day dispels darkness and disbelief. President Ezra Taft Benson spoke of an experience that President David O. McKay had in the 1920s. After falling asleep, President McKay "'beheld in vision something infinitely sublime.' He saw a beautiful city, a great concourse of people dressed in white, and the Savior. 'The city, I understood, was his. It was the City Eternal; and the people following him were to abide there in peace and eternal happiness. But who were they? As if the Savior read my thoughts, he answered by pointing to a semicircle that then appeared above them, and on which were written in gold the words: These Are They Who Have Overcome the World—Who Have Truly Been Born Again! When I awoke, it was breaking day.'" President Benson added: "When we awake and are born of God, a new day will break and Zion will be redeemed" (A Witness and A Warning, 65-66).
