Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 2

Crucified with Christ

Not long ago I sat with a beautiful, bright-eyed, eight-year-old. She had come for an interview before her baptism. She was remarkably well prepared, and her answers to my questions were sharp and perceptive.

I asked: "Now Cindy, why are you going to be baptized?"

She responded, "Well, I want to become a member of the Church. Also, I want to have my sins removed."

We talked for a moment about her misdeeds up to now having been covered by the Atonement. But, as she had indicated, her baptism was indeed for the remission of sins, in this case, sins of the future. We talked for a bit about the fact that she was now accountable for her own sins. I reminded her that whenever she made mistakes in the future and wanted to rectify her actions, a remission of sins was available because of the covenants of baptism and the ordinance of confirmation that would take place in a few days.

"Any other reason you want to be baptized?" I asked.

Her answer startled me with its simplicity. "Yes. I want to be baptized because I love Jesus and I accept his atonement."

I asked for clarification.

She explained, "When I go down into the water and come up out of the water, it will remind me of how Jesus died and was resurrected."

I have interviewed hundreds of children for baptism over the years, and, although the experience is always refreshing and rewarding, never had I experienced such an interview. Somehow, somewhere, this young woman had come to understand and internalize vital doctrinal truths that many adults do not fathom.

Joseph Smith restored an ancient conversation between Jehovah and Abraham, the father of the faithful: "And Abram said, Lord God, how wilt thou give me this land for an everlasting inheritance? And the Lord said, Though thou wast dead, yet am I not able to give it thee? And if thou shalt die, yet thou shalt possess it, for the day cometh, that the Son of Man shall live; but how can he live if he be not dead? he must first be quickened. And it came to pass, that Abram looked forth and saw the days of the Son of Man, and was glad, and his soul found rest, and he believed in the Lord; and the Lord counted it unto him for righteousness" (JST, Genesis 15:9-12).

Here we have a very old prophetic teaching of the death and resurrection of the Savior, a teaching that highlights the absolute necessity for the death of Christ. It is also a remarkable pattern and type for every man and woman who walks the earth, a shadow of what we must do to live the abundant life.

There is a sense in which life and death are defined in terms of each other. In a way, we must die as pertaining to premortality in order to be born into mortality. In mortality, we must die as pertaining to sin and evil in order to be born unto righteousness. And we must die as pertaining to mortality in order to be born unto immortality and eternal life. We must be born. We must die. That is the plan. "Know ye not," the Apostle Paul wrote, "that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?" That is to say, to be baptized into Christ is to participate in and incorporate his atonement by symbolic action. We go down into the watery grave and come forth unto new life, new life in Christ. "Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life" (Romans 6:3-4). Abraham learned that the Messiah would need to die before he could be quickened. So too with us. We must put to death the old person of sin in order to be transformed, to be quickened by the power of God. Then we walk in newness of life.

"For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death," Paul continued, "we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection" (Romans 6:5). Other translations of this passage are enlightening. "If we have been united with him in his death, we will certainly also be united with him in his resurrection" (New International Version; emphasis added). I especially like this one: "For if we have become identified with him in his death, we shall also be identified with him in his resurrection" (Revised English Bible; emphasis added). Truly, in the life to come we will come forth from the grave as Christ, the firstfruits of the grave, has shown us. In addition, those who truly come unto Christ with full purpose of heart in this life, who "offer [their] whole souls as an offering unto him" (Omni 1:26), who sacrifice the natural man on the altar of redemption, are quickened, made alive to the things of the Spirit.

"Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. For he that is dead [to sin; JST], is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him" (Romans 6:6-8; compare Colossians 2:12-14). Or, as found in other translations: "We know that our old humanity has been crucified with Christ, for the destruction of the sinful self, so that we may no longer be slaves to sin" (Revised English Bible). Or: "For we know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body of sin might be rendered powerless, that we should no longer be slaves to sin" (New International Version). In short, the execution of the will of our Lord and Master in our lives requires the execution of our old selves and the birth of a new person.

"The more you obey your conscience," C. S. Lewis wrote, "the more your conscience will demand of you. And your natural self, which is thus being starved and hampered and worried at every turn, will get angrier and angrier. In the end, you will either give up trying to be good, or else become one of those people who, as they say, 'live for others' but always in a discontented, grumbling way. . . .

"The Christian way is different: harder and easier. Christ says 'Give me All. I don't want so much of your time and so much of your money and so much of your work: I want You. I have not come to torment your natural self, but to kill it. No half-measures are any good. I don't want to cut off a branch here and a branch there, I want to have the whole tree down. I don't want to drill the tooth, or crown it, or stop it, but to have it out. Hand over the whole natural self, all the desires which you think innocent as well as the ones you think wicked—the whole outfit. I will give you a new self instead. In fact, I will give you Myself: my own will shall become yours" (Mere Christianity, 167).

I meet so many people who say they want to do good, to do their duty, who want to be active and involved in all the programs of the Church, but who seem not to have decided yet where their treasure is. There is the young man who struggles like crazy to keep his thoughts clean but who has not yet weaned himself from hard-rock music or questionable videos. There is the young woman who wants to feel the Spirit of the Lord in her life but who maintains an immodest wardrobe. And there is the man or woman who is front and center at church each Sabbath day but who makes only feeble effort during the week to commune with the Lord through personal or family devotions. So much of the spiritual burnout that members of the Church may experience—devotion to duty but little satisfaction or peace in the process—comes from trying to do what's right when our hearts are not right, from trying to keep all of the commandments when we have not fully yielded our hearts unto God. It is extremely difficult to do our duty when our disposition is to do otherwise. Frankly, there's nothing tougher than doing what's right when you don't feel like doing right.

The Christian life is not characterized by mindless and heartless acts of service. Though we may not always feel motivated to work at the cannery or to do our visiting teaching, we should, of course, do our duty. It is always better to be obedient than to be slothful or disobedient. I have often heard people say, "Given the way I feel right now, it would be better not to go to church." No, it's probably better to be at church; inevitably we come to feel better about church once we're there. Someone else says, "But I don't enjoy home teaching." A priesthood leader might respond, "Well, that's okay. Go ahead and visit the families anyway. You have been called to serve them. Do your best. And, by the way, pray for the spirit of your calling."

Doing our duty is a noble thing. It's the right thing to do. There is, however, a higher motivation, a motivation born of the Spirit, a motivation felt quite often by those who have sacrificed self on the altar and given themselves fully to Christ. Our Savior does not ask us to operate by sheer willpower and grit. We do have the challenge of denying ourselves of ungodliness—of keeping ourselves from influences that degrade (JST, Matthew 16:26; Moroni 10:32)—but the struggle against sin and the challenge to be anxiously engaged in good causes need not be undertaken by virtue of our own moral and physical strength alone. Jesus Christ stands ready to empower and energize us.

Paul wrote: "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me" (Galatians 2:20). That is, Paul acknowledged that he had died as to the old man of sin. But he was alive spiritually, not of himself, but of and through his Lord and Master. Paul probably did not have to psych himself up for every meeting, push himself to visit every branch of the church, grit his teeth and hold to the iron rod with white knuckles until a given task was completed. His motivation was not of himself alone. It was the Lord Jesus, through his Holy Spirit, who provided life and light and additional motivation for Paul's good works.

Think for a moment. What does it mean to be born of the Spirit? It means to have come alive, to be animated by a power beyond ourselves, to be propelled and directed by divine influences. Few people—even the most saintly ones—walk every second of the day in such light, but much of what they do and say is God-given, God-driven, and God-directed.

To the Philippian Saints, Paul wrote: "Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling" (Philippians 2:12). This is a passage of scripture we quote frequently to reinforce the truth that men and women do indeed have a role to play in their own salvation, that a mere verbal profession of one's faith is not sufficient. It is, however, a passage of scripture that must be read in context. Saints of the Most High are expected to do their duty, to strive with all their might to keep their part of the gospel covenant, to live above the world and its lowly standards, and to fear or reverence the Almighty. Yet those of us who are more than distant acquaintances with holy writ know assuredly that not one of us has the power or the mortal capacity to "work out" our own salvation. We did not create ourselves, and we cannot redeem ourselves. We cannot forgive our own sins, transform our own nature, or raise ourselves from the dead. We cannot create a celestial kingdom, and we cannot exalt ourselves into that glorious abode.

The next verse helps us to understand: "For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure" (Philippians 2:13). It is the power of God—the power of his Holy Spirit—that works within those who have been born of the Spirit, that inspires them to action, that motivates and empowers and directs them in performing their duties. Their engines are not operating solely on their own fuel. Having taught that we are saved by the grace of God and that there is therefore no room for boasting, Paul explained to another congregation of Saints: "For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them" (Ephesians 2:10). The creation or re-creation of the human heart—the new birth—is what Christianity is all about. Those created unto Christ Jesus are created unto good works. Thus our Heavenly Father seeks, through the Atonement, to make us "perfect in every good work to do his will, working in [us] that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ" (Hebrews 13:21).

We can face life's challenges and the buffetings of those who chant and ridicule and proselyte from the great and spacious building with ever so much more courage and perspective when we have been born of the Spirit. When our greatest desire is to live so as to hear the voice of the Lord and receive his approbation, it matters precious little to us what alternate voices value. A person who has nailed his sins and his old self to the cross of Christ is better able to take up that cross and bear the crosses of the world. The trials and vicissitudes of life—problems with health, with financial setbacks, with wandering children or loved ones—will come to every one of us. How we respond to such crosses will depend to a large extent on how we "believe in Christ, and view his death, and suffer his cross and bear the shame of the world" (Jacob 1:8).

We take up our cross as we seek to put down our sins and thereby enter the realm of divine experience. Thus Jesus instructed those who desired discipleship: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments" (JST, Matthew 16:25-26; compare Matthew 10:37-38). Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, endured the cross and despised the shame of it (Hebrews 12:2). That is, he overcame sin and death, submitted to the ignominy of crucifixion, and concerned himself not at all with how the worldly viewed his ordeal. Likewise, the Saints of the Holy One of Israel "have endured the crosses of the world, and despised the shame of it" (2 Nephi 9:18).

This message is as old as the world and as current as today's newscast. "Human nature can be changed, here and now," President David O. McKay taught. "Human nature has been changed in the past. Human nature must be changed on an enormous scale in the future, unless the world is to be drowned in its own blood. And only Christ can change it" (in Benson, A Witness and A Warning, 64). That change is the world's only hope. Unless the people of the world learn to "cross [themselves]" (Alma 39:9)—to put off the urges of the natural man and put on Christ—a world ripened in iniquity will be destroyed by the brightness of the coming of the Lord of Hosts, the same One sent as the Prince of Peace.

Thus we preach the gospel not only to sanctify human hearts but also to spare humankind. President Joseph F. Smith reminded us that "having been born anew, which is the putting away of the old man sin, and putting on of the man Christ Jesus, we have become soldiers of the Cross, having enlisted under the banner of Jehovah for time and for eternity" (Gospel Doctrine, 91).
