Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 3

Healing the Wounded Soul

While serving as a bishop many years ago, I answered the telephone early one morning to hear the voice of a ward member. "I must speak with you right away," she said.

We met within two hours. This person was as kind and loving a woman as I had ever known, and yet over the years I had known that something was not right, something was missing. Yet she was always there, always present at activities and ward outings, always the one who lingered behind to clean up when things had drawn to a close. She was a returned missionary but had married a man not of our faith. Her husband supported her religious life but showed no interest in joining the Church. She paid a full tithe, attended church meetings faithfully, but she did not hold a current temple recommend and could not be persuaded to obtain one.

"I have lived with my lie long enough," she said through tear-filled eyes. "I must finally deal with the pain I feel." We opened our meeting with a prayer, and then I asked her to share her burden. I learned things I would never have guessed. This woman had grown up in the Church, had served an honorable mission, had returned to university life, and had then fallen into sin. She had become involved immorally with an older man and had borne a child out of wedlock. She had lived with a private sin for almost forty years, had done everything in her power to live the life of a Saint, but had never faced the sin head-on through proper confession. It was now as though a dam had burst, as the memories and pains and lies and fear and feelings of inadequacy—forty years worth—came to the surface. "I will do whatever is needed to put away my sins," she said. "If it is felt that I should be excommunicated, I am prepared to face that also. I can bear the burden no longer."

My heart ached for her. My soul yearned to do all in my power to assist her, to lead her to true liberation in Christ. Her repentance went forward rapidly, for her resolve was certain and her desire for full fellowship was intense. A wounded soul was healed, and we were introduced to a new woman, a new woman in Christ. There was a life, a light, a vitality about her Church membership that was contagious and that bespoke divine healing and grace.

The Prince of Peace was sent to "bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound" (Isaiah 61:1). The Lord Jehovah, who is Jesus Christ, is the Great Physician, the One sent of the Father to heal our wounds, to dry our tears, to settle our souls. We live in a fallen world, a world of pain and trauma and tragedy, a world where bad things happen to good people. We live in a world where our goodwill is spurned, our noble desires are questioned, our benevolent deeds are rebutted by the malevolent. Life hurts. A lot. My heart goes out especially to those who know not the Lord, who are unaware of Christ's capacity to lift and lighten and liberate, who feel they must face life's challenges alone. I hurt for the hurting, particularly for those who try so hard to find fulfillment in this world's goods and services, for those who cannot hear or understand the Savior's instruction: "Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full" (D&C 101:36).

When we sin, we wound ourselves. We thereby know the pain associated with alienation, disappointment, and unfulfilled opportunities. Because through sin we withdraw ourselves from the Spirit of the Lord (Mosiah 2:36), we experience a measure of spiritual death—separation from God, from godliness, and from the things of the Spirit: we die as to the things of righteousness (Alma 12:16, 32; 40:26; 42:9; Helaman 14:18). Repentance is a gift of God, a marvelous grace made available through the atonement of Jesus Christ, the only means whereby we are brought back to life and back into the light of God. Repentance allows us to "turn away" from our old ways and to have "a change of mind, i.e., a fresh view about God, about oneself, and about the world. Since we are born into conditions of mortality, repentance comes to mean a turning of the heart and will to God, and a renunciation of sin to which we are naturally inclined. Without this there can be no progress in the things of the soul's salvation" (LDS Bible Dictionary, 760-61).

Forgiveness is indeed a miracle. It is that inexplicable process whereby human souls wounded by sin are made whole through the Balm of Gilead. Because forgiveness, or restoration to spiritual health, is a transition from death to life, a reconciliation with the Lord of life, it represents a rebirth. Indeed, it is a most fundamental and important illustration of rebirth, evidence that we are becoming new creatures in Christ. The movement from sin to peace via forgiveness is a form of conversion. "Conversion," Elder Marion G. Romney declared, "is effected by divine forgiveness which remits sins." Elder Romney also observed: "Getting people's spirits healed through conversion is the only way they can be healed. I know this is an unpopular doctrine and a slow way to solve the problems of men and nations. . . . Nevertheless, I know and solemnly witness that there is no other means by which the sin-sick souls of men can be healed or for a troubled world to find peace" (Look to God and Live, 111, 114).

When our hearts are healed through the miracle of forgiveness, we are able to see and hear and feel and understand from a whole new perspective. Most of the time we do not see things as they really are; we see things as we really are. It is not uncommon, for example, for a man or woman who is steeped in sin to be consumed with doubt, to be troubled about this and bothered by that. As Paul taught, the things of God are known only by the power of the Spirit of God (1 Corinthians 2:11-14). God and the things of God stand revealed or they remain forever unknown. Sinfulness results in spiritual myopia. Healing and conversion result in a believing heart, and when it comes to sacred matters, believing is seeing. Cyprian, a great defender of the Christian faith after the death of the original apostles, declared: "Into my heart, purified of all sin, there entered a light which came from on high and then suddenly, and in a marvelous manner, I saw certainty succeed doubt" (in Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, 109).

Some time ago, while trying to repent of a matter and improve my life, I found myself saying to the Lord in prayer: "Heavenly Father, please help me to see this sin clearly for what it is and feel what I ought to feel. Help me to feel the proper remorse. On the other hand, I have no desire to feel any more guilt than is appropriate. I want to be clean. I want to be at peace again. I want to move on. Please help me." Later, as I reflected on those words, it occurred to me that often our spiritual healing is blocked because we do not sense the seriousness of the offense; sometimes only God can help us see what we ought to see and feel what we ought to feel. On other occasions we do not make progress because we have allowed ourselves to be crippled by guilt and disabled by our mistakes. To Corianton, Alma said, "And now, my son, I desire that ye should let these things trouble you no more, and only let your sins trouble you, with that trouble which shall bring you down unto repentance" (Alma 42:29).

A key to undergoing a true conversion and thus becoming a new creature in Christ is a sincere willingness to change, an unfettered desire to put away sin and put on goodness. A most enlightening episode in scripture on this principle is found in the Book of Mormon. After Aaron, the son of King Mosiah, had taught the father of Lamoni concerning the Creation, the Fall, and the Atonement, the old king asked: "What shall I do that I may have this eternal life of which thou hast spoken? Yea, what shall I do that I may be born of God, having this wicked spirit rooted out of my breast, and receive his Spirit, that I may be filled with joy, that I may not be cast off at the last day? Behold, said he, I will give up all that I possess, yea, I will forsake my kingdom, that I may receive this great joy" (Alma 22:15).

The king's offer to give up all his worldly possessions should not be dismissed lightly. It is always necessary for the disciples of Christ to unyoke themselves from the temporary and the transient before they can become yokefellows with the Master. As Jesus taught, it is impossible for anyone who trusts in their riches to enter into the kingdom of heaven (JST, Matthew 19:26; JST Mark 10:26; JST, Luke 18:27). We cannot lay hold on eternal life until we are willing to disengage ourselves from this world's attachments.

Aaron instructed the king to bow down before God, repent of all his sins, and call on the name of Christ in faith. The king prostrated himself on the ground and delivered one of the most sincere, soul-searching prayers ever recorded: "O God, Aaron hath told me that there is a God; and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make thyself known unto me, and I will give away all my sins to know thee, and that I may be raised from the dead, and be saved at the last day" (Alma 22:16-18). Some things are even harder to give away than telestial toys—namely, our sins. But God is eager to assist us in the process. The God and Father of us all heard the king's pleadings and answered him through forgiveness and rebirth. The king was healed.

I had been on a mission only two days when my senior companion and I began to discuss repentance and forgiveness as a part of our companion study that day. We talked about how to repent and how to know when we are forgiven. My companion—who had been in the field nine months longer than I and whose word I thus received as if it were silver and gold—said this: "Always keep this in mind, Elder Millet: If you can still remember your sins, the Lord has not forgiven you." I asked him to repeat this grand principle, which he did.

"Are you sure?" I asked.

"Yes," he came back, "that's what the scriptures teach."

For several days I was in a deep depression. I could remember my sins with vividness, in living color. My memory was terrific.

In looking back on this event, I recognize that there was really only one thing wrong with my companion's doctrine—it wasn't true! He meant well, of course, but he seemed to have missed an important distinction: the Lord indicates to us that if we truly confess and forsake our sins, he will remember them no more (D&C 58:42-43). To some degree we do forget them, in the sense that they no longer haunt or plague us or that we no longer browbeat ourselves about them. But it would not be accurate to suggest that if we can still remember a misdeed, we are still in sin. If that were true, Alma the Younger would hardly have been as effective as he was in the ministry, for he certainly remembered his sins; he referred to them, along with the story of his conversion, in preaching to his children (Alma 36, 38).

In fact, if there is one question that members of the Church have asked their priesthood leaders over and over, it is this: How do I know when I am forgiven? There are related questions: When may I stop praying about this? When will I be forgiven? How will I know it is time to move on?

Perhaps the finest and clearest explanation of forgiveness in all scripture comes in the middle of King Benjamin's sermon. King Benjamin has given an accounting of his own reign and ministry, has taught his people the importance of serving God through serving one another, has discussed our need for a constant feeling of indebtedness toward Deity, and has delivered to his people the words of an angel concerning the need to put off the natural man and put on Christ through the Atonement (Mosiah 2-3). It must have been a powerful and impressive address, for the Spirit was poured out upon the people in a wondrous manner. They fell to the earth, acknowledged their own carnal state and their own nothingness before God, and cried aloud: "O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God." Now note what follows: "And it came to pass that after they had spoken these words the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ who should come" (Mosiah 4:2-3).

Over the years I have read these verses and considered how the people of Benjamin knew their sins were forgiven. First, the people were filled with joy. Joy is indeed a fruit of the Spirit and an evidence that we are on speaking terms with God. Joy comes to the repentant, the penitent. Joy is a lightness of spirit; in contrast, as President Harold B. Lee taught, "the heaviest burden that one has to bear in this life is the burden of sin" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1973, 177). Second, the people of Benjamin enjoyed peace of conscience. Sin is a product of double-mindedness: whenever we sin we must go against what we know to be right, must act in opposition to what we feel. True repentance and subsequent forgiveness sharpen our conscience and align our attitudes and behavior with our sense of right and wrong. The result is peace of conscience.

There is a third factor, one often overlooked: The Spirit of the Lord came upon them. If it is true that the Spirit cannot dwell in an unclean tabernacle, then what do we conclude when the Spirit has begun to dwell with us again? We conclude we are no longer unclean. The gospel of Jesus Christ is a covenant, a two-way promise between us and God. We promise that we will have faith in Jesus Christ, repent of our sins, be baptized, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and endure faithfully to the end. These are the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. The Lord on his part promises to do for us what we could never, worlds without end, do for ourselves—to forgive our sins, to make us into new creatures, to raise us from the dead to a new life in Christ, to qualify us for entrance into exaltation and eternal life. God's word is certain and sure, and he may be trusted implicitly. He will not fail. But how do we know when we are keeping our part of the covenant? How do we know we are on course? Very simply, the Father sends his Spirit to be with us. The Holy Ghost is the Comforter, God's messenger of peace to the people of his covenant. Because "the Comforter knoweth all things" (D&C 42:17)—including our own worthiness or spiritual standing before heaven—the receipt of the Spirit signals divine acceptance.

Sin on our part is only one way—although a significant way—by which we are wounded in mortality. Very often others' sins against us result in pain and agony of soul. Abuse in its many ugly forms—physical, verbal, sexual—takes a terrible toll on human feelings of worth. Harshness, rudeness, callousness, and insensitivity—these are but a few ways by which Satan wins a battle through man's inhumanity to man. Thus each of us wrestles not only with sin and repentance but also with feelings of inadequacy, feelings of loneliness, bitterness, jealousy, and betrayal. Alma explained that the Redeemer would "go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities" (Alma 7:11-12).

This scripture points us to the Messiah's power to lift us, lighten our burdens, and cradle us midst any care. It highlights the truth that Christ's empathy was made perfect through his participation in pain—our pain as well as his. Though Jehovah knew all things cognitively, there were some things he could only know experientially, some things he would be required to go through personally to be able to assist us, personally, in our passage through the second estate (Alma 7:13). As Bruce C. Hafen has taught, the Atonement is not just for sinners. "Whatever may be the outer limits of the Atonement's reach, the essential point is that it reaches beyond conscious sin." Brother Hafen also observed: "The Savior's victory can compensate not only for our sins but also for our inadequacies; not only for our deliberate mistakes but also for our sins committed in ignorance, our errors of judgment, and our unavoidable imperfections. Our ultimate aspiration is more than being forgiven of sin—we seek to become holy, endowed affirmatively with Christlike attributes, at one with him, like him. Divine grace is the only source that can finally fulfill that aspiration, after all we can do" (Broken Heart, 13, 20).

I have been inspired in working with persons who are seeking to recover from abuse, desertion, or betrayal. The eternal verity has been reaffirmed to me, from witnessing their vexations of the soul, that mortals can do only so much in their feeble efforts to right the wrongs of this life. I have been deeply touched as I have beheld a miracle in process—their growing capacity to forgive. In our first meetings, much bitterness and even hatred has been expressed. As time passed, however, and as the Spirit of the Lord began to work its marvelous wonders in the human heart, I have heard the offended one say such things as, "Well, I don't hate him [or her] any more. I don't want to be his closest friend, but I don't hate him. I can't." Later I hear: "I am still troubled by what happened, but I no longer have bitter feelings toward this person." And then I hear: "I hope things work out for him. I deeply hope he can get his act together and straighten out. I want him to be happy." What a stunning illustration of a rebirth of the soul. Darkness and despair are replaced by light and peace. Doubt is replaced by confidence. Rancor is replaced by tenderness and magnanimity. Such a power, the power to take away the pain, turn away the anger, and put away the past—such a power is not of this earth.

President Gordon B. Hinckley stated: "I would that the healing power of Christ might spread over the earth and be diffused through our society and into our homes, that it might cure men's hearts of the evil and adverse elements of greed and hate and conflict. I believe it could happen. I believe it must happen. If the lamb is to lie down with the lion, then peace must overcome conflict; healing must mend injury.

"Jesus of Nazareth healed the sick among whom he moved. His regenerating power is with us today to be invoked through his holy priesthood. His divine teachings, his incomparable example, his matchless life, his all-encompassing sacrifice will bring healing to broken hearts, reconciliation to those who argue and shout, even peace to warring nations if sought with humility and forgiveness and love.

"As members of the Church of Jesus Christ, ours is a ministry of healing, with a duty to bind the wounds and ease the pain of those who suffer. Upon a world afflicted with greed and contention, upon families distressed by argument and selfishness, upon individuals burdened with sin and troubles and sorrows, I invoke the healing power of Christ, giving my witness of its efficacy and wonder. I testify of him who is the great source of healing" (Faith, the Essence of True Religion, 35).

The cosmic Christ who creates and redeems worlds without number is the same gentle and good Shepherd who goes in search of one wandering lamb. He who holds all things in his power is the same who stills the storms of the human heart by a healing touch. Indeed, Elder Howard W. Hunter observed that "whatever Jesus lays his hands upon lives. If Jesus lays his hands upon a marriage, it lives. If he is allowed to lay his hands on the family, it lives" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1979, 93).

But we must be willing to open ourselves to his tender touch. "Jesus never met a disease he could not cure, a birth defect he could not reverse, a demon he could not exorcise. But he did meet skeptics he could not convince and sinners he could not convert. Forgiveness of sins requires an act of will on the receiver's part, and some who heard Jesus' strongest words about grace and forgiveness turned away unrepentant" (Yancey, Jesus I Never Knew, 174-75).

God has never promised us a life of ease or an existence free from strain and anxiety. We have not been promised that we would be spared bitter potions in this life. We have been assured that we are not alone and that if we trust in and rely on his mighty arm, we will be empowered and comforted in our trials; we will eventually be delivered out of bondage. "And I will also ease the burdens which are put upon your shoulders, that even you cannot feel them upon your backs, even while you are in bondage; and this will I do that ye may stand as witnesses for me hereafter, and that ye may know of a surety that I, the Lord God, do visit my people in their afflictions" (Mosiah 24:14). Truly, "The Lord . . . gathereth together the outcasts of Israel. He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds" (Psalm 147:2-3).
