Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 4

From Darkness to Light

A particular joy of my work at Brigham Young University has been teaching freshman Book of Mormon classes. It is such a delight to meet regularly with these remarkable young people, a generation of destiny from all over the world. It is especially rewarding to watch them change, to see them come alive to the scriptures and the things of the Spirit. One case in particular comes to mind. I remember well a young woman who for a full semester seemed to be a dozen worlds away. She was unkempt, messy, and preoccupied. She was a beautiful person who didn't know she was. She seldom brought a copy of the scriptures with her to class, never took notes, sat on the end of the first row, and glanced up at the clock on the north wall at least fifty times per class period. After looking at the clock, she would shake her head and let out an audible sigh. Here was a case of major boredom.

I suppose what bothered me most was not so much that she found me and the classroom experience particularly uninteresting but that she was absolutely oblivious to the fact that her classmates were a delightfully alive group of young people. Her fellow students always came to class with questions about their reading for the day, followed me back to my office with more questions, and in general seemed to be having a soul-expanding experience. I loved going to class, but I felt heartsick about this particular young woman. I worried about her, knowing that some mom and dad were hoping against hope and praying each morning and night that something would click for their daughter, that the light would come on within her soul, that somebody or something would touch her. I tried to involve her in class by asking questions directly, but she would get a sheepish grin on her face and plead ignorance.

When the semester ended, I fully expected her to find her way into a more exciting classroom for the second half of the Book of Mormon. To my utter surprise, however, she showed up in a class I was teaching. I noticed a few changes in her. She did not seem to look at the clock quite as often, nor did she sigh aloud when she did look. She dressed a little more nicely and occasionally brought a copy of the Book of Mormon to class. She even answered a question or two. The outward signs were reassuring to me, but what touched me the most was the change in her countenance: the darkness in her eyes and the trouble and fear in her very nature began to change. I don't know enough about her to know if there were sins in her life that required confession and repentance, but I do know that she began to be transformed by the power of the Spirit. It showed. And what was most obvious about her was the light within her. By the end of the second semester, I had to restrain myself from simply walking up to her and asking, "What happened to you? You look great!" Her physical beauty was accentuated by the power of goodness within her soul. She had gone from darkness to light.

That journey from darkness to light is what spiritual rebirth is all about. We come forth into a fallen world, a world of darkness. We grapple with the darkness and must decide if we are content to dwell in darkness or to walk toward the light. The Light of the World demands a decision. Either people will press toward him and partake of the light, or they will love and cling to the darkness because of their evil deeds (John 3:19). To come unto Christ is to forsake the darkness and to cleave unto light.

Recently while I was rereading Lehi's dream as it is recorded in 1 Nephi 8, it occurred to me that what he saw in his dream represents the challenge of every man and woman to come out of darkness into the light. Speaking to his sons, Lehi said that he had seen "a dark and dreary wilderness. And it came to pass that I saw a man, and he was dressed in a white robe; and he came and stood before me. And it came to pass that he spake unto me, and bade me follow him. And it came to pass that as I followed him I beheld myself that I was in a dark and dreary waste. And after I had traveled for the space of many hours in darkness, I began to pray unto the Lord that he would have mercy on me, according to the multitude of his tender mercies. And it came to pass after I had prayed unto the Lord I beheld a large and spacious field. And it came to pass that I beheld a tree, whose fruit was desirable to make one happy" (1 Nephi 8:4-10).

It may be helpful to liken Lehi's experience to our own. As we traverse the roads of a darkened world, we receive the beckoning invitation to come out of the darkness unto Christ our Savior. Each of us is born with the Light of Christ, or the Spirit of Jesus Christ, a moral monitor that leads us toward greater light and truth; it helps us to reason, discern, and know right from wrong. If we will hearken to the light we will be led, either here or hereafter, to the covenant gospel and to the greater light of the gift of the Holy Ghost (Moroni 7:16-19; D&C 84:45-48; Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 67-68; McConkie, New Witness, 260). Prayer and searching and pondering on things of substance lead us to Christ, of whom the tree of life is a grand symbol (1 Nephi 11:7, 21-22, 25; Jeremiah 2:13). Partaking of the powers of the Savior cleanses our souls, lifts our burdens, and orients our minds toward eternity. We thereby become a peculiar, or a purchased, people, those called out of darkness into his marvelous light (1 Peter 2:9).

Ammon taught the gospel to King Lamoni with great power and persuasion. He "expounded unto them [Lamoni's household] the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world; and he also made known unto them concerning the coming of Christ, and all the works of the Lord did he make known unto them." The king cried out: "O lord, have mercy; according to thy abundant mercy which thou hast had upon the people of Nephi, have upon me, and my people." Lamoni fell to the earth and "lay as if he were dead for the space of two days and two nights" (Alma 18:39, 41, 43). Ammon realized what was taking place within Lamoni. Though we have no scriptural account of the particulars, we may reason that Ammon and the other sons of Mosiah had undergone a spiritual transformation similar to Alma's (Mosiah 27), and so Ammon would likely understand what was going on within Lamoni's soul. Mormon's account indicates that Ammon "knew that king Lamoni was under the power of God; he knew that the dark veil of unbelief was being cast away from his mind, and the light which did light up his mind, which was the light of the glory of God, which was a marvelous light of his goodness—yea, this light had infused such joy into his soul, the cloud of darkness having been dispelled, and that the light of everlasting life was lit up in his soul" (Alma 19:6).

The Book of Mormon is filled with actual historical instances—experiences of real people in real time—that symbolize universal spiritual truths, that focus on what each of us must do to be spared, sanctified, and saved. Occasionally we must sacrifice our worldly goods, as did Lehi; be bold at difficult times, as was Nephi; encounter anti-Christs, as did Jacob; pray, as did Enos; and be born again, as were Alma and the sons of Mosiah. Their lives serve as patterns for all of us. And so it is with Lamoni. Becoming a new creature in Christ entails a movement from darkness to light. First of all, "the dark veil of unbelief" must be cast away. One of the first things Nephi tells us about himself was that he had great desires to know the mysteries of God—those things that can only be known by the power of the Holy Ghost. "I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father; wherefore, I did not rebel against him like unto my brothers" (1 Nephi 2:16). The visitation of the Spirit leads to a softening of the heart, a malleability, a tenderness, an openness to the ways of the Master. We suppose that Nephi's heart was soft before this experience, but it appears that the closer we get to our Heavenly Father the more open we are to His mind and will. Nephi's believing heart was at the foundation of his spiritual success: it made him what he was.

A believing heart is something for which to be deeply grateful. It seems to be less and less common in today's world. Many in our day are like the generation who lived many years after the time of King Benjamin who refused to believe the righteous traditions of their fathers. "They did not believe what had been said concerning the resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the coming of Christ." Note these poignant words: "And now because of their unbelief they could not understand the word of God; and their hearts were hardened" (Mosiah 26:2-3). Hardened hearts must be softened, and in some cases broken, before spiritual progress can be made. The things that really matter in this life can be understood and appreciated only by the power of the Holy Ghost. That understanding comes about through a rebirth of the soul.

In a gospel sense, believing is seeing. A person being born of the Spirit believes the words of inspired spokesmen (Mosiah 5:2; Alma 18:23; 22:7). Inquiries become more sincere (compare Alma 11:26-39 with 12:7-8). Whereas an unregenerate man is cynical, a reborn man is a believer. Whereas a worldly woman demands physical proof, the spiritual woman enjoys that measure of trust and divine patience that allows the Lord the prerogative to do his own work in his own time. The Lord calls us not to gullibility but to openness. The earnest seeker after truth must willingly suspend disbelief in order to have the truth confirmed in his or her heart. "Search diligently," the Redeemer implored in a modern revelation, "pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another" (D&C 90:24; emphasis added).

A group of people in the Book of Mormon spoke of their internal change in this way: "We, ourselves, also through the infinite goodness of God, and the manifestations of his Spirit, have great views of that which is to come; and were it expedient, we could prophesy of all things" (Mosiah 5:3). Theirs was a view of the truth, of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come (D&C 93:24). Theirs was an elevated perspective, a glimpse of life and the plan of God not filtered through impure eyes or hearts. To be born again is to gain a heightened sensitivity to things that matter. In writing of the person who has been born of the Spirit, Parley P. Pratt explained: "His mind is quickened, his intellectual faculties are aroused to intense activity. He is, as it were, illuminated. He learns more of divine truth in a few days than he could have learned in a lifetime in the best merely human institutions in the world" (Key to the Science of Theology, 59-60).

Because much of the time the Holy Ghost works with members of the Church through their consciences, to be born again is to gain a deeper sensitivity to right and wrong, to enjoy greater manifestations of the gift of discernment, to develop more refined and educated desires. Because being born again consists in being adopted into the royal family of Christ and thus gaining godly attributes and qualities, experiencing the new birth entails feeling a deeper compassion and empathy for those who mourn or suffer or reach out for succor. The quickening in the inner man peels away the film and facade of sin, makes unnecessary the rigors and taxing labors of ostentation and superfluity. Those who are born again see things clearly and sharply and are able to sift out the sordid and the subsidiary. They have less inclination to labor in secondary causes and a consuming but patient passion to occupy themselves with that which brings light and life and love. They treasure the simple pleasures in life and rejoice in the goodness of their God. Joseph Smith taught that "the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 51).

The Holy Ghost makes known the things of God to those who are ready to bear them. He reveals matters that man cannot teach nor man's wisdom convey (1 John 2:27; Moroni 10:5; D&C 43:15-16). President Brigham Young said that the Holy Ghost reveals heaven's treasures to its disciples: "It shows them things past, present, and to come. It opens the vision of the mind, unlocks the treasures of wisdom, and they begin to understand the things of God. . . . They comprehend themselves and the great object of their existence" (in Journal of Discourses, 1:241). The Spirit brings certitude and conviction and banishes the darkness of doubt. It is not that those who are born of the Spirit never have questions or doubts. Rather, they know for a certainty, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that the fundamental verities of the faith are true—that God is in his heaven, that the Church and kingdom of God have been restored to earth with all its keys and powers, and that those who have been chosen and anointed to lead the Church are divinely called. Questions and uncertainties are placed on the shelf. They may not immediately disappear, but they do not disturb. As President John Taylor explained, the Holy Ghost "is not something that affects the outward ear alone; it is not something that affects simply his judgment, but it affects his inner man; it affects the spirit that dwells within him; it is a part of God imparted unto man, if you please, giving him an assurance that God lives" (in Journal of Discourses, 11:23). Those who have been born of the Spirit are not free from the vicissitudes of this life; rather, because they have gained new vision, they have gained new strength, new resources with which to deal with their challenges.

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have received the gift of the Holy Ghost, the right to the companionship of a member of the Godhead. It is a gift that requires some effort on our part, effort associated with searching and striving and inquiring after the mercies and graces of God. A person may have been confirmed a member of the Church and yet never have enjoyed the supernal powers of the Spirit. Such was the case with Lorenzo Snow. He writes: "Some two or three weeks after I was baptized, one day while engaged in my studies, I began to reflect upon the fact that I had not obtained a knowledge of the truth of the work—that I had not realized the fulfillment of the promise that 'he that doeth my will shall know of the doctrine,' and I began to feel very uneasy. I laid aside my books, left the house, and wandered around through the fields under the oppressive influence of a gloomy, disconsolate spirit, while an indescribable cloud of darkness seemed to envelop me. I had been accustomed, at the close of the day, to retire for secret prayer to a grove a short distance from my lodgings, but at this time I felt no inclination to do so. The spirit of prayer had departed and the heavens seemed like brass over my head. At length, realizing that the time had come for secret prayer, I concluded I would not forego my evening service, and, as a matter of formality, knelt as I was in the habit of doing, and in my accustomed retired place, but not feeling as I was wont to feel.

"I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray, than I heard a sound, just above my head, like the rustling of silken robes, and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and O, the joy and happiness I felt! No language can describe the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of mental and spiritual darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that time imparted to my understanding. I then received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and of the restoration of the holy priesthood, and the fulness of the Gospel. It was a complete baptism—a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or element, the Holy Ghost; and even more real and physical in its effects upon every part of my system than the immersion by water; dispelling forever, so long as reason and memory last, all possibility of doubt or fear in relation to the fact handed down to us historically, that the 'Babe of Bethlehem' is truly the Son of God; also the fact that he is now being revealed to the children of men and communicating knowledge, the same as in the Apostolic times. I was perfectly satisfied, as well I might be, for my expectations were more than realized, I think I may say in an infinite degree.

"I cannot tell how long I remained in the full flow of the blissful enjoyment and divine enlightenment, but it was several minutes before the celestial element which filled and surrounded me began gradually to withdraw. On arising from my kneeling posture, with my heart swelling with gratitude to God, beyond the power of expression, I felt—I knew—that he had conferred upon me what only an omnipotent being can confer—that which is of greater value than all the wealth and honors worlds can bestow. That night, as I retired to rest, the same wonderful manifestations were repeated, and continued to be for several successive nights. The sweet remembrance of those glorious experiences, from that time to the present, bring them fresh before me, imparting an inspiring influence which pervades my whole being, and I trust will to the close of my earthly existence" (Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, 7-9).

Not everyone who receives the gift of the Holy Ghost and who further receives a personal witness of Christ and of the restored gospel will experience what Lorenzo Snow did. His description of rebirth is truly a great one in our Latter-day Saint literature. But all of us who strive to keep the commandments and who seek to cultivate the gift and the gifts of the Spirit can come to know just as he knew, can have the cloud of darkness dispelled just as he did, and can come thereby to walk in the light of the Lord just as he did. Nephi and Lehi, sons of Helaman, "had power and authority given unto them that they might speak, and they also had what they should speak given unto them" (Helaman 5:18). Thus when they taught the gospel to the Lamanites, thousands were touched by the power of the word and brought to baptism. In the midst of an unspeakably beautiful occasion, a time when the Holy Ghost was poured out in a most unusual manner upon the listeners and the voice of God was heard, a sincere seeker after truth asked, "What shall we do, that this cloud of darkness may be removed from overshadowing us?" A man named Aminadab—a Nephite by birth who had dissented from the faith—answered: "You must repent, and cry unto the voice, even until ye shall have faith in Christ, who was taught unto you by Alma, and Amulek, and Zeezrom; and when ye shall do this, the cloud of darkness shall be removed from overshadowing you" (Helaman 5:40-41).

Mormon's account continues—another account that stands both as history and as type—"And it came to pass that they all did begin to cry unto the voice of him who had shaken the earth; yea, they did cry even until the cloud of darkness was dispersed. And it came to pass that when they cast their eyes about, and saw that the cloud of darkness was dispersed from overshadowing them, behold, they saw that they were encircled about, yea every soul, by a pillar of fire. . . . and they were filled with that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory. And behold, the Holy Spirit of God did come down from heaven, and did enter into their hearts, and they were filled as if with fire, and they could speak forth marvelous words. And it came to pass that there came a voice unto them, yea, a pleasant voice, as if it were a whisper, saying: Peace, peace be unto you, because of your faith in my Well Beloved, who was from the foundation of the world" (Helaman 5:42-47).

The Holy Ghost is a revelator, a comforter, a sanctifier, and the agent of the new birth. It is by virtue of the blood Christ shed—in Gethsemane and on Calvary—through the medium of the Holy Ghost that we are born again and baptized by fire, just as were the Lamanites Mormon speaks of in Helaman 5.

Those who follow the Light of the World no longer walk in darkness; they become possessors of the light of life (John 8:12; D&C 11:28). A person who is in the process of becoming a new creature alive in Christ is in the process of gaining more and more light (D&C 50:24) and thereby learning and acquiring a new set of priorities. Such a one, though growing daily into a dynamic individual, is at the same time becoming more and more eager to know and abide by the will of God. There is less of "My will be done" and more of "Thy will be done." There is less of "But I want to . . ." and more of "What wilt thou have me to do?" In short, as we grow into a spiritual union with Christ, we begin to develop an eye single to the glory of God, a heart bent on building up the kingdom of God and establishing his righteousness (JST, Matthew 6:38). "And if your eye be single to my glory," the Savior declared in the Doctrine and Covenants, "your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." Such consecration of the heart will eventuate in transcendent blessings: "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:67-68).
