Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 5

A Great Exchange, a Mighty Change

While pondering on the power of Christ to change our souls, I reflected on an episode in the New Testament that seems to be an historical moment with timeless application. In the Gospels a story is told of a woman who had been hemorrhaging for twelve years, a woman who had spent her life's resources on physicians to no avail. She approached Jesus, "touched the border of his garment," and was immediately healed. Jesus turned about and asked, "Who touched me?" The apostles thought the query a bit strange, inasmuch as a multitude had thronged the Lord. "And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me." The woman came forward, fell trembling at his feet, and acknowledged that she was the one who had touched the Master. "Daughter," he said, "be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace" (Luke 8:44-46, 48). Our own contact with Christ, like the woman's, results in healing. From the Great Physician comes virtue or power or, as the Prophet Joseph Smith observed, "the spirit of life" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 281). The Life of the World infuses life into lifeless or wounded creatures.

Our spiritual birth comes through that infusion of life into us, not a self-generated life but a life that comes from Christ. The Apostle Paul wrote to the Corinthian Saints: "Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new" (2 Corinthians 5:17). It is fairly easy to understand what it means for Christ to be in us; his Spirit dwells in us as we are true to the gospel covenant. But what does it mean for us to be in Christ? The words "in Christ" occur in one form or another more than 160 times in Paul's epistles. A person is in Christ when he or she is united with Christ, in covenant, in harmony, in the gospel harness. Truly, as Paul notes, if any person is in Christ, he or she is a new creature of the Holy Ghost. To have put on Christ, to have come unto him, is to have put off the natural man and to have opened oneself to a new creation. In a modern revelation the Lord declared: "And the Father and I are one. I am in the Father and the Father in me; and inasmuch as ye have received me, ye are in me and I in you" (D&C 50:43).

To be in Christ is to have taken on a new identity. That is, in fact, what is meant by the word baptism. The word bapto or baptizo did indeed have to do with immersion, but, more specifically, with what something is like after it has been immersed. Thus if we immerse a white cloth in scarlet dye, we could say that the cloth has been baptized—it has been immersed and come forth with a new identity. It is like new cloth. This truth reminds me of a situation I encountered a few years ago when my eldest son was serving as a zone leader in his mission. He wrote in a letter home that it was not uncommon at zone conferences for the elders to get together, start talking casually, and eventually end up discussing life before their missions. Inevitably one or more of them would speak of mistakes made in those days. This made my son uncomfortable, and he asked me what to do.

I prayerfully thought about his situation for a week or so and then wrote back. I suggested he use an analogy I had discovered some years before. Suppose you and I were walking in the forest on a spring morning. The sun is shining, the flowers are glorious, and the temperature is just right. Suddenly we notice a beautiful flying creature with wings of many colors. It flits here and there. It lands on a leaf for a few seconds and then flies away. It would never occur to us to say, "Wow! did you see that good-looking, converted worm?" It had been a worm, and it had been converted, hadn't it? Yes, it may have once been a ground-bound, crawling creature, but it now flies above the ground and has a totally different perspective of life on earth. Through the process of metamorphosis, a worm became a butterfly. We no longer refer to what it once was; we refer to what it has become.

That is good counsel for us in regard to people—both ourselves and others. We do not dwell on what or who we once were, for we have been changed. We are a new creature, a new creature alive in Christ. "This one thing I do," Paul wrote to another group of Saints, "forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus" (Philippians 3:13-14).

"To dig a straight furrow," President Howard W. Hunter observed, "the plowman needs to keep his eyes on a fixed point ahead of him. That keeps him on a true course. If, however, he happens to look back to see where he has been, his chances of straying are increased. The results are crooked and irregular furrows. We invite those who are new members"—and the counsel is pretty good for the rest of us as well—"to fix their attention on their new goal and never look back on their earlier problems or transgressions except as a reminder of their growth and their worth and their blessings from God. If our energies are focused not behind us but ahead of us—on eternal life and the joy of salvation—we assuredly will obtain it" (That We Might Have Joy, 150-51).

The process of spiritual renewal and growth is accomplished by an infusion of divine power. Paul therefore explained that God the Father "hath made him [Christ the Son] to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him" (2 Corinthians 5:21; compare Philippians 3:8-9). That is what might be called "the great exchange." Jesus Christ came to earth on a search-and-rescue mission in search of lost sheep. He came to earth to find us and then to change us—to change our hearts, our desires, our very lives. But there is more. He came to exchange with us. In Gethsemane and on the cross our Lord took upon him our sins. He offers to convey to us—to put on our spiritual account, as a part of our eternal assets—his righteousness. To be justified by Christ is not simply to be forgiven of our sins, as critical and important as that is; it is to receive from a gracious Savior his goodness, his righteousness, his enabling power, his perfection. Thus we become "perfect in Christ" (Moroni 10:32; emphasis added). As the vision of the glories sets forth, those who qualify for celestial glory are those designated as just men and women "made perfect" through Christ's perfect atonement (D&C 76:69).

I suggest that in our fallen state we are like buckets filled with filthy water. Our Savior comes along, sees our plight, and if we choose to ask him to help us, he dumps out the water. He then turns to the laborious task of cleansing the bucket. He grinds, and he scrubs, and he scours. It hurts abominably. Nevertheless, when the process of cleansing is complete, the bucket is something to behold—it shines. But the cleanup is not yet complete, for the bucket does not fulfill its rightful role until we have invited the Savior to fill it, this time with living water.

Closely allied with the glorious message of a "great exchange" in Paul's writings is the doctrinal notion that we should seek to have Christ "formed in [us]" (Galatians 4:19). We emphasize in our teaching—and appropriately so—that Jesus Christ came to earth to die for us. It is perhaps just as important for us to know that he desires to live in us. He must not and cannot be merely an historical figure; he must always and forever be a current, living reality. In speaking at a Brigham Young University devotional at Christmastime, Elder Howard W. Hunter observed: "It is possible for Christ to be born in men's lives, and when such an experience actually happens, a man is 'in Christ'—Christ is 'formed' in him. This presupposes that we take Christ into our hearts and make him the living contemporary of our lives. He is not just a general truth or a fact of history, but the Savior of men everywhere and at all times. When we strive to be Christlike, he is 'formed' in us; if we open the door, he will enter; if we seek his counsel, he will counsel us. For Christ to be 'formed' in us, we must have a belief in him and in his atonement. Such a belief in Christ, and the keeping of his commandments, are not restraints upon us. By these, men are set free. This Prince of Peace waits to give peace of mind which may make each of us a channel of that peace." Furthermore, "The real Christmas comes to him who has taken Christ into his life as a moving, dynamic, vitalizing force. The real spirit of Christmas lies in the life and mission of the Master" ("Real Christmas," in Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, 1972, 68).

This great exchange manifests itself in what we know as the "mighty change" (Mosiah 5:2). It is mighty in the sense that it is God-inspired, God-directed, and God-empowered. This change is neither superficial nor cosmetic. It does not result in skin-deep holiness. It is not just the result of self-control or will-power. It is a change born of the Spirit and empowered by him who delights in remaking the human heart. For one thing, a new creature who is alive in Christ becomes less and less attracted to the fleeting, the transient, the worldly. He or she comes to sense the emptiness and the vanity of the world and to recognize that peace and happiness are to be found in more substantive things. In a word, the values of a person who is a new creature in Christ undergoes a transformation. It is a mighty change.

Elder Orson Pratt wrote: "Water baptism is only a preparatory cleansing of the believing penitent; it is only a condition of a cleansing from sin; whereas, the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost cleanses more thoroughly, by renewing the inner man, and by purifying the affections, desires, and thoughts which have long been habituated in the impure ways of sin. Without the aid of the Holy Ghost, a person . . . would have but very little power to change his mind, at once, from its habituated course, and to walk in newness of life. Though his sins may have been cleansed away, yet so great is the force of habit, that he would, without being renewed by the Holy Ghost, be easily overcome, and contaminated again with sin. Hence, it is infinitely important that the affections and desires should be, in a measure, changed and renewed, so as to cause him to hate that which he before loved, and to love that which he before hated. To thus renew the mind of man is the work of the Holy Ghost" (Orson Pratt, Writings of an Apostle, 56-57; emphasis added).

After King Benjamin had ended his remarkable and inspiring sermon, "he sent among [his people], desiring to know of his people if they believed the words which he had spoken unto them. And they all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually" (Mosiah 5:1-2). Let us be clear on this matter. It is not that the people of Benjamin never sinned again; we have no indication that such is the case, and a moment's reflection would suggest that such is highly improbable. But they didn't want to sin! That is a very important point, a principle deserving of some discussion.

Let us recall that two births are spoken of in scripture. The natural birth comes first. It gives rise to the natural man, the unregenerate man, the man badly in need of divine assistance. The natural man has his own set of urges, whims, desires, passions, and appetites. The second birth is the spiritual birth. It gives rise to the spiritual man, the regenerated man, the new creature in Christ, who seeks diligently to cultivate the sacred influence of the Holy Ghost in his life. This person is in process of having heart, might, mind, and strength transformed by the Spirit. I repeat: such people are not completely free from sin, but they are diligently striving to become such. And, most important, they are losing their desire for sin. In speaking of the ancients who entered into the rest of God through the holy order of God, Alma stated: "Therefore they were called after this holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb. Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there were many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God" (Alma 13:11-12). Likewise, the Lamanites who were converted through the teaching of Ammon "did all declare unto the people the self-same thing—that their hearts had been changed; that they had no more desire to do evil" (Alma 19:33). As Elder Orson Pratt suggested, we come in time to hate crudeness and harshness and depravity; we long for goodness and integrity and charity.

"Whosoever is born of God," John the Beloved declared, "doth not commit sin; for his [Christ's] seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God" (1 John 3:9). This passage is troublesome, perhaps because I have had the privilege of associating with wonderful people in my life, holy people, men and women of faith who have given their all to God and his work; but they are not perfect, at least they are not perfect in the sense that we generally think about the term—they are not free from sin. To some degree I too have been born of the Spirit, have tasted the sweet fruits of rebirth, have had my mind and heart expanded by the powers of the Holy Ghost, have had my witness of this work deepened and solidified. But I painfully and honestly admit that I am not free from sin. There is nothing I desire more than to be free from sin, nothing I long for more than to be holy before God. But I am not there yet.

Thank heaven for the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. Under inspiration, the Prophet altered many verses in the King James Version—more than thirty-four hundred of them—as a part of the restoration of plain and precious truths in these last days (1 Nephi 13:20-29, 35-41). The Prophet altered the passage in 1 John 3:9 to read as follows: "Whosoever is born of God doth not continue in sin; for the Spirit of God remaineth in him; and he cannot continue in sin, because he is born of God, having received that holy Spirit of promise" (JST, 1 John 3:9; emphasis added). Or, stated another way, "whosoever is born continueth not in sin; but he that is begotten of God and keepeth himself, that wicked one overcometh him not" (JST, 1 John 5:18).

A person who has walked in the light comes to treasure the light. Should he or she step into the darkness momentarily, he or she is repulsed by the darkness and yearns to return to the light. "The new birth results in new behavior. Sin and the child of God are incompatible. They may occasionally meet; they cannot live together in harmony" (Stott, Authentic Christianity, 207). That is, those who have been born of the Spirit learn to repent quickly, to confess and forsake their misdeeds, to move on. Obviously, serious sins require more time, but many of our transgressions may be faced head-on and dispensed with in no time at all. Thus the Prophet Joseph Smith prayed in the Kirtland Temple: "And when thy people transgress, any of them, they may speedily repent and return unto thee, and find favor in thy sight, and be restored to the blessings which thou hast ordained to be poured out upon those who shall reverence thee in thy house" (D&C 109:21).

The birth of the Spirit is for most of us a process. And yet it is something that, though gradual, is essential for every son and daughter of God. Those who choose Christ choose to be changed, a change that awakens them to peace and joy and the abundant life here as it prepares them for eternal reward hereafter. The gospel of Jesus Christ is not just a program bent on making bad men good and good men better, as important as that is; the Rotary Club could do that. Rather, it is a system that seeks to renovate society and transform the whole of humankind. The gospel is the "power of God unto salvation" (Romans 1:16), a power that can make of earth a heaven and of man a god.
