Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 6

Partakers of the Divine Nature

I pay close attention to doctrinal principles or precepts that are mentioned several times in scripture or in more than one of the standard works. For example, the gifts of the Spirit are discussed at length by the Apostle Paul (1 Corinthians 12-14), Moroni (Moroni 10), and the Lord in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith (D&C 46). They must be important. In fact, the gifts of the Spirit are a sign of the true Church, an evidence that God is indeed working through and with a people.

Spiritual gifts are the signs and wonders and miracles that are always found among the Lord's covenant people. Such gifts as testimony, discernment, revelation, prophecy, tongues, teaching, wisdom, knowledge, healing, administration, and many others—these are like parts of the human body, the body of Christ, or the Church (1 Corinthians 12). The Church is a rich blessing, inasmuch as it provides a gathering place for individuals to share their gifts. Every member of the Church has at least one spiritual gift (D&C 46:11), and participation in the Church allows us to draw upon the various gifts of others. For example, Brother Jones brings the gift of healing, Sister Backman the gift of wisdom, Brother Hansen the gift of teaching, and Sister Young the gift of discernment.

I have many sweet memories of my life in the Church and of the importance of individuals with their varying gifts. My grandfather was blessed with the gift of healing. So was my father. This gift just seemed to come to them readily. Both my grandfather and my father had the gift of speaking; when they stood at the pulpit and began to teach the gospel, people listened and were touched. I have been blessed to witness other gifts as well. I have sat in administrative meetings, for example, when extremely difficult matters were being considered, when it appeared that no resolution was possible. I have become frustrated, weary in the realization that we simply could not handle the matter. Then a man would speak, briefly, softly, but powerfully, and suddenly the issue was settled. It was as though he had poured oil on troubled waters, had gotten to the essence of the issue rapidly, and had drawn upon a guiding principle in making his particular recommendation. It was an obvious illustration of the gift of wisdom or divine judgment.

Such gifts are of almost infinite worth. They bless our lives in myriad ways. Certain gifts come to us more naturally than others, perhaps because these gifts were developed in our first estate (McConkie, New Witness, 359). Nevertheless, they must be received and developed in this life as well, in order for them to prove a blessing to the Saints. Though we must strive to be worthy of such gifts, they come to us almost in spite of ourselves. Because the Lord desires to bless the people of the covenant, he works his mysterious wonders through fallible, mortal creatures. To be more specific, let us suppose that in a given ward there is man, a Brother Brown, who has the gift of teaching. The Lord has blessed this man with an unusual insight into scripture, a capacity to expound upon those insights and to involve the members of the Church profitably in the discovery of the sacred truths of the gospel. People love to hear him speak and teach. He proves a rich blessing to the Saints. And yet we find, on closer inspection, that this particular brother has difficulty with his temper, tends to explode over relatively insignificant matters, and can be downright harsh and insensitive when it comes to people's feelings.

We all rejoice in his gift, a gift that blesses us and others. We do not expect Brother Brown to be perfect, even though we certainly wish he were kinder and more Christlike in his dealings with people. No doubt there are some things Brother Brown does that please the Lord and his relative worthiness allows him to possess this gift. And yet it would be unfortunate if Brother Brown concluded that his gift of teaching—which all who know him acknowledge to be his gift—were a sign of God's ready acceptance of his life, that his life was totally on track. The scriptures give us guidance in this matter, for they speak of how to know we are growing spiritually, how to know whether or not we are becoming new creatures alive in Christ. "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and everyone that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God" (1 John 4:7).

"I am the vine," Jesus stated at the Last Supper, "ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing" (John 15:5). To abide in Christ is to trust in him, rely on him, be patient with him and his plan for us, yield ourselves to his mercies, surrender to him, and thereby draw upon his life and his strength.

Though the vine and the branch are related, they are not the same. The uniting factor is the sap that flows through the branches. That is like the Holy Spirit in our lives: we appropriate Christ's strength through the power of the Holy Ghost. When that Spirit dwells in us, we begin to bear the "fruit of the Spirit." Paul contrasts the "works of the flesh"—such things as adultery, fornication, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, strife, and so forth, which are behaviors and attitudes characterizing the natural man—with the fruit of the Spirit, the works and dispositions that characterize the man or woman who has been born again. "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. . . . And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts." Paul then offers this wonderful plea to the household of faith: "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit" (Galatians 5:19, 22-25).

In other words, if we claim membership in the Church of Jesus Christ, let us act like it. If we profess discipleship, people ought to be able to see that discipleship without difficulty. The fruit of the Spirit is the characteristics and attributes that flow from a changed heart—the ways that truly Christlike people feel and act. It's a wonderful thing to be a gospel scholar, to be learned in our theology; it's more of a blessing to know our doctrine and also to embody pure religion (James 1:27). It's a privilege to possess the gift of healing, to be able to lay hands on the sick and, acting for and in behalf of the Lord, witness their recovery. It's a treasure beyond price to be able to love others after the manner of our Master and witness the healing power of that love. Some things matter more than others. People matter. People's feelings matter. God and Christ are in the people business (Moses 1:39), and we have been called to the same work.

Elder Marion D. Hanks was fond of posing a rather haunting question: "If you were arrested and tried for being a Christian, would there be enough evidence to convict you?" One morning I needed to get to work for an early meeting but had overslept. I raced out of the house and drove quickly to campus. On the way, I stopped at an intersection. There was one car in the distance, but I was anxious to get to work as soon as possible, and so I scooted into the traffic. Because I was driving a small vehicle that has very little power, the car in the distance was in no time right on my back bumper. The driver honked his horn and screamed and made obscene gestures, a procedure that went on for about twenty or thirty seconds.

I was humiliated by what took place and certainly regretted having pulled out into traffic as I had. After the man's tauntings ceased and he sped away, I reflected on what had just taken place. I had been wrong. I should have been more patient and waited for the cars to pass before entering the traffic. And yet after thinking about things for a moment, I concluded that I had probably cost this man twenty or thirty seconds—the time involved in his impressive display of emotion. I happened to live in an area that was predominantly Latter-day Saint and thus the odds were pretty high that this man was a member of the Church, or at least a Christian. It was wrong for me to provoke him, I suppose, but his behavior was so bizarre, so radically incongruent with the situation, that it caused me deep and serious reflection. How do I act in such situations? How do I respond to people cutting in front of me on the highway or in the supermarket?

This incident led me to reflect on why I do not enjoy going to Little League baseball games. For many years my wife and I have been closely involved with our children's athletic events, particularly their baseball games. I have agonized and ached with the shouting, the screaming, the insults that go on—hardly ever on the field, but between the fans and the umpire, the fans and the players, the fans and the fans. On more than one occasion I have climbed down from the bleachers and gone home. It seemed better to go home than to allow unkind feelings in my heart to simmer and canker. Paul's words come back again and again: "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit" (Galatians 5:25). I have so much to improve on that it almost seems hypocritical for me to discuss these things, and yet if we waited for perfect individuals to discuss such matters with us, we would never discuss them. It hurts me to see us falling short on things that matter most. People who would never allow themselves to be ensnared by immorality or smoking or embezzlement of funds should never allow themselves to be a part of unchristian conduct.

Alma encouraged the people of Gideon: "And now I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive and gentle; easy to be entreated; full of patience and long-suffering; being temperate in all things; being diligent in keeping the commandments of God at all times." This is not a list of "to-do's." Rather, it is a list of the many ways we begin to act and feel when we allow the Spirit of God to work mighty changes in our hearts. "And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity," Alma continued, "and then ye will always abound in good works" (Alma 7:23-24). Certainly we should strive on our own to be kind and considerate and helpful and loving. And these things come into our lives more naturally—and their effect is so much greater—when they are motivated by the power of the Holy Ghost.

The new creature in Christ begins to act like Christ, to be Christlike. "His affections are . . . purified," Elder Parley P. Pratt observed, "exalted, and increased in proportion. He loves his heavenly Father and Jesus Christ with a perfect love. He also loves the members of the Church, or the body of Christ, as he loves his own soul; while his bosom swells with the tenderest sympathies and emotions of good will and benevolence for all mankind" (Key to the Science of Theology, 60). Or, as the choice seer stated: "There is a love from God that should be exercised toward those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself, but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise towards one another. These principles approximate nearer to the mind of God, because [they are] like God, or Godlike." Further, "love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God"—that is, by those who are born again into the kingdom of God. "A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race" (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 147, 174).

Joseph Smith taught in the School of the Prophets that the Almighty possesses all attributes and characteristics of godliness in perfection; there is no virtue, no ennobling quality, he does not embody perfectly. In speaking of God's love, the Prophet explained, "with all the other excellencies in his character, without this one to influence them, they could not have such powerful dominion over the minds of men" (Lectures on Faith, 3:24). That is to say, God's love colors all other divine attributes. And so it should be with us. "Cease to be idle," the Lord declared; "cease to be unclean; cease to find fault one with another; cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated." And then comes this marvelous invitation: "And above all things, clothe yourselves with the bond of charity, as with a mantle, which is the bond of perfectness and peace" (D&C 88:124-25; compare Colossians 3:14). Charity is "the highest, noblest, strongest kind of love, not merely affection; the pure love of Christ. It is never used to denote alms or deeds or benevolence, although it may be a prompting motive" (LDS Bible Dictionary, 632). Charity is "the highest pinnacle the human soul can reach and the deepest expression of the human heart" (Hunter, That We Might Have Joy, 170).

Charity is a fruit of the Spirit, something given to us by a gracious Lord. It empowers us to love and lift and lighten burdens more than any other single thing in this life. It is Christ's love, conveyed to us and through us to others. Paul warned us that we can enjoy great gifts and powers in the Church, but if we do not have charity, we are nothing; our influence for good is fleeting. "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing." Truly, for the Apostle Paul, the receipt from God of the gift of charity is an evidence of our spiritual growth and maturity, a sign that we are growing unto Christ. "When I was a child," he wrote, "I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things" (1 Corinthians 13:1-3, 11).

We turn to Mormon for a better understanding of how to acquire the gift of charity and also to learn how charity prepares us for entrance into glory. "Wherefore, my beloved brethren," Mormon taught in the synagogue, "pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moroni 7:48).

Charity certainly motivates us to love and serve and minister to others. But it does much more than that. It is a fruit of the Spirit that sanctifies the human heart, purifies us from the things of this world, and prepares us to be like and with God. It brings hope in Christ—assurance, anticipation, and expectation of glory. Thus the Holy Ghost can fill our hearts with hope and perfect love, which love secures us in the faith and assists us to endure faithfully to the end of our days (Moroni 8:26; Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9).

I admit that my labor in the Church has sometimes been motivated by a sense of duty, a realization of the importance of doing what I have been asked to do. Of course, there is nothing wrong with doing one's duty, but there is a freshness, a vibrancy, a life, a dynamism associated with the power of God that makes a real difference in our labors. When we are serving because we want to serve, because we love those we serve, because we love the Father and his Christ—then our energy is greater and our motives are purer. I have come to believe that the Lord's barometer of righteousness is the heart. No matter the depth of our knowledge, the efficiency of our administration, the charisma with which we influence and lead people—no matter how well we do what we do, of much greater significance in the eternal scheme of things is who we are and what we feel toward God and toward our fellow man. It is so easy to be distracted from what matters most, to focus on things—on goals, on excellence programs, on statistics—when in reality people are what count.

We must pray for forgiveness, for cleansing, for reconciliation with the Father through the Son. And we must pray for charity. We must plead for it. We must ask with all energy of heart to be so endowed. As we do so, there will come moments of surpassing import, sublime moments, moments in which our whole souls seem to reach out to others with a kind of fellowship and affection that we would not otherwise know. I have felt that love and tasted of its sweet fruit. It is beyond anything earthly, above and beyond anything that mortal man can explain or produce.

No one had to prompt me to do my home teaching during such seasons. No one had to remind me to search the scriptures or pray or hold family home evening. Those things came naturally. During such times I was much less inclined to judge wrongfully my brothers and sisters, to take offense, and, certainly, to give offense. It seemed so unimportant to correct this insignificant mistake or make that person an offender for a word. People were what counted, people and their feelings. Such love settles the hearts of individuals. It provides moral courage to those who must face difficult challenges. It unites and seals husbands, wives, and children and grants them a foretaste of eternal life. It welds classes and congregations and wards and stakes in a union that is the foundation for Zion. And it comes from that Lord who is the Source of all that is godlike.

"We must know Christ better than we know him," President Howard W. Hunter counseled us; "we must remember him more often than we remember him; we must serve him more valiantly than we serve him. Then we will drink water springing up unto eternal life and will eat the bread of life. . . .

" . . . Sooner or later, and we pray sooner than later, everyone will acknowledge that Christ's way is not only the right way, but ultimately the only way to hope and joy. Every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess that gentleness is better than brutality, that kindness is greater than coercion, that the soft voice turneth away wrath. In the end, and sooner than that whenever possible, we must be more like him" (That We Might Have Joy, 5, 9-10).

Jesus Christ truly has made available to us "all things that pertain unto life and godliness." There are "given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these [we] might be partakers of the divine nature" (2 Peter 1:3-4). To the degree that we trust in that Lord and yield our hearts unto him, "I am persuaded," with the Apostle Paul, "that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord" (Romans 8:38-39).
