Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 7

Becoming as a Little Child

A few months ago I laid the Book of Mormon on the lamp table near where I was sitting. I had just read the last chapter of the book of Moroni. My heart was filled with thanksgiving for this scriptural gem—for the doctrines it teaches and for the spirit it conveys. I pondered for a few moments on what I had learned and felt during the preceding weeks as I reread this sacred volume. I thought of what it teaches about the Fall and its effects upon all of us, of the destiny of God's chosen people and how the Almighty will in the last days gather Israel to Christ and to the lands of their inheritance, and, of central importance, of the vital place of Christ our Redeemer—of the singular truth that if he had not come into the world, no amount of good on our part could ever make up for that loss. I reflected soberly on what President Ezra Taft Benson had said about how the Book of Mormon brings men and women to Christ in two ways: first, through teaching of the Fall and of our need for redemption and rebirth, and second, through exposing the enemies of Christ (A Witness and A Warning, 3).

I thought back on a few of the anti-Christs in the Book of Mormon—of Sherem, Nehor, and Korihor—and reconsidered their doctrine, their approach, their success, and their demise. I then broadened my scope a bit and realized that evil attitudes, as well as perverse teachings and false systems of salvation, also qualify as enemies of Christ. Such teachings as "We have not [prayed about this], for the Lord maketh no such things known unto us"; "All is well in Zion"; "Eat, drink, and be merry"; "Dig a pit for thy neighbor"; "We have received and we need no more"; "There is no devil"; "Ye cannot know what ye cannot see"; "Do this or do that and it mattereth not," and myriads of others—these symbolize the slogans of an antigospel. Undergirding and overarching all of these teachings is an attitude, a mindset, a posture that is at the foundation of fallen individuals and fallen civilizations: pride. As President Ezra Taft Benson explained, pride has frightening implications for both individuals and societies: it is the universal sin as well as the great stumbling block to Zion (in Conference Report, Apr. 1989, 6-7).

"There is one vice of which no man in the world is free," wrote C. S. Lewis, "which every one in the world loathes when he sees it in someone else; and of which hardly any people, except Christians, ever imagine that they are guilty themselves. I have heard people admit that they are bad-tempered, or that they cannot keep their heads about girls or drink, or even that they are cowards. I do not think I have ever heard anyone who was not a Christian accuse himself of this vice. . . . There is no fault which makes a man more unpopular, and no fault we are more unconscious of in ourselves. And the more we have it ourselves, the more we dislike it in others." Lewis says further, "According to Christian teachers, the essential vice, the utmost evil, is Pride. Unchastity, anger, greed, drunkenness, and all that, are mere fleabites in comparison: it was through Pride that the devil became the devil: Pride leads to every other vice: it is the complete anti-God state of mind" (Mere Christianity, 108-9).

The natural man is by nature a self-seeking creature, a being bent on self-promotion and self-satisfaction. He or she spends most of the waking hours seeking to enhance, expand, and exaggerate his or her own holdings or accomplishments. Because proud people are so preoccupied with putting others down, they often do not look up to the true Source of strength and their only hope of extrication from this condition. They are stiff-necked. At the root of the proud being is a deep sense of inadequacy, a cutting realization that he or she walks the paths of life alone. The proud are creatures without comfort, and, as noted earlier, they act and feel in ways that are contrary to happiness (Alma 41:11). Often their feelings of inadequacy are covered by what we call a superiority complex, an obnoxious obsession with being first and of putting all others in their place. Sometimes pride drives individuals with an unhealthy zeal to excel or to grab onto all the telestial things they can bring under their control. But a person can never get enough of things that don't matter.

A proud person is in bondage—in bondage to Satan and in bondage to the self, the fallen self. As with so many other maladies in this second estate, there is no deliverance from this sickness to be found in society's programs or self-help associations. The answer is not to be found in pop psychology or in transcendental meditation. Willpower will not cut it; sheer grit and determination are not sufficient. The answer is in Christ. In his atonement. In his liberating powers. Yet individuals cannot come to Christ until they recognize their own plight—their utter inability to change on their own—and humble themselves before him who is omnipotent, omniscient, and, by the power of his Spirit, omnipresent. No one fully comes unto Christ except he or she become as a little child.

The risen Lord told his American Hebrews: "And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and become as a little child, and be baptized in my name, or ye can in nowise receive these things," meaning the visitation of the Spirit and the baptism by fire. He continued: "And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and be baptized in my name, and become as a little child, or ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God" (3 Nephi 11:37-38). Though these two verses are unusually similar, and though it may seem that the Savior is repeating himself for emphasis, there is a slight difference that deserves attention. A measure of humility—becoming as a little child—is required before a person can come unto Christ through baptism. Alma thus taught the poorer Zoramites: "Therefore, blessed are they who humble themselves without being compelled to be humble; or rather, in other words, blessed is he that believeth in the word of God, and is baptized without stubbornness of heart, yea, without being brought to know the word, or even compelled to know, before they will believe" (Alma 32:16). At the same time, after being baptized and receiving the Holy Ghost, we must press forward on the gospel path, seeking all the while to submit to the will of God and to become more and more childlike.

Some six months before his crucifixion, Jesus was asked by his disciples, "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" He "called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven" (Matthew 18:1-4; compare Luke 18:17). Here we find that becoming as a little child is related to being converted. Becoming as a little child represents a turnaround, an alteration of behavior and attitude, a matter of "crossing [oneself]" (Alma 39:9), of being at cross-purposes to the natural man and moving toward God and godliness. The Lord calls upon us to be not childish but childlike. Although there are exceptions, especially in regard to children who have been abused or subjected to other conditions that might flaw their pure perceptions of life, a little child is:

Dependent. Children depend on their parents or other significant persons in their lives. They cannot live without help, and they know it. They look to others for support and sustenance.

Submissive. Children readily acknowledge that they are under the care and keeping of others. They look to the leadership of parents or other loved ones and learn to abide by the standards of the family or of society.

Trusting. There is something very sobering about an innocent child looking into your eyes. Such trust and loyalty and eagerness to please! Unless they are taught by the perverse to do otherwise, children are extremely trusting.

Humble. Children are eager to learn, eager to be taught. They know, for the most part, what they don't know and want to change that. Their inquisitiveness is unaffected by pride and fear that others will think them deficient or inadequate for asking questions.

Patient and persistent. Children generally can sit and watch and listen to the simplest things for hours. They can wait almost indefinitely for an answer or for a solution to a problem.

Delighted by simple pleasures. Parents learn, with some frustration, that their little ones are just as content at Christmastime to play with the cardboard boxes as they are to play with the expensive toys that came in the boxes.

Alive to life about them. What a refreshing and lifting pleasure it is to watch a child in a meadow or in a forest or on a street corner as he or she attempts with childlike zeal to take in everything. Children literally and metaphorically love to take time to smell the roses.

Not caught up with life's stresses and strains. They do not yield to life's pressures, the anxieties associated with planning and overplanning for tomorrow. They celebrate the present.

Quick to forgive and forget. Many a parent has been heartsick for impatiently overreacting to a child's behavior, only to find that within moments all is forgotten and forgiven.

Pure. Above and beyond all that we have listed above, children are pure. Why are they pure? The humanist might answer: "A child is pure because he or she is just that way by nature. They are innately good." But the scriptures teach otherwise. An angel taught Benjamin that "even if it were possible that little children could sin they could not be saved" if there were no Atonement; "but I say unto you they are blessed; for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins" (Mosiah 3:16). Here is the sum and substance of the whole matter: little children are saved by Christ; they are pure because our Master has decreed them so, as an unconditional benefit of his atonement. "Little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ; and this is what the scriptures mean" (D&C 74:7). God has instructed us that "little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten" (D&C 29:46).

Thus we are instructed to become as little children—dependent, submissive, trusting, humble, patient and persistent, delighted by simple pleasures, alive to life, carefree, and quick to forgive. And, above all, we are instructed to become pure through the atoning blood of our blessed Redeemer, even as children are. Mormon counseled his son Moroni: "This thing shall ye teach—repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children" (Moroni 8:10).

The angel explained to Benjamin that "there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. For behold he judgeth, and his judgment is just; and the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy; but men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:17-19).

Truly the poor in spirit, those who recognize their own spiritual bankruptcy and who then come unto Christ, these are they who inherit the kingdom of heaven (3 Nephi 12:3). All of us—every man, woman, and child—need the Lord. We need him desperately. We are eternally indebted and eternally dependent (Mosiah 2:19-24). Without God, without Christ, we are less than the dust of the earth (Mosiah 2:25; 4:2; Helaman 12:7-8). The sooner we internalize that mighty truth, the sooner we begin to make progress toward life eternal. A transcendent paradox of the gospel plan is that the heartfelt recognition of weakness opens the channel for unspeakable strength and power, the Lord's power.

"And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind. And some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also? Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth" (John 9:39-41). C. S. Lewis observed: "In God you come up against something which is in every respect immeasurably superior to yourself. Unless you know God as that—and, therefore, know yourself as nothing in comparison—you do not know God at all. As long as you are proud you cannot know God. A proud man is always looking down on things and people: and, of course, as long as you are looking down, you cannot see something that is above you" (Mere Christianity, 111).

A new creature alive in Christ is a person who has sought to humble himself before God, has sought to become as a little child, to become a child in Christ. "Contrition is costly," President Howard W. Hunter pointed out. "It costs us our pride and our insensitivity, but it especially costs us our sins" (That We Might Have Joy, 9). A new creature alive in Christ has begun to take his or her cues from within and from God rather than from the whims and tauntings of a fallen world. "Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren [and sisters]," Mormon declared, "that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ" (Moroni 7:19). The Prophet Joseph Smith testified that "the Son of God came into the world to redeem it from the fall. But except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This eternal truth settles the question of all men's religion. A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God . . . unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 12).
