Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 8

The Royal Family of God

When I was a teenager, my mother and father felt very natural concerns that I stay on the gospel path, and they frequently reminded me of my duty. Whenever I walked out the door, they quietly and regularly pronounced the words that thousands of young Latter-day Saints have heard over the years: "Remember who you are, and act accordingly." Though at the time I thought them trite, I now reflect on those words with warmth and feel their import. It was a message that might have been expanded as follows: "Remember who you are. You are a Millet. You have been taught the ways of God. You know what is right, and you know what is wrong. You are a grandson of Anatole J. Millet, who paid a tremendous price to join the Church. He was a pioneer of the Church in Louisiana. He proved true and faithful. He died in the faith. You are the son of Albert Louis and Bobbie Millet, and they expect you to be true to your covenants. You are a member of a family that has a good name. Keep in mind that what you do, good or bad, reflects on that name. Remember who you are, and act accordingly." The plan of salvation, the great plan of happiness, is a system that provides for the salvation of individuals and the glorification of families. Families. That is what life here and hereafter is all about. We lived with God before we came here. God lives in the family unit, and we were and are part of that royal family. The fall of Adam and Eve, though a fortunate fall and an essential step toward mortality and thus a pillar in the Father's plan, brought about dramatic changes in the earth and all forms of life on it. The Fall introduced physical death—the inevitable separation of our spirit from our body. It introduced spiritual death—the inevitable separation of our souls from God and the things of righteousness. As a result of the Fall, all of humankind leave premortality to come forth into a fallen world, a telestial condition. Those who live to the age of accountability become susceptible to the enticements of the flesh and the allurements of a natural state (Moses 6:55).

Spiritual death represents an alienation from God, a kind of disinheritance from the royal family. Unless reconciliation with the head of the family is made, the family name and its associated blessings may be lost. That is, unless an at-one-ment is brought to pass, we lose that family association and sociality, that family life of which the scriptures speak—eternal life. We then are without name and without family. We are spiritual orphans and thereby alone in the world. From an eternal perspective, in the words of Malachi, we have neither root (ancestry) nor branch (posterity) (Malachi 4:1). To experience the joys and feel the warmth and security known only in family living, we must be reinstated in the family, deemed worthy once again of the privileges and opportunities of being called a son or daughter of God.

Deliverance from this state—redemption from spiritual death—is made available only through the labors of a God, through the ministry of One mightier than death, One upon whom justice had no claims and death had no hold. Deliverance is not something that may be had without effort and without price. To be released from carnality and restored to righteousness, men and women must exercise saving faith in Jesus Christ and thus receive the blessings of the Atonement. They must put off the natural man through Christ, must crucify the old man of sin, and rise through their Redeemer unto a newness of life (Romans 6:6; Mosiah 3:19).

Because people are not born in mortality into the family of God, because on earth men and women are estranged by the Fall from holiness, they must be adopted into the family of God—they must comply with the laws of adoption, must meet the lawful requirements. That is accomplished through receiving what the Prophet Joseph Smith called the "articles of adoption," the first principles and ordinances of the gospel (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 328). "Faith, repentance, baptism, and the laying on of hands," wrote Elder Orson Pratt, "are the four rules of adoption. Remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, are the two blessings of adoption which are inseparably connected with obedience to the rules. Both the rules and the blessings of adoption are the same in all ages and dispensations of the gospel. No man or woman ever entered into the Church or kingdom of God on this earth, and became a legal citizen thereof, without complying strictly with these rules. Indeed, it is the only door or entrance into the kingdom" (Orson Pratt's Works, 48). Thus as people receive the ordinances of salvation and thereafter enjoy the gift and influence of the Holy Ghost, they are said to have been "born again," to have risen from spiritual death unto spiritual life, to have come alive to the things of the Spirit.

As the Savior and foreordained Messiah, Jesus our Lord became the "author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him" (Hebrews 5:9), and the Father's gospel—the gospel of God (Romans 1:1-3)—became his, the gospel of Jesus Christ. After the people of Benjamin had heard their king's glorious sermon, had been stirred in their souls by its import, and had made a covenant to keep the commandments of God from that time forward, Benjamin declared: "And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters" (Mosiah 5:7). By desire, through covenant, and through the mediation of the Holy Spirit, they had become new creatures alive in Christ.

As members of the family of Christ, they were required to take upon them a new name, the name of Christ; they thereby became Christians in the truest sense of the word and were obligated by covenant to live by the rules and regulations of the royal family, to live a life befitting the new and sacred name they had taken. "And under this head [Jesus Christ] ye are made free," King Benjamin continued, "and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives" (Mosiah 5:8).

"Family members bear the family name," Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained. "By it they are known and called and identified; it sets them apart from all those of a different lineage and ancestry. Adopted children take upon themselves the name of their newfound parents and become in all respects as though they had been born in the family. And so it is that the children of Christ, those who are born again, those who are spiritually begotten by their new Father, take upon themselves the name of Christ. By it they are known; in it they are called; it identifies and sets them apart from all others" (Promised Messiah, 363).

Children generally come to reflect the character and qualities of their parents. Those of the household of faith who remain true and faithful to their covenants—members of the Lord's Church, those who have taken his name upon themselves in the waters of baptism—come to embody and radiate the attributes of their Master. Alma inquired of the members of the Church in his day: "And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14). Those who are "in Christ" have become new creatures through the regenerating powers of his blood (2 Corinthians 5:17). Those who have been born again evidence the freshness and innocence of youth but the steadiness of spiritual maturity—they walk in the light as their Master is in the light, and they show forth those fruits of faith that point others toward and reflect the goodness of the Perfect One.

The Apostle Paul spoke of another vital family relationship for members of the Church of Jesus Christ: "For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise" (Galatians 3:26-29). Paul is here teaching a mighty truth that is little understood in the religious world. We know that the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are entitled to "the promises made unto the fathers" (Romans 15:8)—the right to receive the gospel, the priesthood, and, upon faithful obedience, the fulness of eternal life (Abraham 2:8-11). These blessings are made available through receipt of the ordinances of salvation, especially the ordinance of celestial marriage, performed only in holy temples.

Those who are not lineal descendants of the ancient patriarchs may, through baptism into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, be adopted into Abraham's family and become heirs to all the blessings promised to those who are actual descendants. The passage from Galatians affirms that lineage alone does not qualify us for transcendent spiritual blessings; we must be loyal to the royal within us and become a people of covenant. Nephi bore a like witness. He declared that "as many of the Gentiles as will repent are the covenant people of the Lord; and as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be cast off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his Son, who is the Holy One of Israel" (2 Nephi 30:2). Children of Abraham are, first and foremost, children of Christ.

There is a real difference, in this world and in the next, between servants and heirs. A colleague of mine once described an experience he had in working one summer on a farm. He spent the entire summer there and then returned home in the fall. The work was hard, to be sure, but he had worked hard before. The days were long, but he had grown up on a farm and was not put off by the amount of work to do. The hardest adjustment had to do with eating and sleeping. When it was time to eat, the father and his two sons went into the house. They sat at the table with the rest of the family and enjoyed one another's company. But the workers, the farmhands (including my friend) were given their food in the barn, where they ate and where they spent nonworking hours. The workers were well fed, well clothed, and had a roof over their head. There was, however, a visible difference between the treatment given to family and that given to servants.

Jesus Christ has offered us the privilege of supping with him and his Father at the family table, of enjoying full family status and benefits with him. In short, he has offered us adoption as sons and daughters. "God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ" (Galatians 4:4-7).

It was never intended that men and women remain children forever, even children of Jesus Christ. After we have received the appropriate ordinances and entered into sacred covenants; after we have chosen to forsake evil, have begun to have dross and iniquity burned out of our souls as though by fire, have become alive to the things of the Spirit and thus been born again; after we have taken the name of Christ and become his sons and daughters by covenant—after such growth, we may yet qualify for greater family blessings: We may become sons and daughters of God the Father and thus joint heirs with Christ to all the Father has. We are not joint heirs with Christ as his children. Through the ordinances of the temple, particularly eternal marriage, we qualify to inherit, receive, and possess equally with Christ. He is the Firstborn and is entitled to all the blessings of the Firstborn. Through his mercy and grace, he offers to raise us up to possess equally with him the blessings of the Firstborn. These are they who are the Church of the Firstborn—those who are, by right or by regeneration, entitled to the blessings of the Firstborn. "They are joint-heirs; they are possessors of the whole. They have inherited as their Prototype before inherited. They have the fulness of glory and honor and dignity and dominion" (McConkie, Households of Faith, 5). Of such persons the revelations declare: "They are they who are the church of the Firstborn. They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things." And further, "as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God" (D&C 76:54-55, 58).

Our Father in Heaven has sent us into the world and essentially implanted the words into our souls: "Remember who you are, and act accordingly." We are his spirit sons and daughters. We have the opportunity to receive forgiveness of sin and reconciliation with his royal family through the Atonement of Jesus Christ. We have the privilege of being children of the covenant, sons and daughters of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And we have the power through Christ and through the ordinances of the temple to grow in spiritual grace until we become the sons and daughters of God the Father and joint heirs with him who is the Firstborn. God is literally our Father, and the most important unit in time and eternity is the family. "Therefore," King Benjamin pleaded, "I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom power and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all. Amen" (Mosiah 5:15). As new creatures alive in Christ, we have come back home. The Gods wait patiently to welcome us.
