Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 10

Testimony and Conversion

Gaining a testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ is a remarkable thing. It is a miracle, an instance in which the Infinite intersects the finite, in which the heavens touch the earth, in which Spirit speaks to spirit, in which God manifests truth to mortals. To gain a testimony is to be reborn to what we know and feel and value. "Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God" (1 John 5:1).

A person who has received such a manifestation is a new creature alive in Christ. "To know God our Eternal Father and Jesus Christ, whom he sent," President Marion G. Romney explained, "one must, as did the Apostles of old, learn of them through the process of divine revelation. One must be born again. . . .

" . . . Church members have, of course, been through the process. They have been baptized and confirmed members of the Church and have had hands laid upon their heads for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Through these ordinances the door is unlocked. Submission to this is absolutely essential to rebirth." President Romney then related the following experience: "My wife was reared in a home where they had prayer night and morning; where, almost daily, they discussed gospel principles around the family hearth. She loved education and wanted to go to college. Her father, however, thought college was for boys. In her struggle for an education, she developed an attitude of awe toward people who had been through college. As a member of a stake Sunday School board in Idaho Falls, she taught a class. There came to the class a nonmember of the Church, the wife of one of the brethren on the board. This woman had received a college degree from the University of Idaho. My wife, having not yet received her degree, was a little timid in the presence of this woman.

"One of the lessons in the course dealt with the First Vision of the Prophet Joseph Smith. As she made her preparation for the lesson, there came into her mind the realization that this nonmember would be present in the class. This realization was followed by the question, 'What will she think of me, an ignorant girl, saying that the Father and the Son actually came down from heaven and appeared before a fourteen-year-old boy?' The thought terrified her, and she concluded that she couldn't do it. She went to her mother, crying, and said, 'Mother, I can't teach this lesson. I don't know that Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son. I know I have been taught it all through my life by you and Father. I have believed you, but personally I don't know it. This woman will ridicule me. I just can't stand up before the class with this woman present and teach this lesson.'

"Now, her mother had not been to school very much. She was not an educated person by the world's standards, but she had faith in God the Eternal Father and in Jesus Christ, his Son, and she said to her daughter, 'What did Joseph Smith do to get that vision?'

"'Well,' she answered, 'he prayed.'

"'Why don't you do that?' she said to her daughter.

"This young girl returned to her room and there, for the first time in her life in fact, she went to the Almighty with a sincere desire to know whether he lived and whether he and the Savior actually appeared to the Prophet Joseph. Coming out of that room, she went to her Sunday School class and taught that lesson with joy, with knowledge, with conviction. She had been born of the Spirit. She knew" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1981, 18-20).

As a young missionary in the Eastern States I learned something about being at peace and entering into the rest of the Lord. My companion and I moved into a small town in New Jersey to find that the local Protestant ministers had prepared their parishioners for our coming. At almost every door we approached, we were met by a smiling face and the words, "Oh, you must be the Mormons. This is for you." They then handed us an anti-Mormon tract. We saved the pamphlets, stacked them in the corner of the living room of the apartment, and soon had a substantial pile of material. Out of curiosity we began to read the stuff during lunchtime. I can still recall the dark and empty feelings that filled my soul as we encountered question after question about certain doctrines and specific moments in the history of the Church. My senior companion was no different; he was as unsettled as I was.

For weeks we did our work, but our heart wasn't in it. We went through the motions, but, without saying much to each other, recognized that we couldn't do this indefinitely. I broke the ice at lunch one afternoon with the rather brutal query: "Elder Dyreng, what if the Church isn't true?" His response: "I don't know." I followed up: "What if the Baptists are right?" (There was a strong contingent of Baptists in the area.) He said: "I just don't know." Third question: "What if the Catholics are right? What if they have had the authority all along?" His response: "I've been wondering the same thing." Then, presumably in an effort to cheer me up, he asked, "Elder Millet, do you think we are doing anything wrong? I mean, even if we are not a part of the true church, are we hurting anyone?" I sheepishly replied that we were probably not doing anything destructive. "Then," he added, "maybe we should keep working." I asked with much pain, "Is that supposed to make me feel better? If so, it doesn't." He indicated that under the present circumstances it was the best he could do.

I am ashamed to admit that prior to this time I had never prayed intently about my testimony. I was reared in the Church. Mom and Dad had a testimony, and I knew that they knew. That had always seemed adequate. But now I was up against the wall of faith, and suddenly what they knew did not seem sufficient to settle my troubled heart. I prayed and I pleaded. I begged the Lord for light, for help, for anything! These vexations of the soul went on for about a month. I had actually concluded (though I had not confided the same to my companion) that if relief were not forthcoming shortly, I would pack my bags and go home. It did not seem proper to be engaged seriously in a cause about which I could not bear testimony.

At lunch a few days later my companion set about the task of making the soup and preparing the peanut butter sandwiches. I collapsed in a large chair in the living room, removed my shoes, and loosened my tie. As I began to reflect once more on my testimony problem, my heart ached. My feelings were close to the surface, and I yearned for deliverance from my pain. For some reason I reached to a nearby lamp table and picked up a copy of the pamphlet Joseph Smith Tells His Own Story. I began reading the opening lines. When I came to the Prophet's statement that he was born on 23 December 1805 in Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, I was suddenly and without warning immersed in the most comforting and soothing influence I had ever known. It seemed at the time as if I were being wrapped in a large blanket as I began to be filled with the warmth of the Holy Spirit from head to toe. I wept as the spirit of conversion encompassed me, and I knew assuredly that what we were doing was right and true and good. I did not hear specific words, but the feelings on that occasion seemed to whisper: "Of course it's true. You know that now, and you've known it for a long time." The other feeling was to the effect that the answers to what was troubling me were, for the time being, beyond my capacity to comprehend. In time the answers would come, answers that would be as satisfying to the mind as they were soothing to the heart. The answers came, in fact, within a matter of months, and I marveled at the time how something so simple could have been so problematic before.

The Spirit touched my heart and told me things my mind did not yet understand. I was then able to proceed confidently with my work until my head caught up with my heart. Formerly I was in agony, subject to the nagging and uncomfortable power of doubt and uncertainty. Afterwards I was at peace, at rest, secure in the knowledge that my faith was well founded. In short, I had been born again and was in many ways thereafter a new creature. I saw with new eyes and felt with a new heart.

By the power of the Spirit we come to know the things of God—we gain a testimony. By that same power we continue the process of conversion. In a sense, gaining a testimony is a form of conversion from unbelief to belief, from doubt to certitude. The process of conversion, the process by which we are changed from a carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness (Mosiah 27:25), continues throughout our lives. Conversion "denotes changing one's views, in a conscious acceptance of the will of God (Acts 3:19). If followed by continued faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism in water for the remission of sins, and the reception of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, conversion will become complete, and will change a natural man into a sanctified, born again, purified person—a new creature in Christ Jesus (see 2 Corinthians 5:17)" (LDS Bible Dictionary, 650). "To become converted, according to the scriptures, means having a change of heart and the moral character of a person turned from the controlled power of sin into a righteous life. . . . It means to overcome the tendencies to criticize and to strive continually to improve inward weaknesses and not merely the outward appearances" (Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, 354-55).

A testimony of the gospel is thus a necessary but insufficient condition for salvation. Even the devils "believe, and tremble" (James 2:19). The importance of building upon one's testimony and thereafter becoming truly converted is illustrated dramatically in the life of Simon Peter. Peter was a humble man, a fisherman, when he was called by Jesus to the ministry. As a member of the meridian First Presidency, Peter was frequently alone with the Savior and privy to many of the spiritual experiences recorded in the New Testament (Matthew 14:28-29; 17:1-9; 26:37; Mark 5:35-43). There is little doubt that Peter was a good man with sound desires, one who had a testimony of the divinity of Jesus of Nazareth. After Jesus preached his powerful bread of life sermon, in which he identified himself as the true bread of life and the living manna, many of the disciples were offended and "walked no more with him." Christ turned to the Twelve in what was a poignant moment and asked: "Will ye also go away?" Peter responded in deep sincerity and conviction, speaking for the others of the Twelve: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God" (John 6:66-69). At Caesarea Philippi some six months before the crucifixion, Jesus asked the Twelve: "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" Again answering for the Twelve, Simon said: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" (Matthew 16:13, 19).

Although the New Testament attests that Peter had a testimony, it also affirms that he was weak—that he slipped and stumbled. Not infrequently he was chastened by his Master for his shortsightedness and impulsiveness. Almost immediately after his remarkable testimony at Caesarea Philippi, Jesus began to prepare his chosen Twelve for what lay ahead—his arrest, passion, and death. "Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee. But [Jesus] turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offense unto me; for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men" (Matthew 16:21-23). Here we see that the rock, or seer stone (JST, John 1:42), had become a stumbling block. And, of course, there was the most classic of Peter's blunders—his open denial of a knowledge of Jesus on the night the Savior was arrested (Matthew 26:69-74).

How could someone who had a testimony fall short so often? How could someone who knew as Peter knew slip as often as Peter did, even to the point of an outright denial? The answer to such questions seems to lie in a conversation between Jesus and Peter at the Last Supper. Jesus said, "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren" (Luke 22:31-32). Though Peter had a testimony, he was not fully converted. Because the full power and gifts of the Holy Ghost were not given until the day of Pentecost, Peter had enjoyed only flashes of inspiration. After the resurrection of the Lord and after Pentecost and the accompanying baptism by fire, Peter and the Twelve walked in a new light. We need only to read the opening chapters of the Acts of the Apostles to witness a transformation in the man Peter. He is bold and certain and solid in his ministry—the permanent and indelible impression was planted, and the Holy Ghost had made Peter into a new creature, a new creature alive in Christ.

As Peter and John walked through the Gate Beautiful on the way to the temple (Acts 3), they passed a lame man who begged alms daily. President Harold B. Lee described the touching scene: "Here was one who had never walked, impotent from his birth, begging alms of all who approached the gate. And as Peter and John approached, he held out his hand expectantly, asking for alms. Peter, speaking for this pair of missionaries—church authorities—said, 'Look on us.' And, of course, that heightened his expectation. 'Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk.'"

President Lee continued: "Will you see that picture now of that noble soul, that chiefest of the apostles, perhaps with his arms around the shoulders of this man, and saying, 'Now, my good man, have courage, I will take a few steps with you. Let's walk together, and I assure you that you can walk, because you have received a blessing by the power and authority that God has given us as men, his servants.' Then the man leaped with joy." Through the cultivation of the gift of the Holy Ghost, Peter was born again, converted, turned wholly to Christ and to His righteousness. Peter could now strengthen his brothers and sisters. "You cannot lift another soul," President Lee added, "until you are standing on higher ground than he is. You must be sure, if you would rescue the man, that you yourself are setting the example of what you would have him be. You cannot light a fire in another soul unless it is burning in your own soul" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1973, 178).

Truly, a person is converted "when he sees with his eyes what he ought to see; when he hears with his ears what he ought to hear; and when he understands with his heart what he ought to understand. And what he ought to see, hear, and understand is truth—eternal truth—and then practice it. That is conversion. . . .

"When we understand more than we know with our minds, when we understand with our hearts, then we know that the Spirit of the Lord is working upon us" (Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, 92).

One thing we see clearly as we become converted is that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is divinely led and that those charged with its direction are indeed seers and revelators. President Lee reiterated the words of an earlier leader of the Church when he observed that "that person is not truly converted until he sees the power of God resting upon the leaders of this church, and it goes down into his heart like fire" (in Stand Ye in Holy Places, 63).

I recall vividly the shock and sense of personal loss I felt at the death of President David O. McKay, probably because this marvelous leader had served in the presidency of the Church all of my young life. As I came to recognize that our beloved leader was gone and that the Church would move on with another in his place, I remember praying earnestly for a witness of the divine call of Joseph Fielding Smith. There was some apprehension in my soul as I wondered whether I would be able to transfer my loyalties to a new prophet. I can still recall what I felt when President Smith rose to address the conference: a sweet but powerful flood of light came into my soul and bore testimony that God Almighty had spoken. There is an unspeakable gratitude in my heart for a gracious Lord who has sent to me that same witness with the passing of one president of the Church and the subsequent call of another. Latter-day Saints from all over the world can bear a like witness.

Following the visit of the risen Lord to the Americas, "the people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land." There were "no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another." They consecrated their souls and their resources to the good of society and "were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift" (4 Nephi 1:2-3). Conversion to Christ sets us free—free from error and sin, free from ignorance and pride, free to give of ourselves without let or hindrance to the work of the Lord and the blessing of humankind. Thus through becoming new creatures in Christ, we help to lay the foundation for a new creation, a world dedicated to truth and righteousness, "every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God" (D&C 82:19).
