Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 11

Baptized by Fire

Joseph Smith, the choice seer, taught us that our Heavenly Father is an exalted Man, a Man of Holiness (Moses 6:57). He is a corporeal being; he has a body of flesh and bones astangible as man's (D&C 130:22). He also is a divine being; he is filled with light and truth and power and intelligence. Fire is often used to typify the glory and power of our God. The Prophet explained that God dwells in eternal fire, an expression that symbolizes glory (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 326, 367). Brother Joseph saw in vision "the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of [the celestial] kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son" (D&C 137:2-3).

"If we could see our heavenly Father," President Brigham Young observed, "we should see a being similar to our earthly parent, with this difference, our Father in heaven is exalted and glorified. . . . While He was in the flesh, as we are, He was as we are. But it is now written of Him that our God is as a consuming fire, that He dwells in everlasting burnings, and this is why sin cannot be where He is." President Young said further: "There are principles that will endure through all eternity, and no fire can obliterate them from existence. They are those principles that are pure, and fire is made typical use of to show the glory and purity of the gods, and of all perfect beings" (in Journal of Discourses, 4:54).

John the Baptist came as an Elias, a forerunner, sent of God to prepare the way for the Son of Man. "The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. He was not that Light but was sent to bear witness of that Light" (John 1:7-8). "I indeed baptize you with water, upon your repentance," John said, "and when he of whom I bear record cometh, who is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear (or whose place I am not able to fill), as I said, I indeed baptize you before he cometh, that when he cometh he may baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire" (JST, Matthew 3:38). John made it perfectly clear that his baptism of water was not sufficient for salvation; he baptized many persons in the meridian of time, but the rite he performed was the first of a two-part ordinance.

Joseph Smith explained that "baptism is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby God hath ordained for man to come to Him to be saved, and enter into the Kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in vain; then you have the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 198). We often speak of being baptized to wash away our sins. That symbolism is helpful, and there is something to be gained from understanding water baptism as a cleansing. But the more powerful symbol is baptism as the death and burial of the old man of sin and the rise to newness of life (Romans 6:3-5). The truth is, our sins are not really remitted in the baptism of water. In setting forth the doctrine of Christ, Nephi called upon his readers to "do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter. For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost" (2 Nephi 31:17; emphasis added). Truly, after people are received unto baptism, they are "wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost" (Moroni 6:4).

The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier. After baptism we are "sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost" (3 Nephi 27:20). If we were to be immersed in water and then never be confirmed a member of the Church and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, we would still be in our sins. "You might as well baptize a bag of sand as a man," Joseph Smith pointed out, "if not done in view of the remission of sins and getting of the Holy Ghost. Baptism by water is but half a baptism, and is good for nothing without the other half—that is, the baptism of the Holy Ghost" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 314; see also 360).

Or, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "Sins are remitted not in the waters of baptism, as we say in speaking figuratively, but when we receive the Holy Ghost. It is the Holy Spirit of God that erases carnality and brings us into a state of righteousness. We become clean when we actually receive the fellowship and companionship of the Holy Ghost. It is then that sin and dross and evil are burned out of our souls as though by fire. The baptism of the Holy Ghost is the baptism of fire. There have been miraculous occasions when visible flames enveloped penitent persons, but ordinarily the cleansing power of the Spirit simply dwells, unseen and unheralded, in the hearts of those who have made the Lord their friend. And the Spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle" (New Witness, 290; see also 239).

Elder B. H. Roberts taught that the forgiven soul may still continue to "feel the force of sinful habits bearing heavily upon him. He who has been guilty of habitual untruthfulness, will at times find himself inclined, perhaps, to yield to that habit. He who has stolen may be sorely tempted, when opportunity arises, to steal again. While he who has indulged in licentious practices may again find himself disposed to give way to the seductive influence of the siren. So with drunkenness, malice, envy, covetousness, hatred, anger, and in short all the evil dispositions that flesh is heir to.

"There is an absolute necesity for some additional sanctifying grace that will strengthen the poor human nature, not only to enable it to resist temptation, but also to root out from the heart concupiscence—the blind tendency or inclination to evil. The heart must be purified, every passion, every propensity made submissive to the will, and the will of man brought into subjection to the will of God.

"Man's natural powers are unequal to this task; so, I believe, all will testify who have made the experiment. Mankind stand in some need of a strength superior to any they possess of themselves, to accomplish this work of rendering pure our fallen nature. Such strength, such power, such a sanctifying grace is conferred on man in being born of the Spirit—in receiving the Holy Ghost. Such, in the main, is its office, its work" (Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity, 169-70).

As Elder McConkie suggested, much of the time the Holy Ghost works quietly and imperceptibly upon the hearts and minds of the children of God, rubbing off a corner here and refining an edge there. Zion is established "in process of time" (Moses 7:21), and, with few exceptions, men and women become pure and holy in the same manner. There are very few instant Saints. If we earnestly strive to keep the commandments and stay in the line of our duty, we may not even notice how or in what manner we are changing; often others most readily notice the change. We may develop a deeper appreciation for quiet moments and come to treasure silence. We may develop a reverence for life and a revulsion for violence. We may discover a heightened sensitivity to right and wrong; we simply cannot feel good about doing some things we used to do. We may find our hearts reaching out to those who mourn, our feet rushing to assist those who are in need, our voices eager to express thanks and gratitude to those who serve us. And so on.

Some believe that the baptism by fire must be an extraordinary and unusual outpouring of the Holy Ghost, such as the experience at Pentecost or the event recorded in Helaman 5 in the Book of Mormon, in which Nephi and Lehi, sons of Helaman, preached the gospel with such power that fire came down from heaven, angels ministered, and the voice of God was heard. There is no question but that on some occasions the Spirit is sent and the manifestations are enjoyed in dramatically miraculous fashion. Those, however, are the exception. So far as I can discern, the scriptures do not distinguish between the gift of the Holy Ghost and the baptism of fire (3 Nephi 12:1-2; Mormon 7:10; D&C 19:31; 20:41; 33:11; 39:6). The baptism of fire is simply the cleansing of the human heart, the purging of the soul, the renovation of the mind—all by the power of the Spirit. It is every bit as miraculous for a man or a woman to be forgiven of sin and made alive to goodness as it is to behold visions or to enjoy the ministry of angels.

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "It is not to be wondered at that men should be ignorant, in a great measure, of the principles of salvation, and more especially of the nature, office, power, influence, gifts, and blessings of the gift of the Holy Ghost; when we consider that the human family have been enveloped in gross darkness and ignorance for many centuries past, without revelation, or any just criterion [by which] to arrive at a knowledge of the things of God, which can only be known by the Spirit of God. Hence it not infrequently occurs, that when the Elders of this Church preach to the inhabitants of the world, that if they obey the Gospel they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, that the people expect to see some wonderful manifestation, some great display of power, or some extraordinary miracle performed. . . .

"We believe that the Holy Ghost is imparted by the laying on of hands of those in authority, and that the gift of tongues, and also the gift of prophecy are gifts of the Spirit, and are obtained through that medium; but then to say that men always prophesied and spoke in tongues when they had the imposition of hands, would be to state that which is untrue, contrary to the practice of the Apostles, and at variance with holy writ; . . . sometimes they spake in tongues and prophesied in the Apostles' days, and sometimes they did not. The same is the case with us also in our administrations, while more frequently there is no manifestation at all, that is visible to the surrounding multitude. . . .

"The Lord cannot always be known by the thunder of His voice, by the display of His glory or by the manifestation of His power, and those that are the most anxious to see these things, are the least prepared to meet them, and were the Lord to manifest his power as he did to the children of Israel, such characters would be the first to say, 'Let not the Lord speak any more, lest we His people die.'

"We would say to the brethren, seek to know God in your closets, call upon him in the fields. Follow the directions of the Book of Mormon, and pray over, and for your families, your cattle, your flocks, your herds, your corn, and all things that you possess; ask the blessing of God upon all your labors, and everything that you engage in. Be virtuous and pure; be men of integrity and truth; keep the commandments of God; and then you will be able more perfectly to understand the difference between right and wrong—between the things of God and the things of men; and your path will be like that of the just, which shineth brighter, and brighter, unto the perfect day.

". . . The gifts of God are all useful in their place, but when they are applied to that which God does not intend, they prove an injury, a snare and a curse instead of a blessing" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 242-48; emphasis added).

After baptism we strive with all our might to live in such a way as to merit the companionship of the Holy Ghost. But the Spirit is not something that may be programmed, plotted out, manufactured, or elicited. The influences of the Holy Ghost certainly cannot be demanded or coerced. We cannot force spiritual things, nor can we cavalierly announce that the congregation is "about to have a spiritual experience." Jesus said to Nicodemus: "Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit" (John 3:7-8). The Prophet Joseph Smith likewise taught that "a man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not tarry with him" (D&C 130:23).

We know that the Spirit will not dwell with those who are unclean and thus unworthy of its companionship (1 Corinthians 3:16-17; 6:19; compare 1 Nephi 10:21; 15:34; Alma 7:21; 3 Nephi 27:19). In addition, we cannot always tell when we will be filled with the Spirit and when we will not. Worthiness is only one variable. We may end the day on fire with the power of the Spirit, rejoicing in our blessings, grateful for the closeness we have felt to the Lord. When we arise a few short hours later, it may not be uncommon to feel as if we had lost something, to feel that the distance between us and Deity had increased dramatically. We ask ourselves searchingly: "What happened? Did we sin during the night? Did we do something to change what we were feeling only a short time ago?" President Joseph F. Smith taught that "every elder of the Church who has received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, by one having authority, has power to confer that gift upon another; it does not follow that a man who has received the presentation or gift of the Holy Ghost shall always receive the recognition and witness and presence of the Holy Ghost himself, or he may receive all these, and yet the Holy Ghost not tarry with him, but visit him from time to time." President Smith also observed that "the Holy Ghost, may be conferred upon men, and he may dwell with them for a while, or he may continue to dwell with them in accordance with their worthiness, and he may depart from them at his will" (Gospel Doctrine, 61, 466).

Our inability always to recognize the workings of the Spirit in our lives is no guarantee that the Spirit is not with us. In looking back over the past thirty years of my life, it seems as though I have had a variety of experiences with the Spirit and with receiving answers to prayer. Many prayers have been answered so directly, so clearly, so unambiguously there could be no doubt about the course I should follow. On the other hand, there have been many other times when I have gone before the Lord in deep sincerity, hungering and thirsting for insight and direction. So far as I could tell, I was not guilty of serious sin. I pondered and prayed and pleaded and wrestled and waited upon the Lord, and yet a clear answer was not forthcoming. President Brigham Young declared: "If I do not know the will of my Father, and what He requires of me in a certain transaction, if I ask Him to give me wisdom concerning any requirement in life, or in regard to my own course, or that of my friends, my family, my children, or those that I preside over, and get no answer from Him, and then do the very best that my judgment will teach me, He is bound to own and honor that transaction, and He will do so to all intents and purposes" (in Journal of Discourses, 3:205).

I believe there is more to President Young's counsel than meets the eye. It is certainly true that we should pray with all our hearts for direction and then make the wisest decisions we can. It is my conviction, however, that even on those occasions when we feel so very alone—when we wonder if God is listening—if we are striving to be found worthy, the Lord is in fact directing our paths, for he has so promised us. No doubt there are seasons of our life in which we are called upon to proceed without clearly recognizing the Spirit. That does not mean that we are in fact alone. I believe that one day, when we are allowed to review the scenes of mortality from a grander perspective, we will be astounded at how closely the Lord directed our paths, orchestrated the events of life, and, in general, led us by that kindly light we know as the Holy Ghost.

Perhaps it is the case that over the years the Spirit of the Lord works in a quiet, consistent manner to educate our consciences, enhance our perspective, and polish our wisdom and judgment. After all, the Prophet Joseph explained that an important assignment of the Holy Ghost is to convey pure intelligence through expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with knowledge (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149). It may be that one day we will look back on what we perceived at the time to be seasons wherein we believed we were required to make decisions on our own, only to discover that the Lord had been, through the honing and refining processes in our souls, leading us along paths of his choosing. That is, maybe we will learn that our own wisdom and judgment were not really our own (D&C 61:22; 62:8).

Finally, it is worth noting that we may well have an experience with the Spirit, a genuine and true experience, and yet not know exactly what has taken place. Over the years it has been my privilege to work with many Latter-day Saints who were struggling to repent of their sins and become clean before God. It has been a joy of Church service to witness the light growing in the countenance, the heart being softened, and the consciousness of right and wrong returning. Never, however, in all my years has a member of the Church said to me, "I have been justified of the Spirit" or "I have entered the rest of God" or "I am redeemed of the Lord" or "I am born of the Spirit." Those who have had their sins remitted and have renewed their covenant with Christ could have used any of those doctrinal phrases to describe their standing, but generally they say such things as "I feel good all over" or "I feel clean and pure" or "I am at peace."

During the period of darkness before his visit to the Americas, Jesus spoke to the Nephites: "I am the light and the life of the world," he said. "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings. And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost, even as the Lamanites, because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion [those in Helaman 5], were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not" (3 Nephi 9:18-20; emphasis added). Far more significant than a theological explanation is the value of a religious experience; whether we can give a ten-minute discourse on spiritual rebirth matters little compared to the change of heart such a rebirth brings.

We cannot come unto Christ unclean; we must be baptized. We must be immersed and sanctified. That is the good news, the glad tidings—that Christ came to sanctify the world and cleanse it from unrighteousness (D&C 76:40-41). "And verily, verily, I say unto you, he that receiveth my gospel receiveth me; and he that receiveth not my gospel receiveth not me. And this is my gospel—repentance and baptism by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which showeth all things, and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom" (D&C 39:5-6). "And if it so be that ye believe in Christ, and are baptized, first with water, then with fire and with the Holy Ghost, following the example of our Savior, according to that which he hath commanded us, it shall be well with you in the day of judgment" (Mormon 7:10).
