Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 12

Inside Out

Several years ago I sat at the bishop's desk to interview a young man who was preparing for full-time missionary service. He had joined the Church a couple of years before and was the only Latter-day Saint in his family. He had been faithful and dependable during his brief time in the Church. I asked him all the hard questions, and he answered them to my complete satisfaction; he was as pure a person as I had met in a long time.

"Is there anything you want to tell me?" I asked. "Is there anything we ought to talk about?" I had stressed forcefully that he needed to enter the mission field completely worthy and thus be in a position to obtain the influence of the Holy Ghost.

"There is one thing we ought to discuss," he said. "I really want to be prepared for this mission, and so I've made a plan to make sure I am clean. I have done a lot of thinking in the last few weeks and made a list of every sin I have ever committed, at least the ones I can remember."

"What in the world are you going to do with such a list?" I asked.

He said he planned to devote a day to repenting of each sin.

"You know, Bill," I responded, "we do want to get you into the mission field before you are too old to serve."

He replied, "I know, Bishop. I have it worked out so that I'm repenting of the last one the day before I enter the Missionary Training Center."

I complimented him on his keen sense of timing. My heart went out to him in love, because I knew his was a sincere desire to be worthy. "Could I suggest an alternative program?"

He nodded.

"You know, Bill, there's another approach to this matter of worthiness that I would like you to consider. It's just as important to have a pure heart as it is to have clean hands, maybe even more so."

He agreed.

"I mean, have you given much thought to praying about your nature, as well as your actions?"

He wasn't sure what I meant, so we had a delightful discussion. I reminded him that most of the sins of his past had been covered by his baptism only two years earlier. "Oh, yeah," he said. "I forgot about that." Then we talked about sinfulness as well as sin, about desires as well as deeds. I explained that in Old Testament times two types of animal sacrifice were used symbolically to cleanse the people of Israel. First, a trespass offering was made by the officiating priest to cover specific sins that an individual may have committed against God's law. Second, a sin offering was made by the priest to cover sin in general, or, we might say, sinfulness. Those two types of offerings pointed toward the atonement of Jesus Christ, which makes it possible for us not only to be forgiven of unrighteous deeds but also over time to have our hearts cleansed and purified, to have our desires to sin eradicated. My young friend recognized this important concept and committed to pray about his nature as well as his actions.

Here is another way of looking at this problem of sin and sinfulness. Picture yourself in a pool with water up to your chest. A person in authority steps up to the pool and empties a bag containing one hundred Ping-Pong balls into the water with you. He says, "To be saved in the highest heaven, you must immerse all one hundred Ping-Pong balls and keep them under the water at the same time."

Having loads of confidence in your ability and agility, you say, "No problem. I can handle it." You begin the task in earnest and find it relatively easy to immerse sixty or seventy balls at a time. Then you work at the task more methodically. "Eighty. Eighty-one. Eighty-two." Without warning, fifteen balls pop up, and you are forced to start over. "Thirty. Thirty-one. Thirty-two." Five balls make their way to the surface at the edge of the pool, and you start over again.

In a way, our sins are like that. When we're convinced they are pushed well beneath the surface, one or more of the almost-forgotten ones pop up.

Most of us are acquainted with the program of improvement devised by Benjamin Franklin. He chose a virtue, worked on it for a season until it was mastered, and then moved on to another. I can't speak for anyone else, but I don't have enough years in one lifetime to get it done that way!

Surely, any effort to improve ourselves is commendable, but such an approach is terrestrial at best. It focuses on proper actions but fails to address the state of the soul. Christ calls us to a higher righteousness. He calls upon us to repent of our sinful deeds and our sinfulness, to be born again, born from above, changed deep down. Elder Glenn L. Pace pointed out: "Sometimes we overlook the fact that a spiritual transformation or metamorphosis must take place within us. It comes about through grace and by the Spirit of God, although it does not come about until we have truly repented. . . . We can be guilty of being so careful to live the letter of the law that we don't develop our inner spiritual nature and fine-tune our spiritual communication to the point that we may receive sanctification and purification. My conclusion is that we will not be saved by works if those works are not born of a disposition to do good, as opposed to an obligation to do good" (Spiritual Plateaus, 63).

C. S. Lewis wrote that as we begin to become new creatures in Christ, as we mature in the things of the Spirit, "we begin to notice, besides our particular sinful acts, our sinfulness; begin to be alarmed not only about what we do, but about what we are. This may sound rather difficult, so I will try to make it clear from my own case. When I come to my evening prayers and try to reckon up the sins of the day, nine times out of ten the most obvious one is some sin against charity; I have sulked or snapped or sneered or snubbed or stormed. And the excuse that immediately springs to my mind is that the provocation [against me] was so sudden and unexpected: I was caught off my guard, I had not time to collect myself. Now that may be an extenuating circumstance as regards those particular acts: they would obviously be worse if they had been deliberate and premeditated. On the other hand, surely what a man does when he is taken off his guard is the best evidence for what sort of a man he is? Surely what pops out before the man has time to put on a disguise is the truth?"

Lewis offered a clever analogy: "If there are rats in a cellar you are most likely to see them if you go in very suddenly. But the suddenness does not create the rats: it only prevents them from hiding. In the same way the suddenness of the provocation [against me] does not make me an ill-tempered man: it only shows me what an ill-tempered man I am. . . . And if (as I said before) what we are matters even more than what we do—if, indeed, what we do matters chiefly as evidence of what we are—then it follows that the change which I most need to undergo is a change that my own direct, voluntary efforts cannot bring about. . . . I cannot, by direct, moral effort, give myself new motives. After the first few steps in the Christian life we realise that everything which really needs to be done in our souls can be done only by God" (Mere Christianity, 164-65).

President Ezra Taft Benson taught that "even the most just and upright man cannot save himself solely on his own merits, for, as the Apostle Paul tells us, 'all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God' (Romans 3:23). Therefore, repentance means more than simply a reformation of behavior. Many men and women in the world demonstrate great will-power and self-discipline in overcoming bad habits and the weaknesses of the flesh. Yet at the same time they give no thought to the Master, sometimes even openly rejecting Him. Such changes of behavior, even if in a positive direction, do not constitute true repentance. Repentance involves not just a change of actions, but a change of heart" (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 71).

I have noticed young men and women who have been involved in serious sin before rendering full-time missionary service. They serve what might be called a successful mission (perhaps in terms of convert baptisms), and then return home, only to become involved again in sin before long. In some interviews with such returned missionaries, I have discovered that although they had ceased immoral or illegal conduct before they left home, they did not experience a genuine change of heart. I'm not talking here about the drama of an "Alma experience" necessarily; rather, they seem never to have experienced the joy and peace and enabling power that come from complete repentance. Consequently, they may have altered behavior patterns but did not receive the additional strength that flows from a regenerate heart. Neither did they enjoy the gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost in their ministry that they might have.

After his tragic fall, King David cried out: "Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me. . . . Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities" (Psalm 51:1-3, 6-9).

Note his poignant plea, his summary of all his pleading: "Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit. . . . For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise" (Psalm 51:10-17; see also Psalms 25; 38).

A marriage counselor has written: "One friend comes to mind who is self-disciplined in his health habits. He resists temptation to eat too many sweets, he jogs faithfully, and he paces his workload well. I respect him for that. His behavior reflects a commendable level of willpower, a level that sometimes puts to shame my efforts to eat, exercise, and work properly.

"Another friend responds to a terribly disappointing struggle in his life by loving others more deeply. He feels his pain but somehow uses it to make himself more aware of others' pain and of God's ability to encourage. When I look at his life, words like noble, godly, and rich come to mind.

"Observing habits of self-discipline, orderliness, and general cordiality do not bring to mind those same words. I describe my well-disciplined friend as effective, respectable, and nice. When I look at his life I think, 'I should be more disciplined.' I feel a bit pressured, somewhat guilty, and occasionally motivated. The effect of my struggling friend, on the other hand, is not to make me say, 'I should be more disciplined,' but 'I want to be more loving.'

"The difference is enormous. Some people push me to do better by trying harder. Others draw me to be better by enticing me with an indefinable quality about their lives that seems to grow out of an unusual relationship with Christ. . . .

"I want to do more than exercise kindness toward my wife; I want to freely give to her from deep resources within me. I want to do more than teach my kids what's expected and then enforce rules to keep them in line; I want to draw them by my life into the pursuit of God. . . . I want to do more than control my tendency toward depression; I want to taste the goodness of God to such an extent that I'm confident of perfect joy ahead" (Larry Crabb, Inside Out, 41-42).

The call of Christ is not just a call to be good, a call to abstain from sinful deeds. It is a call to holiness, a call to be renewed in the spirit by the Spirit. It is not just a call for more grit but instead a call to surrender and submit to the cleansing and renovating powers of the Holy One of Israel. One writer has observed: "We may be quite sure that Christ-centeredness and Christ-likeness will never be attained by our own unaided efforts. How can self drive out self? As well expect Satan to drive out Satan! For we are not interested in skin-deep holiness, in a merely external resemblance to Jesus Christ. We are not satisfied by a superficial modification of behavior patterns. . . . No, what we long for is a deep inward change of character, resulting from a change of nature and leading to a radical change of conduct. In a word, we want to be like Christ, and that thoroughly, profoundly, entirely. Nothing less than this will do" (Stott, Life in Christ, 109).

Though we strive daily to imitate the deeds of the only perfect Being to walk the earth, we also strive to cultivate the sacred influence that causes Christ to be "formed in [us]" and live in us (Galatians 4:18), resulting in a Christlike nature as well as Christlike behavior.

Jehovah spoke of the sinfulness of ancient Israel through Jeremiah, a warning that is remarkably relevant to our time: "For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water" (Jeremiah 2:13). It is not just that people do not come unto Christ and partake of the waters of life, as serious as that is; they also seek to do things their own way, to dig their own wells. These wells, as the Lord explained, are deficient or even perverse. It is so easy in a complex world to be recruited by secondary causes, to enterprises that promise happiness but that cannot fulfill. Instead of focusing as we ought upon comfort in Christ and trust in the Lord and submission to his will, we may be distracted by self-discovery and self-fulfillment and self-esteem. We hear of the need to control all the variables in our world and to be driven by carefully constructed plans for our lives. Jesus said simply, "I receive not honour from men" (John 5:41). That verse speaks volumes. Feelings of well-being, of peace, of contentment, of satisfaction with life—these things come from the Father of Lights, not from a fickle world. We would do well to seek for "Christ esteem"—feelings of true fulfillment that flow from relying on and trusting in him—instead of wandering in search of people's praise and applause. My colleague Catherine Thomas has asked: "If we live and move and have our being in him (see Acts 17:28), where is self-esteem? How do I even separate my self out from the abundant grace that makes my life and even my intellect go forward in some marvelous symbiosis with my Creator? The human self cannot be defined without putting God in the definition" (Spiritual Lightening, 20).

We are reminded continually of what a tense and stress-filled world we live in. The complexity of life and the competition not only to stay afloat but also to get ahead have resulted in a host of psychophysiological disorders that were unknown to our forebears. We hear much about how to cope with life. We cope with our problems. We cope with our unmerciful schedules. We cope with our family challenges. It is as if Jesus' comforting words had been adapted to our times as follows: "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will help you cope." But we really are in a position to do more than cope. Coping implies enduring the present crisis, surviving the moment. Jesus Christ promises deliverance, liberation, lasting peace—not passing pleasure. His solution is not simply to generate and build upon the power of positive thinking. He does not ask us to play Pollyanna, to live in a world of denial. What he does ask of us is that we do all we can to help ourselves and then be willing to shift our remaining burdens to him. What he does require is trust and reliance. As new creatures alive in Christ, we learn to be discerning—to labor in primary causes and to look in all the right places for peace.

In what I consider one of the greatest sermons in this dispensation, President Ezra Taft Benson affirmed that "besides the physical ordinance of baptism and the laying on of hands, one must be spiritually born again to gain exaltation and eternal life. . . .

"The Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature. . . .

"Yes, Christ changes men, and changed men can change the world.

"Men changed for Christ will be captained by Christ. . . .

"Finally, men captained by Christ will be consumed in Christ. To paraphrase President Harold B. Lee, they set fire in others because they are on fire. . . . May we be convinced that Jesus is the Christ, choose to follow him, be changed for Him, captained by Him, consumed in Him, and born again I pray" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1985, 4-6).
