Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 13

The Mind of Christ

As we have pointed out, the Fall takes a tremendous toll on us—physically, spiritually, emotionally, morally, and mentally. "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found," Jehovah spoke through Isaiah. "Call ye upon him while he is near: let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" (Isaiah 55:6-9). The new birth entails a forgiveness of sins, a cleansing of the human soul, and the formation of a new heart to feel the things of God. Inasmuch as true repentance leads to a new way of seeing things, becoming a new creature who lives in Christ is a process by which our way of thinking is transformed by the power of the Spirit.

Whereas the carnal mind is at enmity with God (Romans 8:7), the spiritual mind is in harmony with the mind and will of God (Romans 8:27). "I beseech of you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God" (Romans 12:1-2). Our calling as Christian disciples is thus to "put off the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the mind of the Spirit" (JST, Ephesians 4:22-23).

As we have said, to be "in Christ" is to be in union and in covenant with Christ. In his great intercessory prayer, the Savior pleaded to the Father not to take his disciples out of the world "but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. . . . Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me" (John 17:15, 20-21). Those who strive to keep the commandments, to be true to their part of the gospel covenant, are in Christ: "And this is his commandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us" (1 John 3:23-24; compare D&C 50:43).

In a profound theological statement, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught how our Eternal Father and his Beloved Son are one. Speaking of the Son, he said: "And he being the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, and having overcome, received a fullness of the glory of the Father, possessing the same mind with the Father, which mind is the Holy Spirit, that bears record of the Father and the Son" (Lectures on Faith, 5:2). According to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, our Redeemer "possesses the same mind with the Father, knowing and believing and speaking and doing as though he were the Father. This mind is theirs by the power of the Holy Ghost. That is, the Holy Ghost, who is a personage of spirit (a spirit man!), using the light of Christ, can give the same mind to all men, whether mortal or immortal" (New Witness, 75).

Those who are learning to live in Christ are gaining the mind of Christ. They are beginning to think and feel and act as their Exemplar. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard," Paul wrote, "neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, except he has the Spirit of God. . . . For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ" (JST, 1 Corinthians 2:9-11, 16).

It is true that the fulness of moral perfection, the fulness of sanctification, the fulness of divine might and power and glory—these things await us in a world to come. In this life we can, nonetheless, know, through the whisperings of the Holy Ghost, that the Lord is pleased with us, know that we are on course. Though it is true that the fulness of eternal reward is not available until after the resurrection, peace—the harbinger of eternal life that comes through the Spirit—can and should be ours in mortality.

One way we gain the mind of Christ is through a serious study of holy writ. As we go from darkness to light, as we put off the natural man and put on Christ, our eyes are opened to the profundity of that which has been spoken and written by the ordained servants of God. New writing, as it were, begins to appear before our eyes. The scriptures come alive. They become ours. Further, the more we study them, the more their language and logic distill upon our soul and form our speech, our discernment, and our principles. As we read them, we hear the word of God (D&C 18:34-36). In his last address to the Church, Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated: "In speaking of these wondrous things [the atonement of Christ] I shall use my own words, though you may think they are the words of scripture, words spoken by other Apostles and prophets.

"True it is they were first proclaimed by others, but they are now mine, for the Holy Spirit of God has borne witness to me that they are true, and it is now as though the Lord had revealed them to me in the first instance. I have thereby heard his voice and know his word" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1985, 9).

Revelation is another means of gaining the mind of Christ. "Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation" (D&C 8:2-3). When our hearts are purified of sin, the Spirit can make known to us the will of God concerning us. Enos reported that as he was struggling in the Spirit, the voice of the Lord came into his mind (Enos 1:10). "A person may profit," Joseph Smith instructed, "by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, . . . and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151).

Still another important evidence of spiritual growth is the quality of our prayers. Having been forgiven of our sins, having sung the song of redeeming love (Alma 5:26), we feel a greater need to commune with Deity more regularly and consistently. Our petitions are more heartfelt and our expressions more sincere. Not all of our prayers will be like Enos's (nor were Enos's, for that matter). But occasionally we will feel the need to wrestle with our God in prayer—for remission of sins, for purity of motive, for needed assistance. Our souls will cry out for spiritual sustenance, for insights, for peace. In addition, there will come times when our words reach beyond our thoughts, when we pray for people or circumstances or eventualities that we have not previously contemplated.

Paul instructed the Saints that "the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered" (Romans 8:26), or, as the Prophet Joseph clarified, "with striving which cannot be expressed" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 278). "And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God" (Romans 8:27). That is to say, the Spirit, the Comforter, who "knoweth all things" (D&C 42:17), leads us to see and feel what is deep within our souls and to pray more in keeping with our true needs than with our wants. In such a spiritual state, we no longer pray from our own agenda; the mind of God is being manifest through our prayers. Such prayers are thus more than petitions; they are instructive, because we learn from what we have said.

A supernal blessing of this kind of prayer is that, because we are speaking as we are led by the power of the Spirit, we always receive that for which we pray. "He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh" (D&C 46:30). Nephi, son of Helaman, was therefore promised: "I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will" (Helaman 10:5). "And if ye are purified and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done. But know this, it shall be given you what you shall ask" (D&C 50:29-30).

When we have been born of the Spirit, we are much less concerned with how we appear or how we sound; we are more concerned that our prayers are sincere. Mormon records the following incident of the risen Lord in the Book of Mormon: "And it came to pass that when Jesus had thus prayed unto the Father, he came unto his disciples [the Twelve], and behold, they did still continue, without ceasing, to pray unto him; and they did not multiply many words, for it was given unto them what they should pray, and they were filled with desire" (3 Nephi 19:24).

Those who have the mind of Christ do not "have a mind to injure one another, but to live peaceably, and to render to every man according to that which is his due" (Mosiah 4:13). The mind of Christ motivates us to love and serve one another and to strive for that social union that characterizes Zion (Moses 7:18). Paul encouraged the Saints to "let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: . . . that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel" (Philippians 1:27). That is, we are to be "likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind" (Philippians 2:2).

When there is no contention in an individual soul, there is less likely to be contention between souls. Men and women can then "look forward with one eye, having one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another" (Mosiah 18:21). Whereas the spirit of the world divides, the Spirit of God unites. Whereas the spirit of the world encourages divisive competition, the Spirit of God prompts us to look to the needs of others and to cooperate. In short, whereas the spirit of the world celebrates diversity as an end in itself, the Spirit of God calls us to unity in all our diversity.

To gain the mind of God is to know how to act and what to speak. I remember very well a warm June evening in Louisiana, a few months after I returned from my mission. I was sitting with my mom and dad, watching television. The phone rang, and my father was summoned to the hospital to give a priesthood blessing to a sixteen-year-old boy, a friend of my younger sister, who had collapsed on the softball field and had been rushed to the hospital. My dad was told that the young man had contracted some strange degenerative nerve disease and that if something did not happen soon he would die. We rushed to the hospital, took the elevator to the fifth floor, and hurried through the doors that opened to the waiting room. We were greeted by the news that the young man had died. We did our best to console the family and then made our way home.

As we walked in the back door, my sister asked, "How is he?"

I told her that her friend had passed away.

She came right back with, "Well, why didn't you raise him from the dead?"

Being the seasoned and experienced returned missionary that I was, having almost all the answers to life's questions, I stuttered for a second and then turned to my father. "Yeah, Dad, why didn't we raise him from the dead?"

Dad's answer was kind but firm. It was also terribly instructive: "Because the Spirit of the Lord didn't prompt us to do so."

In the years since, I have come to know something about my dad's faith. He recalled a time when his father had been prompted by the Spirit, and the dead had been raised to life again. My father knew when to move and when not to move. He had faith. He understood the importance of knowing the mind of God.

Joseph Smith taught that working by faith is working by the power of mental exertion rather than by physical force (Lectures on Faith, 7:3). I am persuaded that the mental exertion of which he spoke is not just a cognitive exercise but rather a stern, strenuous effort, a spiritual search to know the mind and will of God and then to abide by it and act according to that will. "Working by faith is not the mere speaking of a few well-chosen words," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written. "Anyone with the power of speech could have commanded the rotting corpse of Lazarus to come forth, but only one whose power was greater than death could bring life again to the brother of Mary and Martha. Nor is working by faith merely a mental desire, however strong, that some eventuality should occur. There may be those whose mental powers and thought processes are greater than any of the saints, but only persons who are in tune with the Infinite can exercise the spiritual forces and powers that come from him." In short, "faith cannot be exercised contrary to the order of heaven or contrary to the will and purposes of him whose power it is. Men work by faith when they are in tune with the Spirit and when what they seek to do by mental exertion and by the spoken word is the mind and will of the Lord" (New Witness, 191-92).

To gain the mind of Christ is to grow in discernment, not only to distinguish clearly between right and wrong (which is vital) but also to distinguish the important from the less important. The reborn Christian senses what matters a great deal and what matters but little. That is, to be born again is not necessarily to champion every cause or lead every noble crusade in society. Rather, we strive to labor in primary causes, to expend our time and our talents and our resources on those things that do the most to build the kingdom of God and bless lives.

The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that "God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 51).

Indeed, as we grow into a meaningful spiritual union with Christ, we come to treasure the sacred and to be sobered by the responsibility of working with the souls of men and women. "The things of God are of deep import," the Prophet taught, "and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out. Thy mind, O man! if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation, must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity—thou must commune with God." And then the choice seer added, in words with which the hearts of the spiritually reborn humbly vibrate: "How much more dignified and noble are the thoughts of God, than the vain imaginations of the human heart! None but fools will trifle with the souls of men" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 137).
