Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 14

The Tongue of Angels

Several years ago I walked out of our stake center with two of my sons after viewing the satellite broadcast of a general priesthood meeting. I was pensive and repentant, as I always am after such a meeting. One emotion that inevitably fills my bosom during and after conference is deep gratitude for prophets, seers, and revelators. I thought about what was said, what I felt, and what I needed to do to improve. Just before we got to the parking lot, I overheard an elderly high priest in our stake say to the man with him, "Wasn't that powerful! President Gordon B. Hinckley just spoke with the tongue of angels." I nodded my head in complete agreement. I knew exactly what he meant.

As he came to the close of his second book, Nephi, son of Lehi, wrote: "I know that if ye shall follow the Son, with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ, by baptism—yea, by following your Lord and your Savior down into the water, according to his word, behold, then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost; yea, then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost; and then can ye speak with the tongue of angels, and shout praises unto the Holy One of Israel" (2 Nephi 31:13). We know that speaking in tongues and the interpretation of tongues are two of the gifts of the Spirit, two evidences of the true Church and signs that the Lord is working with his people. But what are they? What does it mean to speak in tongues?

An example of speaking in tongues is found in the second chapter of Acts in the New Testament. On the day of Pentecost—some fifty days after Passover and a day that was traditionally observed as the occasion when Moses had received the law from God on Sinai—the Holy Ghost was poured out upon the disciples in a manner they had never known before. Luke records in verses 1 through 6: "And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting." Both the Hebrew word ruakh and the Greek word pneuma may be translated as "wind, breath, or spirit." The "rushing mighty wind" that was felt by the early Saints thus symbolized a mighty outpouring of the Holy Spirit. "And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them." That is, the people witnessed "tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them" (New International Version) or "flames like tongues of fire distributed among them" (Revised English Bible). "And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven. Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language."

This monumental event in the history of the Christian Church made it possible for the gospel to be preached by simple men to people of other tongues. So speaking a foreign but known tongue is a manifestation of the gift of tongues. We have numerous examples of this phenomenon in the history of the Church, times when either the speakers or the listeners were actuated by the Spirit of the Lord, when a foreign language was spoken or understood, and thus when communication and edification followed. This happens regularly with our full-time missionaries. By hard work and consistent effort and practice—and, most importantly, through a rich endowment of the Holy Ghost—elders and sisters are enabled to acquire language skills in a miraculously short period of time. They recognize and understand and feel things that would normally require many years to master. It is an everyday occurrence that staggers the learned and the wise of the world.

A second manifestation of tongues is when persons speak the pure Adamic language. We are told in modern revelation that our first parents were taught by God to read and write in a language that was "pure and undefiled" (Moses 6:6). The Adamic language continued among the children of men until the time of the Tower of Babel, at which time the speech of the people (except for the Jaredites, who took this sacred tongue with them to America) was confounded (Genesis 11:1-9; Ether 1:33-37; Smith, Way to Perfection, 67-69). The Adamic tongue was a powerful language that communicated not only words and ideas but also the power of God. "And so great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness; and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him" (Moses 7:13). Moroni seems in awe of the power of this language, as contained in the writings of the brother of Jared: "And thou hast made us [the Nephites] that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, thou hast not made us mighty in writing like unto the brother of Jared, for thou madest him that the things which he wrote were mighty even as thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them" (Ether 12:24).

One of the first demonstrations of the use of the Adamic tongue in our dispensation took place early in the history of the Church. Brigham Young relates the following story: "In September, 1832, Brother Heber C. Kimball took his horse and wagon, Brother Joseph Young and myself accompanying him, and started for Kirtland to see the Prophet Joseph. We visited many friends on the way, and some Branches of the Church. We exhorted them and prayed with them, and I spoke in tongues. Some pronounced it genuine and from the Lord, and others pronounced it of the devil.

"We proceeded to Kirtland and stopped at John P. Greene's, who had just arrived there with his family. We rested a few minutes, took some refreshment, and started to see the Prophet. We went to his father's house and learned that he was in the woods chopping. We immediately repaired to the woods, where we found the Prophet and two or three of his brothers, chopping and hauling wood. Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and received the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be, as a true prophet. He was happy to see us, and bid us welcome. We soon returned to his house, he accompanying us.

"In the evening a few of the brethren came in, and we conversed together upon the things of the kingdom. He called upon me to pray; in my prayer I spoke in tongues. As soon as we arose from our knees the brethren flocked around him, and asked his opinion concerning the gift of tongues that was upon me. He told them it was the pure Adamic language. Some said to him they expected he would condemn the gift Brother Brigham had, but he said, 'No, it is of God, and the time will come when Brother Brigham Young will preside over this Church" (Millennial Star 25 [3 January 1863]: 439).

At the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, and on many other occasions, Latter-day Saint men and women have enjoyed this gift. Because most of us, like Ammon, often "cannot say the smallest part which [we] feel" (Alma 26:16), speaking in the language of God, by virtue of a spiritual outpouring, seems to allow people to speak and rejoice and exult in the things of righteousness, to express their praise to God from the depth of their souls, and otherwise to give voice to that which is unutterable.

It is presumably this manifestation of the gift of tongues that many outside the true church seek to acquire or imitate. Many Pentecostals hold it as a tenet of their faith that one is not truly born again until he or she speaks in tongues. The Prophet Joseph Smith, like Paul, his apostolic colleague, said that the gift of tongues is in some ways the least of the spiritual gifts but the one most sought after (see 1 Corinthians 14:8-32; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 246). Because Satan is so eager to deceive those who seek excessively for the gift of tongues (ibid., 25, 162, 195), the Prophet declared that anything taught in tongues was not to be received as doctrine (ibid., 229). "Tongues were given," he explained, "for the purpose of preaching among those whose language is not understood; as on the day of Pentecost, etc., and it is not necessary for tongues to be taught to the Church particularly, for any man that has the Holy Ghost, can speak of the things of God in his own tongue as well as to speak in another; for faith comes not by signs, but by hearing the word of God" (ibid., 148-49).

That statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith leads us to the third manifestation of tongues and the one to which Nephi referred. "Do ye not remember," Nephi inquired, "that I said unto you that after ye had received the Holy Ghost ye could speak with the tongue of angels? And now, how could ye speak with the tongue of angels save it were by the Holy Ghost? Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ" (2 Nephi 32:2-3). The message is simple, straightforward, and deeply profound. Men and women who have been born of the Spirit, who are becoming new creatures alive in Christ, enjoy the gift and influence of the Holy Ghost. When they teach or preach, they do so by that same power. The result is that they convey not merely their own will and desires but the mind and will of Christ. Stated more simply, President Gordon B. Hinckley spoke with the tongue of angels in the sense that he spoke with the power and persuasion of the Holy Spirit. He spoke what angels would have spoken. He delivered what Christ wanted delivered. It was as though angels had come and delivered the message, or, more powerfully, as though our blessed Redeemer himself had been present and had spoken to his people.

That may be both a frightening and an exhilarating proposition. We are the servants of the Lord. As members of his Church and kingdom, we are called upon to represent him, to speak and act as he would speak and act. If we strive with all our hearts to be worthy of his Spirit, he will speak his words through us. When that happens, it is as though we had been given, by and through the Holy Ghost, a divine investiture of authority, a sacred authorization to represent our Master. This is his work. This work is spiritual, and for it to make a difference in the world, it must be done under his guiding and empowering influence.

Those who are born of the Spirit speak and act differently from those who are still acclimated to the things of a fallen world. Their words are different; their message carries evident power. When they speak, people listen. Like him who is their Prototype, they speak as one having authority from God (JST, Matthew 7:37).

The Gospel of Matthew records the following of Jesus' childhood and growth to maturity: "And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come. And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him. And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh" (JST, Matthew 3:24-26). John the Beloved wrote that "the anointing which ye have received of him"—that is, the Holy Ghost which we have received from God—"abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him" (1 John 2:27). Many things cannot be learned from even good people; some things must be learned only from the wisdom and divine judgment that flow from and through the Spirit of God. Truly, "by the power of the Holy Ghost [we] may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:5).

It is a consummate privilege to enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost and a humbling honor to participate in those soul-stirring experiences in which a merciful and kind Savior sees fit to work through us. Sometimes it's a little scary, too. More than twenty years ago while serving as an elders quorum president, I received a phone call at about 11:30 p.m. from my quorum secretary. He asked if I had a moment to visit with him. I looked at my watch and asked, "Would you like to talk on the phone, or do we need to meet somewhere?"

He indicated that he would like to come to our apartment for a priesthood blessing. I asked what was wrong, and he responded: "Oh, it's nothing like that. My wife and I are perfectly healthy. I just need a special blessing to help me in making a big decision. I need to know whether our family should move. I have had this strong feeling that we should move."

This was the first I had heard of the matter. Besides, he was an excellent quorum secretary. "I can tell you what to do without giving you a blessing," I said. "The Lord wants your family to stay put. You are blessing lives here and now."

He said that he was perfectly willing to forget the whole thing if that was what the Lord wanted. "Could I come over right now and just get your feelings confirmed in a special blessing?"

"Certainly," I said. "Come on over."

I had just finished dressing when the knock came at the door. He came in and we visited for a moment. Then I laid my hands upon his head, paused for a few seconds, and proceeded to tell him very forcefully that he and his family should move as quickly as possible. I was stunned. He and his wife were not surprised at all and felt a great peace about the entire enterprise. They packed up and moved within a week. I wondered for months about that strange incident but found out eventually that it was the right thing for him to do; he entered a special school in the new area and went on to great success in his employment and in the Church there. Often, very often, we cannot see the big picture and must be assisted by him who knows all things. If we will let him, he will move in his mysterious ways his wonders to perform—through us.

More than ten years ago I was asked to travel to a part of the country to assist the Latter-day Saints there who were dealing with opposition. My assignment was to help them in facing and responding properly to anti-Mormonism. A temple had recently been dedicated in the area, and, as is so often the case, enemies of the Church came out of the woodwork. I spoke in one town on Thursday night, and all went well. On Friday night I delivered the same message to members of the Church in an adjoining city. On Saturday morning I slept in a bit, arose, went for a nice walk, and returned to the motel. I read and worked on a few projects for several hours that day. An early dinner was followed by a glance at the television to check on sports scores. After getting dressed, I knelt beside the bed and prayed. There was nothing particularly unusual about this occasion: I thanked the Lord for the good experiences we had had the two preceding nights and asked for his help one more time. I then heard myself say: "Father, I want to do what's right and what thou wouldst have done. Tell me what to say, and I will say it. Tell me what not to say, and I won't say it."

A local member of the Church picked me up within ten or fifteen minutes, and we drove to the stake center. A deep discomfort began to fill my soul as the time drew closer. When I considered speaking on how to deal with opposition, I felt sick. During the middle of a special musical number, I leaned over to the stake president and said, "President, I have a problem."

"What's the matter?" he asked. "You don't look so good."

I told him I felt extremely uncomfortable about speaking on this subject, that I knew this presentation had been advertised for several months, and I didn't want to disappoint the five hundred Saints in attendance.

He smiled and said gently, "Brother Millet, I think you need to stand up and tell the people what the Lord wants you to say."

I felt a few seconds' comfort, for now part one of my problem was solved. I knew clearly what was not to be discussed. I stood at the pulpit and realized that my next task was to find out what topic was to be addressed.

A speaker can only take so long telling the congregation how lovely it is to be there, how wonderful the area is, how delightful it is to be a part of the Church Educational System, etc., etc. I prayed with all my heart to know what to do and what to say. There was no private agenda here, no favorite subject I was longing to discuss. For about ten minutes I felt my way through the darkness. Then the light came on. It was clear to me that I was to speak on what modern prophets and the scriptures of the Restoration have taught us concerning life after death. I glanced at my briefcase near my feet. It was filled with information about opposition, but all that I had to assist me in this new undertaking were my scriptures and a copy of Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. And, of course, the Spirit of the Lord.

That was one of those rare occasions in a lifetime. For well over an hour I spoke on this subject with no notes, no quotations from Church leaders, nothing but the earnest desire of my heart to do this subject justice. I learned a great deal that night from what I had to say, and I felt the congregation did as well. My tongue was loosed, and I enjoyed a fluency of speech I had never experienced. The words and writings and teachings of Church leaders flooded into my mind, and I spoke them. When I sat down, I looked over at the stake president. He was very sober, and so I feared that perhaps I had disappointed him or had been inappropriate in some way. After the closing prayer, and while the members of the Church walked up to the stand to shake hands, the stake president said that he would like to speak briefly with me when everyone was gone.

The president and I sat together. He asked, "Do you know why you chose to speak on life after death?" I shook my head. He said, "Brother Millet, a member of our stake died a few days ago. It was a tragic death, one that raised many questions about why the Lord would allow such things to happen. A funeral was held for the young man in this chapel late this afternoon. Even after the services, many people had concerns about life here and life hereafter. The Lord blessed you tonight, Brother Millet. You addressed most of those questions in your talk. Thank you."

A few members approached me after the president and I had finished our talk to ask if I would like to join them for a late snack. I thanked them for offering but indicated that I was very tired and simply wanted to get some rest. What I most wanted to do right then was to return to the motel, kneel beside my bed once again, and thank a gracious Lord for allowing me to be a part of something significant.

My feelings are very close to the surface when I reflect on that unusual experience. I think of it often, and it reminds me that God Almighty is in charge—this is his work, and it must be done in his own way and according to his will. I am weak, ever so weak, when it comes to speaking the words of truth, but I know, as Ammon humbly affirmed, that "in [God's] strength I can do all things" (Alma 26:12; compare Philippians 4:13). Our task is to repent and improve and read and study and prepare and pray and plead for divine assistance. And when the time is right, God will work through us to bless his children. What the Lord said in regard to the early missionaries is to some degree true of each of us who seeks to be led and empowered by His Spirit: "And ye shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two by two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, declaring my word like unto angels of God" (D&C 42:6).
