Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 15

Everyday Holiness

As we mature spiritually, our appreciation for the Sabbath and for the Church of Jesus Christ grows. In a modern revelation the Lord set forth the principles of proper Sabbath observance: "And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day; for verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High; nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times; but remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full. Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer" (D&C 59:9-14).

This passage represents, in a sense, a divine formula for enhancing our individual spirituality:

To keep ourselves unspotted from the world, we should attend Church meetings. The Church is the body of Christ, the body of believers. It is made up of men and women who have by covenant come out of the world and given themselves to the cause of Jesus Christ. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is absolutely indispensable to our salvation. No supposed personal relationship with Jesus, no commitment to the gospel, no high level of Christian conduct in society can compensate for what is to be found in the Church. If we are not at ease in the Church, if we are bored or put off or offended, if we find ourselves saying (even privately) that we do not need the Church, then something in our lives needs adjustment.

We live in trying times. We are surrounded by gross wickedness—indecency, immorality, abuse, harshness, crudeness, and insensitivity to the things of God. To keep us from yielding to the persuasions of the worldly, the Lord has provided a sacred institution we call the Church. Attending Church meetings focuses our minds, for at least three hours a week, on things that matter. Attending Church meetings puts us in contact with people of goodwill, people who have the same desires for time and eternity that we do. Attending Church meetings allows us to learn and grow and develop; it also allows us to give and share and strengthen others.

I have been surprised and somewhat disappointed by how many Latter-day Saints choose not to attend Sunday School or Priesthood or Relief Society, how many leave the building instead of going to Young Men or Young Women classes. Do we honestly feel we are strong enough on our own to make it without all the reinforcement and inoculation we can receive in our Church meetings? Further, not one of us has all the answers, and we learn even as we teach one another. More that twenty years ago I had occasion to speak privately with Dallin H. Oaks, who was then president of Brigham Young University. I asked him for one of his keys to a successful life. He blushed a bit at the question, as you would suppose, and then said, "Well, I have always tried to learn something from every person I meet." Each of us has something to offer—an idea, a feeling, an application— something that can prove valuable, that can assist others to resist temptation in a moment of weakness or trial. Those who are becoming new creatures in Christ enjoy Church meetings and are open, teachable, and willing to participate.

We go to meetings on the Sabbath to participate in the sacraments of the Church. The sacraments, or ordinances, of the Church are essential. No matter how good a person we might strive to be during the week, we cannot go where God and Christ are without receiving the ordinances of baptism, confirmation, ordination to the priesthood for men, endowment, and sealings. The ordinances represent channels of divine power, the means whereby the power of the Almighty is brought into our individual and congregational lives. "And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; for without this"—the power of godliness—"no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live" (D&C 84:19-22).

The ordinance of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper is vital in our quest for deeper spirituality. A friend once asked a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles how to live in this world in such a way as to be prepared to live hereafter in the celestial kingdom. The Church leader answered quickly: "Take the sacrament worthily every week." Though that answer may sound obvious, it points us to the need for ordinances. If we skip sacrament meeting once in a while, then we are not only missing the spiritual growth that could come through contact with the Saints and participation in sacred music and the spoken word but we are also denying ourselves a regular opportunity to be healed.

In ancient Israel, the Aaronic priest officiated at the sacrificial altars in behalf of the people. He offered bulls or lambs or doves as a blood offering to atone for the sins of the men and women of the congregation. It was not the blood of the animals that saved them (Hebrews 10:4) but rather what the blood stood for—the precious blood of the Messiah that would be shed in the meridian of time. If the people brought their offering in the right spirit, presented it to the priests, and repented fully of their transgression, a remission of sins followed. In our day, the Aaronic priest likewise officiates at the holy altar. We go to church, present our offering—a broken heart and a contrite spirit (3 Nephi 9:20; D&C 59:8)—and the priest officiates in our behalf. It is not bread and water that save us but rather what the bread and water represent. If we can attend sacrament meeting with a broken heart and a contrite spirit (meaning that we are repentant and eager to rid ourselves of our sins), focus our thoughts and our feelings on the atoning offering of Christ our Savior, and covenant once again to keep the Lord's commandments and plead for his strength and goodness to enable us to do so, then healing and cleansing take place. It is as though we can enjoy a rebaptism every Sabbath. Participation in the ordinance of the sacrament is an occasion for meditation, introspection, self-analysis, and covenant renewal. It is an important reason for attending sacrament meeting.

The Sabbath should be a day to rest from our labors and pay our devotions to the Most High God. The Lord's holy day has largely become a holiday in our fast-paced world. Men and women scurry about on weekends in a maddened effort to grab all the relaxation and leisure they can find. In the process they do not make a way for their soul to be rested. Just as the physical body needs a diversion from the cares and trouble of the world of work, so the spirit within us needs diversion from the things that distract us from sacred matters. Elder James E. Faust stated: "Over a lifetime of observation, it is clear to me that the farmer who observes the Sabbath day seems to get more done on his farm than he would if he worked seven days. The mechanic will be able to turn out more and better products in six days than in seven. The doctor, the lawyer, the dentist, the scientist will accomplish more by trying to rest on the Sabbath than if he tries to utilize every day of the week for his professional work. I would counsel all students, if they can, to arrange their schedules so that they do not study on the Sabbath. If students and other seekers after truth will do this, their minds will be quickened and the infinite Spirit will lead them to the verities they wish to learn. This is because God has hallowed his day and blessed it as a perpetual covenant of faithfulness" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1991, 45).

We should strive to make every day a holy day. It is a marvelous thing to strive to keep the Sabbath day holy. It is even more marvelous to strive to maintain a sense of holiness in our lives "on all days and at all times" (D&C 59:11). In short, as Latter-day Saints we are expected to live our religion seven days a week, to reflect on and keep our covenants every day. Several years ago, when I was teaching the Gospel Doctrine class in our ward, my wife, Shauna, and I were trying to decide whether we should go to a particular movie one Saturday evening. We had heard that it was quite good, but we also knew that it was rated PG-13 and that there were some objectionable parts. I finally said to Shauna, "Let's not go. I have to teach Sunday School in the morning, and I don't want to do anything that would keep me from enjoying the Spirit of the Lord." And so we talked and read for a few hours that night.

As I laid my head on the pillow about 11:00 p.m., I reflected on what a noble choice I had made, on how wonderful it was that I had exercised the appropriate restraint. And then there came some unanticipated thoughts: "So you think you're really something, huh? Well, what if this had been a Tuesday night or a Thursday night? Would you still have been as concerned about tarnishing your mind and heart? Would you have gone to the movie then, or do you plan to go next Wednesday or Friday?" My smug self-righteousness was rapidly transformed into the remorseful realization that I should be just as concerned about what I consume on Monday morning as I am on Saturday night. My vows, meaning my covenants made at baptism and in the holy temple, should and must guide me throughout the entire week.

Sunday services, for example, are so much more rewarding and inspirational if we have taken occasion to study and pray and think seriously during the week. My individual devotion on Monday through Saturday lays the foundation for true worship on the Sabbath; the Sabbath thus becomes the capstone of a successful effort at making every day a holy day. If I have difficulty keeping my mind focused on Jesus Christ and the Atonement during the fifteen minutes the sacrament is being passed on Sunday, it may be because I have spent so little time pondering on Christ and the Atonement Monday through Saturday. Individual devotion, including a consistent program of scripture study, also enables me to contribute to the discussion and the spirit of learning that should be taking place in our Sunday classes. It is a sweet experience for us to gather as a group of Saints who have read the scriptures under consideration that day. Sundays then become a time of spiritual refreshment and transformation.

"But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations"—that is, "offerings, whether of time, talents, or means, in service of God and fellowman" (D&C 59:12, note b)—"and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord." We do not believe in using the meetings of the Church to confess private sins, unless our sin was such that it affects the whole congregation. We confess our sins to one another in the sense that we seek to make amends with our brothers and sisters against whom we may have trespassed, so that we may be properly reconciled to man and God before taking the holy emblems. We confess our sins to the Lord in prayer and in our moments of reflection during the sacramental service. The more serious sins that may affect our standing in the Church or our ability to partake of the sacrament worthily, such as moral sins or violations of the law of the land, should be confessed privately to priesthood leaders.

The Sabbath is a day of fasting and prayer. We are told in the revelation that we are to let our food "be prepared with singleness of heart that [our] fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that [our] joy may be full" (D&C 59:13). We eat to live. We do not live to eat. The Sabbath meal should not be the central event of the day, nor should we miss church or slip out of meetings to prepare it. The Savior directed the Saints: "I give unto you a commandment that ye shall continue in prayer and fasting from this time forth" (D&C 88:76). To fast is not just to go without food and drink; it is to hunger and thirst after righteousness, to yearn for and crave spiritual nourishment. On the Sabbath, we enter into a type of fast in the sense that we long to be filled with the gifts of the Spirit. We desire with fervency, akin to that of the starving, to be endowed with pure intelligence. We have a righteous obsession to see the face of God. "And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (3 Nephi 12:6).

Oddly enough, we are in a position to hunger and thirst after righteousness on Sunday more fully as we feast on things of righteousness on the other days of the week. Jacob counsels us: "Come, my brethren [and sisters], every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come buy and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without price. Wherefore, do not spend money for that which is of no worth, nor your labor for that which cannot satisfy . . . . and come unto the Holy One of Israel, and feast upon that which perisheth not, neither can be corrupted, and let your soul delight in fatness" (2 Nephi 9:50-51; compare Isaiah 55:1-2).

I believe with all my heart in the goodness and value of the Church. If we will take seriously our opportunities to rest and feed our souls on the Sabbath, to gather our families for family devotionals, and to curtail our worldly pursuits, then the Lord will pour out his Spirit upon us in ways we cannot now comprehend. As Amulek taught, this life is the time to prepare to meet God; now is the day of our salvation (Alma 34:31-32). Now is the day for which each of us has prepared for an infinitely long period of time. Our life here and now is thus a mission, not a career. We are here to please God, not man. We need not make the Sabbath burdensome by establishing long lists of don'ts but only remind one another why Jehovah has established the Sabbath and what it means to honor, or hallow, it. Though we ought to look and act differently on the Sabbath, it should also be a happy day, a rejuvenating break from much of what we do during the week.

A friend of mine who served for some years as a successful bishop confided to me, "Since I have been released, I just can't seem to get back into the spirit of Church. It seems like my motivation for being spiritual left with my calling as bishop." I spoke bluntly to him because I love him. I reminded him that something is not right in our individual lives if the only time and place in which we find spiritual refreshment is at Church meetings on Sunday. The Church is necessary to our spiritual growth and our sanctification as Saints, but we ought to be growing on our own. Then Sabbath worship becomes the capstone to our personal worship, and the week is complete. If we will set aside time each day—maybe only ten or fifteen minutes—to read, ponder, and pray, we will find fulfillment in life, in spite of life's challenges and difficulties. We need not hold major office or visible position in the Church to be happy. As President Joseph F. Smith taught, "To do well those things which God ordained to be the common lot of all man-kind, is the truest greatness" (Gospel Doctrine, 285).

Too often the less important things—not just the ugly, nasty, and vile things—crowd out the sacred in our lives. Simple matters that result in revelation and priesthood power and family solidarity—matters like personal devotion, weekly family home evening, daily scripture study and prayer—are being upstaged by secondary causes, community demands, and even in some cases by well-intended but perhaps excessive Church-related activities. That is one reason many of us feel so empty and unfulfilled and exhausted: we are not taking the time to charge our spiritual batteries.

When we are alive in Christ, the Spirit of the Lord sharpens our minds and opens us to new truths. It enhances our social skills and deepens our love and affection for those of the household of faith, as well as all of our Heavenly Father's children. The Spirit motivates us to serve others and to undertake our duties in the Church with enthusiasm. The new birth gives us a profound appreciation for the scriptures, for the words of the prophets, for the doctrines and ordinances of salvation. In short, the new birth expands our love for God, for the people of God, for the Church of God. It produces holiness, greater holiness, seven-days-a-week holiness.
