Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 17

Free Indeed

I attended college during the 1960s and was served up a regular diet of rebellion, revolution, and shouts for freedom. In addition to necessary and appropriate efforts to alleviate human suffering, there were the ever-present crusades against authority, untiring efforts to throw off all shackles and hindrances to individual expression and personal whim. Everyone wanted to be free. Everyone wanted to do his or her own thing, to be untrammeled in the search for self, undiminished in the march to a different drummer. Because many agreed there were no absolutes (one of the most absolute propositions ever made), standards of morality and decency were washed away in a wave of ethical relativism.

In my second year of college, I decided to live on campus and acquired a room in the stadium housing at Louisiana State University. It was nice to avoid the half-hour drive in the morning and the forty-five-minute drive home each night. It was nice to feel a touch of independence from family and old friends, to start a new life, to build new associations. But it was also a lonely time for me, and, in looking back, one of the lowest periods of my life. Homesickness plagued me (this was a year before my mission), and I lost interest in my classes. In addition, my two roommates made life a bit challenging. One was a brilliant math major, a young man who was a very committed Southern Baptist. The other young man, whose major area of study I cannot recall, was an active and enthusiastic Pentecostal. In the evenings our conversation inevitably turned to religion, and inevitably the two Protestants ganged up on the Mormon.

We debated prophecy and tongues and miracles and priesthood and golden plates and angels and man becoming as God. In looking back, I really didn't handle myself very well (and didn't represent the Church as well as I might have). I focused on the wrong things, argued out of context, and, in general, became embroiled in a contentious spirit; it is no wonder that the Spirit of the Lord did not proceed from me to them and communicate the truthfulness of the restored gospel. One thing my two Protestant friends constantly bashed me with was the idea that Mormons are "works-crazy," that we focus so much on doing our duty and accomplishing the "work of the Church" that we do not truly accept Jesus as our Savior and rely upon his mercy and grace. I told them again and again that we do believe in Christ but that he expects us to keep his commandments. At that point my two associates would say, "Robert, you're a slave! You are required to march lockstep to every command of your church and its leaders. You're not free; you're a prisoner."

Thirty years have passed since those fiery conversations, but I can still remember how I felt then: frustrated, tongue-tied, and helpless. I knew the Church was true, and I didn't feel like a slave, but my verbal skills were limited. There were times, I must confess, when I lay in my bunk and wondered just how free I really was; whether I might indeed be a slave to a way of life; whether these two guys might know what they were talking about. Besides, freedom was in the air, and young people all about me were loosening their hold on time-honored and time-tested values. Though I can honestly state there was never a time during those years when I did not feel, deep within my soul, the spirit of testimony, yet there were times—quite a number of times, in fact—when a worldly worldview led me to deep reflection on this matter of freedom.

It would take much of a lifetime for me to come to understand some of life's most important lessons about freedom and responsibility and maturity and discipline and submission and surrender and commitment and consecration. These lessons would be learned not just from a study of the written word but, perhaps more importantly, from life's reality tests and mortality's vicissitudes. Like Jesus and Melchizedek, we learn obedience by the things we suffer (Hebrews 5:8). As Cecil B. DeMille wisely pointed out, men and women cannot really break the Ten Commandments; they can only break themselves against the commandments (Commencement Address, 6).

It would take many years of trials and tests and failures and successes before I could appreciate what Elder Boyd K. Packer had in mind: "Choice among my freedoms is my freedom to be obedient. I obey because I want to: I choose to." Elder Packer continued: "Some people are always suspicious that one is only obedient because he is compelled to be. They indict themselves with the very thought that one is only obedient because he is compelled to be. They feel that one would obey only through compulsion. They speak for themselves. I am free to be obedient, and I decided that—all by myself. I pondered on it; I reasoned it; I even experimented a little. I learned some sad lessons from disobedience. Then I tested it in the great laboratory of spiritual inquiry—the most sophisticated, accurate, and refined test that we can make of any principle. So I am not hesitant to say that I want to be obedient to the principles of the gospel. I want to. I have decided that. My volition, my agency, has been turned in that direction. The Lord knows that" (That All May Be Edified, 255).

Cain entered into a diabolical conspiracy with Satan and eventually killed his brother. "And Cain gloried in that which he had done." Note the first murderer's ironic cry: "I am free; surely the flocks of my brother falleth into my hands" (Moses 5:33). Free! Free? Cain was never more ensnared by conscience and more enslaved by divine law that cried out for retribution. He would thereafter be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth (Moses 5:39), spending his days fleeing not just from those who sought his life but also from the memory and the realization of what he had done. There is no freedom in sin, only in righteousness.

Our Lord and Savior was tabernacled in the flesh at a time when there was much confusion in the religious world—between means and ends, between tokens and covenants, between ritual and real religion. In addition to the 613 rules set forth in the law of Moses—248 commands and 365 prohibitions—the traditions of the elders and the commentaries upon the law had multiplied mercilessly over the generations. Sabbath observance, intended originally to be a glorious and spiritually lifting experience, had become burdensome and backbreaking. The Pharisees, in focusing on punctilious detail and minutiae, seemed bothered precious little by the painstaking labors they required. "For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers" (Matthew 23:4). It was in such a taxing environment that the Master offered the following invitation: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light" (Matthew 11:28-30).

Becoming a new creature alive in Christ entails our being yoked to Christ. Rebirth frees us from the bondage of sin (John 8:31-32), from the chains of hell forged through ignorance (Alma 12:9-11), from the slavery of false traditions, and from the deceptive trap of attempting to save oneself. It frees us from vanity, from the supposed need to impress others, from unnecessary personal ambition and social agendas. Rebirth frees us from an undue anxiety about possessing (and eventually being possessed by) this world's goods (Matthew 6:25). As Paul taught, in being made free from the slavery of sin, we become, appropriately, the servants of righteousness (Romans 6:18). More especially, we become servants of Christ; he becomes our new Head. Those who are born again become members of the family of Jesus Christ by adoption; they are changed from a carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness, becoming his sons and daughters (Mosiah 5:7; 27:25). "And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free" (Mosiah 5:8).

Lehi taught Jacob that "the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon" (2 Nephi 2:26; compare Helaman 14:30-31). Truly, when we have put off the natural man, we are no longer driven doggedly about by our passions; we begin instead to be enticed by the things of God. Mormon recorded: "And it came to pass in the thirty and sixth year [some two years after the Lord's crucifixion, resurrection, and visit to the Americas], the people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another. And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift" (4 Nephi 1:2-3). We are made free by Christ and through Christ and in Christ. "Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free," the Redeemer calls to us in modern revelation, "entangle not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean, until the Lord comes." And again, "I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed" (D&C 88:86; 98:8; see also John 8:36).

In a remarkable address to young people in which he warned them of the "spiritual crocodiles" that lie in wait to deceive and to mangle their souls, Elder Boyd K. Packer said: "I would like to make reference to . . . [an] experience, one I think of often but one I seldom talk about. I shall not mention it in detail; I only want to refer to it. It happened many years ago when I was perhaps not quite as young as you are now, and it had to do with my decision to follow that guide [the Holy Spirit].

"I knew what agency was and knew how important it was to be individual and to be independent, to be free. I somehow knew there was one thing the Lord would never take from me, and that was my free agency. I would not surrender my agency to any being but to Him! I determined that I would give Him the one thing that He would never take—my agency. I decided, by myself, that from that time on I would do things His way.

"That was a great trial for me, for I thought I was giving away the most precious thing I possessed. I was not wise enough in my youth to know that because I exercised my agency and decided myself, I was not losing it. It was strengthened!" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1976, 47).

Several years later I attended a priesthood leadership session of a regional conference. Elder Packer atttended that conference, accompanied by Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum of the Twelve and Elder John H. Groberg of the Seventy. It was a four-hour meeting, but time sped by, and all too soon we departed for home. Each of the Brethren spoke several times and each delivered profound counsel. One thing above all, however, has stayed in my mind. Elder Packer spoke again of his decision early in life to give to the Lord the one thing the Lord would never take by force—his agency. He then turned to the assembled priesthood leadership and said: "Brethren, I would recommend that you consider doing the same." And then he raised his hand, shook his finger at us, and warned, with unaccustomed sternness: "But don't you monkey with this. This is serious business!" I felt the power of that declaration, and the witness went forcefully into my heart. It is one thing to say "Thy will be done" and quite another truly to mean it. We must be prepared for such a sober move; we must count the cost (Luke 14:25-33). We need God's help to reach this point. Our prayer might well be, "Help thy servants to say, with thy grace assisting them: Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours" (D&C 109:44).

Our ability to surrender to God is inextricably tied to our dependence upon God. As long as we are still fighting to save ourselves, to solve all our own problems, to do things our own way and on our own timetable, we are like a drowning man who does not recognize help when it swims up to him. Surrendering to divine will entails a concurrent surrender of our own will. "The greatest mystery a man ever [learns]," President Brigham Young observed, "is to know how to control the human mind, and bring every faculty and power of the same in subjection to Jesus Christ" (in Journal of Discourses, 1:46). We will come to know the quiet acceptance of the Almighty when we stop fighting, when we have been born of the Spirit and have matured sufficiently to acknowledge our utter nothingness and inability to function without divine assistance.

"Indifference to the Savior," President Howard W. Hunter taught, "or failure to keep the commandments of God brings about insecurity, inner turmoil, and contention. These are the opposites of peace. Peace can come to an individual only by an unconditional surrender to him who is the Prince of peace and who has the power to confer peace" (That We Might Have Joy, 30). C. S. Lewis noted that our total dependence on the Lord and our acknowledgment of his power to save do not rule out the necessity for us to keep trying our best to do what is right. "To trust Him means, of course, trying to do all that He says. There would be no sense in saying you trusted a person if you would not take his advice. Thus if you have really handed yourself over to Him, it must follow that you are trying to obey Him. But trying in a new way, a less worried way" (Mere Christianity, 129).

How tragic is a world seeking for freedom and peace in all the wrong ways and in all the wrong places. The birth of the spirit is an awakening to life and light; a shedding of this world's trappings and attachments; a grander awareness of things of eternal import; and, of course, a birth of personal freedom and liberty, "the freedom to feel and to know, the freedom to do, and the freedom to be, at least a thousandfold more than we offer Him" (Packer, That All May Be Edified, 256). A person who has been born again is driven and directed by covenant, by a sacred cooperation with Deity toward the sanctification of the soul. Thus "men and women who turn their lives over to God," President Ezra Taft Benson taught, "will discover that He can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He will deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends, and pour out peace. Whoever will lose his life in the service of God will find eternal life" (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 361).
