Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 18

The Earnest of Our Inheritance

For many years Elder Mark E. Petersen was the member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles assigned to deal with apostates, with those who had lost their way and wandered into strange paths. He related more than once that in his hundreds of individual interviews with straying souls, almost always the wanderers expressed the thought that they "knew" what they were doing was proper and right, that they had received "a burning in the bosom" to prove it—presumably referring to the principle of revelation set forth in Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-9. Elder Petersen stated that for the longest time he was convinced that such sentiments were naive, ill-informed, or just plain false. Then he began to recognize that these people were probably feeling something, perhaps even a warm or burning sensation, even though such was not of God. He commented that although they regularly referred to their inner burning, there was one thing not one of them ever manifested during an interview. That one thing was peace. Not one of them was at peace. Not one of them was at home with himself. Not one of them evidenced the quiet confidence of the Spirit of God that he or she would have enjoyed by pursuing a righteous course.

Peace. Peace is what the gospel is all about. Yet though most members of the Church know what peace is, I believe that we as a people have not yet fully appreciated peace as the remarkable fruit of the Spirit and the transcendent manifestation of the new birth it is. Those who have been born again know that peace is a priceless gift in a world that is at war with itself. New creatures alive in Christ look to him who is called the Prince of Peace for their succor and their support. They know that peace is a cherished commodity in the here and now and is also a harbinger of glorious things yet to be. Peace is a sure and solid sign from God that the heavens are pleased. In referring to a previous occasion when the spirit of testimony had been given, the Master asked Oliver Cowdery: "Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23).

Sin and neglect of duty result in disunity of the soul and strife and confusion, but repentance and forgiveness and rebirth bring quiet and rest and peace. Sin results in disorder, but the Holy Spirit brings order and congruence. The world and the worldly cannot bring peace. They cannot settle the soul (D&C 101:36). "Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him. But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked" (Isaiah 57:19-21).

On the other hand, the Savior said: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid" (John 14:27). As Paul wrote, those who have been justified by faith—who have entered into covenant with Christ, been forgiven of their sins, and had the Lord's righteousness imputed unto them—have "peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ" (Romans 5:1). True Saints "let the peace of God rule in [their] hearts" (Colossians 3:15). Paul elsewhere instructs us to "be careful for nothing"—meaning that we should not be overly concerned or weighed down by worry—"but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus" (Philippians 4:6-7).

A closely associated fruit of the Spirit—and a sure sign of rebirth—is hope. Our hope is in Christ. Our hope cannot rest solely on mortal men and women, no matter how good or noble they may be. Because iniquity abounds in the world, those who are of the world live in despair (Moroni 10:22). Gospel hope is more than wishing, more than yearning for some eventuality or some possession. It is a solid and sure conviction. It is expectation. Anticipation. Assurance. The Saints of the Most High—those who have come out of the world, put off the natural man, and put on Christ—these are they who are entitled to a "more excellent hope" (Ether 12:32). Hope flows from faith, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. When we have faith in him, we believe in him, in who he is and what he has done. Further, we believe he can do what he says he can do, which is to make us clean and whole, make us pure before God the Father, make us happy, productive, and contributing members of his grand kingdom. Mormon taught: "And again, my beloved brethren [and sisters], I would speak unto you concerning hope. How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall [then] have hope? And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise" (Moroni 7:40-41).

Truly, "whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God" (Ether 12:4). Hope in Christ, which is a natural result of our saving faith in Christ, comes through spiritual reawakening, through rebirth. Because we have been born of the Spirit, we realize our place in the royal family and are warmed by the sweet family association. We know that if we can endure to the end—stay faithful to our covenants to the end of this mortal probation and thus true to the family name—we will enjoy the fulness of blessings of the family, which is the continuation of the family unit into eternity, and receive the fulness of the glory and power of our Heavenly Father (D&C 76:56; 84:33-38; 132:19-20).

What is our indication that we are on course? How do we know we are in the gospel harness? "Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit" (1 John 4:13). The presence of God's Spirit is the attestation, the divine assurance that we are headed in the right direction. It is God's seal, his anointing, his unction (1 John 2:20) to us that our lives are in order. "A seal is a mark of ownership . . . and God's seal, by which he brands us as belonging forever to him, is the Holy Spirit himself. The Holy Spirit is the identity tag of the Christian" (Stott, Authentic Christianity, 81).

I can recall vividly the fear and awful anxiety that my wife, Shauna, and I felt when we decided to purchase our first home. We had no money in savings, only a steady job that did not bring a great income. Yet we knew that we had to get started some time if we ever hoped to become homeowners. We determined to start slowly. A dear friend of ours, a fellow seminary teacher, located a place for us in his neighborhood. Another seminary teacher friend offered to lend us the down payment. It was at this time that Shauna and I became acquainted with the concept of "earnest money." We made a goodwill payment to the owner of the home, a small amount, to be sure, but an amount sufficient to evidence our seriousness about purchasing the place. That amount was called the earnest money. It was a token payment, a gesture indicating our desire to acquire that home, a promissory note of sorts.

God works with us in a similar way. He communicates to us that we are following a proper course by sending his Spirit. The Holy Ghost thus represents God's "earnest money" on us, his down payment, his goodwill gesture and assurance to us that he is serious about saving us and that one day he will own us and claim us fully as his. "Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God; who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts" (2 Corinthians 1:21-22). "Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath given us the earnest of the Spirit" (2 Corinthians 5:5). The Apostle Paul wrote that the Saints had trusted in Christ, "after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory" (Ephesians 1:13-14). In short, the same Spirit that eventually seals us up unto eternal life places a seal of approval upon our lives here and now. Though the fulness of the blessings of eternal life are not available until the world to come, the peace and rest and hope that are harbingers of those unspeakably sweet blessings can and should be ours in this world.

There is, then, a sense in which we can know our standing with the Lord. If we are living in such a way that the Holy Ghost can dwell with us, then we are in covenant, on course, in Christ. If we are doing all we can to cultivate the gift and gifts of the Spirit, we are living in what might be called a saved condition. President David O. McKay observed that "the gospel of Jesus Christ, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, is in very deed, in every way, the power of God unto salvation. It is salvation here—here and now. It gives to every man the perfect life, here and now, as well as hereafter" (Gospel Ideals, 6). President Brigham Young stated: "If a person with an honest heart, a broken, contrite, and pure spirit, in all fervency and honesty of soul, presents himself and says that he wishes to be baptized for the remission of his sins, and the ordinance is administered by one having authority, is that man saved? Yes, to that period of time. Should the Lord see proper to take him then from the earth, the man has believed and been baptized, and is a fit subject for heaven—a candidate for the kingdom of God in the celestial world, because he has repented and done all that was required of him at that hour. . . .

"It is present salvation and the present influence of the Holy Ghost that we need every day to keep us on saving ground. When an individual refuses to comply with the further requirements of Heaven, then the sins he had formerly committed return upon his head; his former righteousness departs from him, and is not accounted to him for righteousness: but if he had continued in righteousness and obedience to the requirements of heaven, he is saved all the time, through baptism, the laying on of hands, and obeying the commandments of the Lord and all that is required of him by the heavens—the living oracles. He is saved now, next week, next year, and continually, and is prepared for the celestial kingdom of God whenever the time comes for him to inherit it.

"I want present salvation. I preach, comparatively, but little about the eternities and Gods, and their wonderful works in eternity; and do not tell who first made them, nor how they were made; for I know nothing about that. Life is for us, and it is for us to receive it to-day, and not wait for the millennium. Let us take a course to be saved to-day, and, when evening comes, review the acts of the day, repent of our sins, if we have any to repent of, and say our prayers; then we can lie down and sleep in peace until the morning, arise with gratitude to God, commence the labours of another day, and strive to live the whole day to God and nobody else" (in Journal of Discourses, 8:124-25).

"I am in the hands of the Lord," President Young pointed out, "and never trouble myself about my salvation, or what the Lord will do with me hereafter" (in Journal of Discourses, 6:276). As he said on another occasion, our work "is a work of the present. The salvation we are seeking is for the present, and, sought correctly, it can be obtained, and be continually enjoyed. If it continues to-day, it is upon the same principle that it will continue to-morrow, the next day, the next week, or the next year, and, we might say, the next eternity" (in Journal of Discourses, 1:131).

Though we dare not face life with pride or immoderate self-assurance, we must also avoid false modesty and doubt, which are antithetical to faith. Joseph Smith taught that doubt—including a constant worry about our standing before God or our capacity to go where Christ is—cannot coexist with saving faith (Lectures on Faith, 3:20-21; 4:13; 6:12). If indeed "happiness is the object and design of our existence" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 255), then happiness is something to be enjoyed in the present, in the here and now, not something reserved exclusively for the distant there and then. "If we are saved," President Young declared, "we are happy, we are filled with light, glory, intelligence, and we pursue a course to enjoy the blessings that the Lord has in store for us. If we continue to pursue that course, it produces just the thing we want, that is, to be saved at this present moment. And this will lay the foundation to be saved for ever and for ever, which will amount to an eternal salvation" (in Journal of Discourses, 1:131).

We cannot overcome the world if we are worldly. We cannot overcome the world if our trust is in the arm of flesh (2 Nephi 4:34). And we cannot overcome the world if we live in constant spiritual insecurity. Satan, the arch deceiver, is versatile and observant. As surely as the day follows the night, he will strike at our sense of insecurity before God if we do not acquire the hope or assurance that comes by and through His Holy Spirit. We overcome the world through Christ—through being changed by Christ, captained by Christ, and consumed in Christ. In his Last Supper, Jesus declared to his disciples: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world" (John 16:33).

We need not be possessed of an intemperate zeal in order to be saved; we need to be constant and dependable. God is the other party with us in the gospel covenant. He is the controlling partner. He lets us know, through the influence of the Holy Ghost, that the covenant is intact and his supernal promises are sure. The Savior invites us to learn the timeless and comforting lesson that "he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23). Peace. Hope. Assurance. These blessings come to us by virtue of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ and as a natural result of our new creation in him.
