Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 19

One Time and Lifetime

At this point in our study, the following kinds of questions inevitably surface: Must the spiritual rebirth be dramatic? Is it not a true conversion unless I am knocked to the ground by an angel and given a startling change of heart by God? Does a real baptism by fire require an unusual outpouring of the Spirit, circling flames of fire, blowing winds, and the ministry of angels? Is the rebirth something I experience only once in my life? Must the mighty change be immediate, sudden, in an instant?

In my first year of teaching at Brigham Young University, a young woman in one of my classes came to my office to visit with me. The light of the gospel shone in her countenance, and her language, her demeanor, and her very manner bespoke an inner spiritual refinement. "What can I do for you?" I asked.

She was silent for about thirty seconds, bowed her head, and began to cry. "I'm so embarrassed," she said. "I'm ashamed of myself."

My first thought was that she had committed some serious sin. "Would what you are about to say be better said to your bishop?"

"Oh no," she said through her tears, "it's nothing like that." She continued, "I am embarrassed to say that I have never been born again. As far as I can tell, I have never had an experience like Alma the Younger's. And Alma said that everyone must be born again. I was reared in the Church. I have said my prayers in the morning and at night all of my life, read my scriptures daily, and graduated from seminary. But never has anything happened to me like what happened to Alma. I feel like such a failure."

I sat there helpless, wondering what would be appropriate to say to her. It occurred to me that one response might be: "Well, Susan, it is a serious matter that you have not yet been born again. You're absolutely right that you need to experience a mighty change of heart, and that change must come to you before you leave this life. Maybe you haven't been trying hard enough. Maybe your prayers aren't really sincere. You might try fasting a couple of times a week until the change comes. But if I were you, I'd double or triple my intensity until it happens. And, by the way, I'd look carefully both ways when I cross the street!" Such an approach would no doubt have been devastating to Susan. It would either have depressed her further or led her to an excessive zeal that would in time result in spiritual imbalance and instability.

Then it occurred to me that I might be a bit more sensitive to her plight and say something like this: "Well, Susan, it's refreshing to find someone your age who is seriously concerned about this matter. Yes, we do need to be born again before we can be saved in the celestial kingdom. But you shouldn't get discouraged because an Almalike experience hasn't come yet. You need to be patient. It'll come soon enough, you just watch."

Both of those options raced through my mind. And neither seemed appropriate. Without downplaying the importance of the mighty change, I gently explained to Susan that she was already well on her way. The light of the Spirit of God was with her. She was worthy, sensitive, and attentive. She sincerely wanted to be pure and clean before God.

I once heard my colleague Joseph McConkie say to a large group of Saints in Washington, D. C., something that I thought a bit unusual. He said: "All of us will at one time or another go through what Alma did. At the same time, few of us will ever go through what Alma did." The eyes of the listeners evidenced their confusion at the comment, but it laid the groundwork for an extremely fruitful discussion. On the one hand, every one of us must be born again, changed from a carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness. We must become new creatures alive in Christ before we will be qualified and equipped to sit comfortably with God and angels, or, for that matter, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. In a very real way, we will one and all go through the principal stages of Alma's spiritual rebirth, even though ours may not be quite as dramatic as that described in the Book of Mormon. Taking Alma's own account of his conversion as a guide (Alma 36), let us consider the principles associated with his change:

These principles provide more than adequate precepts for us to liken Alma's experience unto our own. Yes, once in a great while a man or woman will indeed be reborn after the manner of Alma or Lamoni (Alma 18-19) or Saul on the road to Damascus (Acts 9). Few of us, however, need to be turned around so dramatically as Alma was. Susan will probably never have an experience like Alma's—not because she is unworthy but because she has not descended to the depths that Alma had. She has been growing in spiritual graces through a worthy life. She will, nonetheless, undergo changes in her nature over time, gain insights and impressions and refinements that inevitably come as she cultivates the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Then, we may ask, is our birth in the Spirit a single event or is it a process? The best answer is a solid yes, or perhaps an unequivocal yes and no. In a few cases individuals are born again suddenly, quickly, and their movement from darkness to light is rapid. In a sense, the rebirth is an event. Alma could rightly speak of having been born again during a specified three days in time. On the other hand, Alma's mighty change was far more extensive and lengthy than his experience with the angel and the three-day conversion. Alma grew line upon line, precept upon precept, day by day for the rest of his life.

For example, how did Alma know of the truthfulness of the gospel and of the power of Christ to transform the souls of men and women? Was it because of his being struck down by the angel? That event certainly had an influence, to be sure. Yet when Alma bears his testimony, he does not say "I know this work is true because an angel leveled me and sent me into a spiritual coma for three days." No, what he says is "Behold, I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety? Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me" (Alma 5:45-46). In short, Alma came to know as we come to know—through personal prayer, searching, and inquiry, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

And even though it is true that our own rebirth may be a process, yet almost always there was a moment in time—a vital moment or a season in life that mattered—when we were touched, moved, motivated, and directed to turn our lives around or at least become better than we had been. Besides, in a sense it is not the rebirth per se that is sufficient but rather the subsequent life that flows therefrom. Just as there are critical days or months prior to our physical birth and many months and years that lead from physical birth into maturity, so it is with the spiritual birth: many things prepare the way, and many things more lead to the harvest thereafter. As one Christian writer observed: "It does not matter at all if, although you know you have turned to Christ, you do not know the date when you did so. Some do; others do not. What matters is not when but whether we have put our trust in Christ. Jesus called the beginning of our Christian life a second 'birth,' and the analogy is helpful in many ways. For example, we are not conscious of our physical birth taking place, and would never have known our birthday if our parents had not told us. The reason we know we were born, even though we do not remember it, is that we are enjoying a life today which we know must have begun at birth. It is much the same with the new birth" (Stott, Authentic Christianity, 203). As Paul explained to a group of Saints in the meridian of time, "now is our salvation nearer than when we believed" (Romans 13:11).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained in 1976 to students at Brigham Young University that "we are born again as we die as pertaining to unrighteousness and when we live as pertaining to the things of the Spirit. But that doesn't happen in an instant, suddenly. That . . . is a process. Being born again is a gradual thing, except in a few isolated instances that are so miraculous that they get written up in the scriptures. As far as the generality of the members of the Church are concerned, we are born again by degrees, and we are born again to added light and added knowledge and added desires for righteousness as we keep the commandments" ("Jesus Christ and Him Crucified," in Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, 1976, 399-401).

President Ezra Taft Benson taught that "we must be careful, as we seek to become more and more godlike, that we do not become discouraged and lose hope. Becoming Christlike is a lifetime pursuit and very often involves growth and change that is slow, almost imperceptible. The scriptures record remarkable accounts of men whose lives changed dramatically, in an instant, as it were: Alma the Younger, Paul on the road to Damascus, Enos praying far into the night, King Lamoni. Such astonishing examples of the power to change even those steeped in sin give confidence that the Atonement can reach even those deepest in despair.

"But we must be cautious as we discuss these remarkable examples. Though they are real and powerful, they are the exception more than the rule. For every Paul, for every Enos, and for every King Lamoni, there are hundreds and thousands of people who find the process of repentance much more subtle, much more imperceptible. Day by day they move closer to the Lord, little realizing they are building a godlike life. They live quiet lives of goodness, service, and commitment. They are like the Lamanites, who the Lord said 'were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not.' (3 Ne. 9:20; italics added.)" ("Mighty Change of Heart," Ensign, Oct. 1989, 2-5).

In my own life, it seems as though I have been born again and again and again. That is, there have been key moments of growth and transformation that I can point to as pivotal times, springboards to greater light and truth and conviction. Perhaps it was a general conference address, a poignant passage of scripture, or the singing of a hymn that jolted me into the stiff realization that I must climb higher. For me there does not seem to be a single event to which I can point as the time of spiritual rebirth. Rather, I can catalog several eras in my life when the Lord was attempting to get my attention, boost me off a spiritual plateau, and move me forward and upward to new vistas of understanding and feeling. I do know from experience that a person cannot afford to coast spiritually, to live forevermore on past sacred moments; new ones must be sought for, treasured, and deposited in the reservoir of faith. The Holy Spirit will not allow us to go stale if we attend to his promptings. There will always be stretchings and unlearning and relearning and moments of divine discontent—subtle but serious reminders that it is time to move on. Alma stated: "And now behold, I say unto you, my brethren, if ye have [in the past] experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:26).

Elder B. H. Roberts wrote of the new birth and of the subsequent growth of the Christian initiate. The children of Christ, he explained, "are not fully developed men and women in the things of God. It is expected that they will have to 'grow in grace and in the knowledge of God.' . . .

"The new-born saints will find themselves in a new atmosphere, sensitive to new forces operating upon them, new powers developing within them; and as the young child staggers in its first attempts to walk, and has many a fall before it will obtain complete control over its muscles—so the newborn member of Christ's Church will make many mistakes and perhaps blunders in the days of his infancy . . . .

"There is no one great thing that man can do and then do no more and obtain salvation. After entering into the kingdom of God, . . . it is by learning 'precept upon precept; line upon line; here a little and there a little,' that salvation will be made secure. It is by resisting temptation today, overcoming a weakness tomorrow, forsaking evil associations the next day, and thus day by day, month after month, year after year, pruning, restraining and weeding out that which is evil in the disposition, that the character is purged of its imperfections. Salvation is a matter of character-building under the Gospel laws and ordinances, and more especially with the direct aid of the Holy Spirit.

"Nor is it enough that one get rid of evil. He must do good. He must surround himself with circumstances congenial to the sensitive nature of the Holy Ghost, that he may not be offended, and withdraw himself; for if he does so, amen to the man's spiritual or moral development. He must cultivate noble sentiments by performing noble deeds—not great ones, necessarily, for opportunity to do what the world esteems great things, comes but seldom to men in the ordinary walks of life; but noble deeds may be done every day; and every such deed performed with an eye single to the glory of God, draws one that much nearer into harmony with Deity . . . .

"Thus by refusing to follow the evil inclinations of the disposition on the one hand, and cultivating noble sentiments on the other, a character may be formed that shall be godlike in its attributes, and consequently its possessor will be fitted to dwell with God, and if so prepared, there is no question but his calling and election are sure" (Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity, 196-98).
