Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Chapter 20

Faithful to the End

There is a crying need in the Church for constancy and steadfastness, for those who have come out of the world by covenant to endure faithfully to the end. It is easy enough to find members of the Church who can relate a remarkable conversion story, who may be featured at firesides and special lectures, but who choose not to remain true and faithful to the day-by-day requirements of Christian discipleship. The Lord needs more than a flash-in-the-pan approach to gospel living. Few things are more desirable to priesthood leaders than dependable people; I have said many times that I would gladly trade competence for dependability, for people I can rely on. Those who have been born again, who have enjoyed the revelatory, sanctifying, and motivating powers of the Spirit in their lives—these must continue to hunger and thirst after righteousness and to cultivate the gifts of the Spirit.

In Lehi's dream, related to us by Nephi, we learn of a group of people who pressed forward, caught hold of the rod of iron, and eventually partook of the fruit of the tree. They were then lured away from the strait and narrow path by those who chanted and mocked and proselytized from the great and spacious building (1 Nephi 8:24-28). Imagine that! This group of people had received the word of God into their lives and had partaken of the renovating powers of Christ's atonement—their sins had been remitted, and for a season they sang "the song of redeeming love" (Alma 5:26). What was the problem? They were too concerned with what others thought, too preoccupied with the world's pecking order. They allowed their values to be affected and then shaped by the values of others. That is, they surrendered to pride.

After the translation of the book of Lehi was lost, the Savior warned the Prophet Joseph Smith that "although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him" (D&C 3:4). Thus we see that one of our primary labors in this life is to subordinate self, displace personal whims, and seek to have an eye single to the glory of God. True and lasting spiritual growth comes through seeking the mind of Christ, desiring to please the Father, and, like the Holy One, having our own will swallowed up in the will of heaven.

One sign of spiritual maturity is an emotional steadiness about the gospel. Among my very first institute students was an exciting and excitable convert from Roman Catholicism. David was a fireball who loved the Lord deeply and wanted to do everything he could (and more) to please him. His enthusiasm for the gospel and the Church was contagious. Whenever he heard something new or discovered another of the beautiful principles of salvation, he would let out a "Wow!" or "Ooh" or "I can't believe it!" David made our classes fun. It was a thrill for me to witness his growth in the kingdom. He left on a mission several months after I arrived in the area and served faithfully for two years in a Scandinavian country.

When he returned, there was a powerful light in his countenance, but his verbal outbursts were fewer and quieter. He had been back only a short time when he offered to drive me home after class. He asked me soberly, "Brother Millet, what's wrong with me? I don't seem to have the same enthusiasm and fire for the gospel that I had when I was converted. Have I lost it?" I smiled and patted him on the back. "No, my friend, you haven't lost it. There's nothing at all wrong with your testimony. You have a depth that you did not have before you left. You have simply learned to express your faith and your love of the Lord in less exuberant ways." And so it is with all of us. As we grow in spiritual graces, we probably have fewer high highs and fewer low lows. We seem able to deal maturely with trying or even tragic events in our life, and we manage to evidence our gospel gladness without living in constant glee and giddiness.

As the Holy Ghost transforms our soul, as we forsake the world and find delight in the noble and the uplifting, we enjoy the quiet assurance that God is in his heaven, that the work in which we are engaged is true and will triumph, and finally (and most important) that the Keeper of the Gate is pleased with our offering. Our testimony of the truth grows stronger and stronger, but our desire to share it and our appreciation for it are more often couched in simple expressions of testimony and gratitude. Though we know more surely than we have ever known, though the scriptures and the words of the living apostles and prophets have become manna to our taste, though our desire to proclaim the truths of the Restoration knows no bounds, yet our zeal has been tempered by wisdom, and our enthusiasm has gained a dignity and a stability that the scriptures characterize as steadfast and immovable (1 Nephi 2:10; Mosiah 5:15; Alma 1:25).

The call of Christ to endure to the end is fundamental to our faith. It is a principle of the gospel set forth powerfully and consistently by Book of Mormon prophets (2 Nephi 31; 3 Nephi 27). The risen Lord proclaimed that "whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world." The Master then pronounced this woe upon those who are not steadfast: "And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father." Jesus added this doctrinal instruction that points up the need for forgiveness and rebirth: "And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end" (3 Nephi 27:16-17, 19).

The Lord is straightforward in what he wants: he wants finishers. He wants disciples who count the cost and are willing to see the fray to its conclusion (Luke 14:25-33). "If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation" (D&C 6:13). "If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God" (D&C 14:7). Obviously these passages refer to avoiding sin, being true to our covenants, and staying active and faithful in our duties in the Church. To endure to the end is to finish our mortal lives temple worthy, to live and die in the faith, for, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie once observed, "If we die in the faith, that is the same thing as saying that our calling and election has been made sure and that we will go on to eternal reward hereafter" (address at funeral of S. Dilworth Young, 13 July 1981).

And yet there is more to faithful endurance than eternal vigilance and dependability, as critical as these matters are. Enduring to the end entails seeking to live our lives, day by day, as the Lord Jesus Christ would have us live them. Nephi "heard a voice from the Father, saying: Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved. And now, my beloved brethren," Nephi continued, "I know by this that unless a man shall endure to the end, in following the example of the Son of the living God, he cannot be saved" (2 Nephi 31:15-16). Indeed, to endure to the end is to strive to follow our Exemplar all the days of our lives (2 Nephi 31:10, 12, 13).

Many years ago Charles Sheldon wrote a novel that has become a classic Christian bestseller. The story, In His Steps, is about a Protestant minister who takes seriously the injunction to emulate the life of the one sinless soul ever to walk the earth. He determined that he would ask himself, whenever a decision was needed, "What would Jesus do?" Further, he extended the invitation to his congregation to do the same. His story is a poignant drama about the challenges a person faces when he or she takes seriously the invitation to follow Christ. How does such a covenant affect the kinds of entertainment I allow in my business establishment? How does this commitment affect the kinds of articles I allow to be printed in my magazine? How does it affect my decision to open my business on the Sabbath? And so forth.

Again and again the leaders of the Church have charged us as Latter-day Saints to do this very thing—to ask ourselves, "What would Jesus do?" and then to have the courage to follow where he leads. In fact, this very commission is as old as the world. Our first parents were commanded to offer sacrifices unto God. "And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth." Note this commandment, as pertinent to us who live six millennia later but who have taken upon ourselves the name of Christ: "Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore" (Moses 5:6-8).

Nephi also encouraged us to "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life" (2 Nephi 31:20). It is of interest to me that Nephi added the injunction to "feast upon the word of Christ" to the injunction to "endure to the end." In my mind this addition is significant, for it points toward how we come to know what Jesus would do. We endure to the end faithfully by living as Jesus would live.

How do we know how Jesus would do things? We search the scriptures, a priceless collection of the words of Christ. We study his life and ministry in the New Testament, noting how he dealt with friends, how he dealt with enemies, how he dealt with difficulty, how he dealt with praise and adoration, how he taught the gospel. We study the acts of the risen Lord and his teachings in 3 Nephi and expand our spiritual database of understanding. We study his words in the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price, and, of course, we treasure the counsel of his living oracles in our day.

And yet all of these teachings—more precious than silver and gold—are not sufficient to cover every exigency, every possible aspect of our lives. It would not be long before we found ourselves in a real-life situation in which we could identify no close parallel in the life and ministry of Christ or in the teachings of his authorized servants. What do we do then? How do we proceed? How do we do what Jesus would do if it is not recorded in sacred scripture or the counsel of prophets? Again we turn to Nephi for direction. "And now, behold, my beloved brethren," he wrote, "I suppose that ye ponder somewhat in your hearts concerning that which ye should do after ye have entered in by the way. But, behold, why do ye ponder these things in your hearts? . . . Wherefore, I said unto you, feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do. Wherefore, now after I have spoken these words, if ye cannot understand them it will be because ye ask not, neither do ye knock; wherefore, ye are not brought into the light, but must perish in the dark. For behold, again I say unto you that if ye will enter in by the way, and receive the Holy Ghost, it will show unto you all things what ye should do" (2 Nephi 32:1, 3-5). There is our answer. We endure faithfully to the end by cultivating the gift of the Holy Ghost in our lives. With that gift we may learn how Jesus would speak or act under this or that circumstance—by inspiration, through the direction of the Spirit, that third member of the Godhead, who will tell us and show us how to proceed.

We cannot live by written scripture alone, nor can we endure to the end in a wicked world with even the added benefit of prophetic declarations, handbooks, or resource manuals. The strength of this Church is to be found in the hearts and lives of its individual members, in the manner in which they seek for and obtain the mind of God through the instrumentality of the Holy Ghost. Ours is the privilege of belonging to the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth (D&C 1:30), and our opportunity and our duty is to partake of the fruit of a living tree of life, to be governed by a living constitution. "But notwithstanding those things which are written," the Lord declared in a modern revelation, "it always has been given to the elders of my church from the beginning, and ever shall be, to conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy Spirit" (D&C 46:2; see also Moroni 6:9; D&C 20:45). The Church seeks to teach us guiding principles, but quite often it is the Holy Ghost who will teach us specific practices.

Many years ago, while serving as a counselor in a stake presidency, I was given leadership responsibility for the stake when the president left the country for an extended period. On a Sabbath evening soon after the president left, the phone rang. It was one of the bishops. "President Millet," he said, "I have a couple in my ward who have been planning to be married in the temple for several months. I just discovered in a recent interview with them that a problem has arisen," and he mentioned the specific matter.

I said, "Bishop, you know what we have been counseled to do when those particular sins occur, don't you?"

He stated that he knew what we generally did but then asked, "President, would you be willing to meet with this couple?"

I indicated that I would be happy to meet with them but that such was unnecessary, given the nature of the offense and the instructions that had been given to the bishops.

"I understand," he replied, "but would you be willing to meet with them anyway?"

It seemed clear to me that this bishop was pushing his responsibilities off on me, but I finally gave in and agreed to meet with them at my office at the university the next day at 5:30 p.m.

It would be an understatement of the grossest kind to say that my interview with the couple was not what I had expected. I went into the meeting with an agenda, with a planned outline of what would be said and what would be done. I knew the offense, and I knew what we had always done about it in the past. I anticipated that they would be upset because the marriage would need to be postponed, and I would have bet my life that there would be defiance in their attitudes. What I found were two beautiful young people who came in the depths of humility, who had spent the last several days pleading with the Lord for forgiveness, and who were resigned to accepting that what they had so looked forward to was not to be, at least for now.

The young man spoke for both of them. "President Millet, we only want to do what the Lord would have us do. We are prepared to receive whatever discipline is appropriate. We know clearly that what we have done is a serious offense and one that cannot be ignored. We don't want to go into the temple unworthily."

I was stunned. Neither their verbal response to the sin nor their countenances was what I had expected. There was a sweet spirit in the room, so sweet, in fact, that I was absolutely dumbfounded.

I was completely honest with the couple and told them that I frankly did not know what should be done. My suggestion was that we pray together about the matter. We knelt together. The young man prayed first, and then the young woman. I prayed last. There was a purity in their voices, a pleading that was born of the Spirit, a longing that attested that they had indeed experienced what the scriptures call a broken heart and a contrite spirit. While the young woman was praying, there came into my mind the words I had heard President Spencer W. Kimball say, that some people can repent more in twenty-four hours than others can in twenty-four months! I knew by what I heard and by what I felt that their hearts and their lives had truly been cleansed and their repentance had been accepted by God.

We arose from prayer, wiped our eyes, and I said, "I feel, and the Spirit seems to accord, that you have been forgiven and that you should go ahead with your temple plans." Many more tears flowed as we embraced one another and separated.

After they left my office, I sat at my desk for quite some time. On the one hand I was thrilled for the couple and rejoiced in the goodness of God. On the other hand, I felt chastened severely by the Lord and his Spirit. Though there were no words spoken to me, it was as though God had said: "You listen to me. This is my Church, and these are my children. I alone know the hearts of men and women. If you are going to represent me, you had better humble yourself, open yourself to my guidance, and avoid trying to lead the people from some preconceived notions you may have. Repent!" It was a sobering moment for me, one for which I am extremely grateful. I will always be grateful for handbooks, guidelines, manuals, and faithful traditions. I am also—more so now than ever before—eternally grateful that even the least of us can know what Jesus would do by importuning the Father in prayer.

Those who are born of the Spirit and continue to seek the Lord earnestly will receive strength to endure and overcome life's obstacles and vicissitudes. Because they have chosen to forsake the world and its allurements, there comes into their lives a wisdom, a judgment, a steadiness, and a quiet confidence. Such spirituality makes them a great benefit to the children of men. Their lives bespeak the reality of finding fulfillment in righteousness. Such persons look to God and live (Alma 37:47), and in the process are able to lift and lighten and liberate others. They find comfort in the Master's words: "Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life" (3 Nephi 15:9).
