Robert L. Millet, Alive in Christ: The Miracle of Spiritual Rebirth ( 1997)

Epilogue

I bear testimony of the divine truth—taught over and over again in holy scripture—that we must be born again, born from above, become new creatures alive in Christ, to qualify to go where God and Christ are. We must have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repent of our sins, be baptized by immersion by one having proper authority, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. "Mere compliance with the formality of the ordinance of baptism," Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "does not mean that a person has been born again. No one can be born again without baptism, but the immersion in water and the laying on of hands to confer the Holy Ghost do not of themselves guarantee that a person has been or will be born again. The new birth takes place only for those who actually enjoy the gift or companionship of the Holy Ghost, only for those who are fully converted, who have given themselves without restraint to the Lord" (Mormon Doctrine, 101).

Salvation does not come to us through simply understanding a few theological concepts. Salvation comes to those who have become like Christ, who have been made more Christ-like through the Atonement. Salvation comes through human regeneration, through the miraculous powers of the Redeemer, as mediated to us through his Holy Spirit. The Prophet Joseph Smith spoke of the nature of salvation and what Christ "proposed unto the human family when he proposed to save them—that he proposed to make them like unto himself, and he was like the Father, the great prototype of all saved beings; and for any portion of the human family to be assimilated into their likeness is to be saved; . . . and on this hinge turns the door of salvation" (Lectures on Faith, 7:16). As someone has observed, "Christlikeness is what God wants to see in us. If we had to sum up in a single brief sentence what life is all about, why Jesus Christ came into this world to live and die and rise, and what God is up to in the long-drawn-out historical process both B.C. and A.D., it would be difficult to find a more succinct explanation than this: God is making human beings more human by making them more like Christ. . . . God's whole purpose, conceived in a past eternity, being worked out for and in his people in history, to be completed in the glory to come, may be encapsulated in this single concept: God intends to make us like Christ" (Stott, Life in Christ, 100-101).

We have discussed many facets of the new birth, as well as many doctrinal principles associated with the transformation of human nature, including the following:

Though we are not responsible for the Fall, we are certainly affected by the Fall. Fallen creatures must be rescued, redeemed, reclaimed, ransomed, and renewed. The good news, the glad tidings in a world that is filled with so much bad news, is that Christ has come (D&C 76:40-42). Help is available through the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Those who come unto Christ must be willing to leave behind the old man or woman of sin, to put off the natural man and put on Christ through the Atonement. We are "crucified with Christ," and he then lives in us through the power of his Spirit (Galatians 2:20).

Being reborn of the Spirit entails being healed by him who is the Great Physician, whether we are healed of sin or abuse or anger or jealousy or feelings of inadequacy.

To be born again is to move from darkness to light, to walk in the light of the Son and see and feel things from a whole new perspective. Because we walk in the light as God is in the light, we have fellowship with the Saints, and the blood of his Son cleanses us from all sin (1 John 1:7).

The wonder of the Atonement and the gospel covenant is that the sinless one offers to make a "great exchange": to take upon him our sins and to impute to us his righteousness (2 Corinthians 5:21). Our birth in the Spirit involves a "mighty change" in our nature, a change from worldliness to the pursuit of holiness (Mosiah 5:1-2).

Just as the "works of the flesh" flow from the unregenerate heart, so the "fruit of the Spirit"—such Christlike attributes as patience, longsuffering, meekness, gentleness, and the pure love of Christ—characterize those who have become new creatures in Christ. Because they live in the Spirit, they have begun to walk in the Spirit (Galatians 5:19-25).

To be born again is to become as a little child—to be open, teachable, dependent, alive to beauty and truth, and, most important, pure and innocent through the atonement of Christ (Mosiah 3:19).

To be born again is to become a son or a daughter of the Lord Jesus Christ, to enter the royal family, qualify for the family name, and bask in the warmth of family privileges and family associations (Mosiah 5:7-8).

So often faith and rebirth come through the power of the word, through the power of human testimony spoken or written by the servants of God. That testimony, borne of the Spirit, is always accompanied by the spirit of prophecy and revelation (Romans 10:17; Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 148). That is, people are changed or converted by the power of the word, a power that has tremendous effect upon the souls of men (Alma 31:5).

The birth in the Spirit entails more than skin-deep holiness, more than a change in behavior. The Lord works from the inside out and brings about a change of nature, a change wherein we lose our desire for evil and yearn for greater righteousness (Mosiah 5:2). We have repented, literally "turned away" from our sins and turned toward our Lord and Master.

To become a new creature in Christ is to gain "the mind of Christ" (1 Corinthians 2:11-14), to come to feel and think and speak and act and pray as the Master would under similar circumstances.

Those who have received and cultivated the gift of the Holy Ghost come to speak with the "tongue of angels" (2 Nephi 32:1-3), to speak the words of Christ, and to thereby enjoy a divine investiture of authority. That is, they speak by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Those who have been born of the Spirit have a dynamic witness of the Church and its glorious benefits—saving ordinances, divine teachings, and Christian fellowship—and feel compelled to keep not only the Sabbath but every day holy (D&C 59:9-14).

Sometimes God sends angels, heavenly messengers, as a part of the conversion of his wandering children. On other occasions he orchestrates events and sends caring and sensitive souls into the wanderer's path. In the long run, it is not the drama and the suddenness of the change that matters but the permanence and substance of the change that brings joy and happiness.

Freedom comes from rebirth, a freedom to be all the Lord intends us to be. We enjoy freedom from sin, from error and duplicity, from habit, and from the allurements of the world (John 8:31-32).

The visitation of the Spirit is a grand evidence that we are living true to our covenant with God. It is a clear indication that the Lord is pleased with us, that we are on course and "in Christ." The Holy Spirit is the "earnest of our inheritance," a token or reminder that the Lord has accepted our offering and that he is serious about saving us (2 Corinthians 1:21-22; 5:5; Ephesians 1:14).

In a way, being born again is both an event and a process. It involves a moment or a season of decision, a resolve to change and improve, as well as a process that continues throughout our lives. We are born again line upon line, precept upon precept. Even those who have had an instantaneous conversion must learn to live by faith, walk in the light of the Spirit, and incorporate the powers of Christ and of his Spirit for the remainder of their days. Truly, "now is our salvation nearer than when we believed" (Romans 13:11).

Those who are born of the Spirit learn that enduring to the end entails more than holding tenaciously to the iron rod and remaining forever vigilant against sin. It also entails living in such a way that through the power of the Holy Ghost we may be told and shown what Jesus would do and thus would have us do (2 Nephi 32:3-5).

Being born again is not a single experience, is not manifest in one way only. The mercy and love and condescension of God toward those who earnestly seek to come out of the world are indeed manifested in various ways. Often we do not reach out for the supernal blessings of heaven that could be ours, and there are more evidences that we have been born of God than we sometimes realize.

In a modern revelation, the Lord explained to his Saints: "There are many who have been ordained among you, whom I have called but few of them are chosen. They who are not chosen have sinned a very grievous sin, in that they are walking in darkness at noon-day" (D&C 95:5-6). How is that possible? How could an individual walk in darkness at noonday? A person would need either to be blind to the light or to knowingly shield himself from the light. Sin or moral corruption could certainly be the cause of such blindness. I suggest, however, that many of us are like Amulek, who was probably not guilty of gross evil but suffered instead from spiritual indifference: "I did harden my heart," he stated, "for I was called many times and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know" (Alma 10:6).

Many of us are not guilty of violations of the law of chastity or the Word of Wisdom or the law and order of the Church in general. But too often, perhaps, we are guilty of preoccupation or distraction; the blessings of the Spirit of the Lord, the consummate blessings of spiritual rebirth, are not enjoyed by us as they could be, simply because we do not seek earnestly for them. President Brigham Young taught: "There is no doubt, if a person lives according to the revelations given to God's people, he may have the Spirit of the Lord to signify to him His will, and to guide and to direct him in the discharge of his duties, in his temporal as well as his spiritual exercises. I am satisfied, however, that in this respect, we live far beneath our privileges" (in Journal of Discourses, 12:104).

President George Q. Cannon likewise offered this counsel and plea: "We find, even among those who have embraced the Gospel, hearts of unbelief. How many of you, my brethren and sisters, are seeking for these gifts that God has promised to bestow? How many of you, when you bow before your Heavenly Father in your family circle or in your secret places, contend for these gifts to be bestowed upon you? How many of you ask the Father, in the name of Jesus, to manifest Himself to you through these powers and these gifts? Or do you go along day by day like a door turning on its hinges, without having any feeling on the subject, without exercising any faith whatever; content to be baptized and be members of the Church, and to rest there, thinking that your salvation is secure because you have done this? I say to you, in the name of the Lord, as one of His servants, that you have need to repent of this. You have need to repent of your hardness of heart, of your indifference, and of your carelessness. There is not that diligence, there is not that faith, there is not that seeking for the power of God that there should be among a people who have received the precious promises we have. . . . I say to you that it is our duty to avail ourselves of the privileges which God has placed within our reach. . . .

"I feel to bear testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, . . . that God is the same to day as He was yesterday; that God is willing to bestow these gifts upon His children. . . . If any of us are imperfect, it is our duty to pray for the gift that will make us perfect. Have I imperfections? I am full of them. What is my duty? To pray to God to give me the gifts that will correct these imperfections. If I am an angry man, it is my duty to pray for charity, which suffereth long and is kind. Am I an envious man? It is my duty to seek for charity, which envieth not. So with all the gifts of the Gospel. They are intended for this purpose. No man ought to say, 'Oh, I cannot help this; it is my nature.' He is not justified in it, for the reason that God has promised to give strength to correct these things, and to give gifts that will eradicate them. If a man lack wisdom, it is his duty to ask God for wisdom. The same with everything else. That is the design of God concerning His Church. He wants His Saints to be perfected in the truth. For this purpose He gives these gifts, and bestows them upon those who seek after them, in order that they may be a perfect people upon the face of the earth, notwithstanding their many weaknesses, because God has promised to give the gifts that are necessary for their perfection" (Millennial Star 56 [1894]: 260-61).

We are richly blessed to live in the dispensation of the fulness of times. We are immersed in revelations and gifts and signs and wonders. The light of gospel truth is all about us. Unfortunately, we sometimes do not fully realize what we have until we lose it. I am persuaded that our Lord and God desires to fill our hearts and minds with his Spirit. I believe he yearns to make us into new creatures alive in him; he wants to make us men and women of purpose and power. God truly desires to save all of his children that will be saved. We must, however, yield ourselves to the powers of the Spirit and plead with all the energy of heart to be so endowed (Moroni 7:48). The gifts of God must be received if they are to be efficacious to us; otherwise, we do not rejoice in the gift or in the Giver of the gift (D&C 88:33).

Thus one of the most important labors we can perform is to seek the Spirit. The older I get and the more I reflect upon the truths of the gospel, the more I am driven toward this one imperative: Seek the Spirit. If eternal life is indeed the greatest of all the gifts of God in eternity (D&C 6:13; 14:7), then surely the companionship of the Holy Ghost is the greatest gift we can receive in time, in this mortal sphere (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 5). It is of eternal significance to me, therefore, that after his death Joseph Smith appeared to Brigham Young and implored: "Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the still small voice; it will teach them what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom. Tell the [people] to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it. They can tell the Spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts; and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God. Tell the [people] if they will follow the Spirit of the Lord, they will go right" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).

Our God does not call upon us to be truer than true, to go beyond the bounds of propriety, to be excessive in our zeal, or to run before our leaders. He does not ask us to be unwise and imprudent in generating gospel hobbies or in seeking for signs and wonders. I can still remember hearing President Harold B. Lee in his last address to Brigham Young University students, in the fall of 1973. President Lee, then the prophet, seer, and revelator, affirmed a great truth by referring to his own quest for spiritual light: "As I pray for the guidance of the Spirit," he said, "and seek to rise to the responsibility which has been given me, I don't ask for any special endowment. I ask only to go where the Lord would have me go, and only to receive what the Lord would have me receive, knowing that more important than sight is the witness that one may have by . . . the Holy Ghost to his soul that things are so and that Jesus is the Christ, a living personage. It is that which guides me through many of the experiences of life" ("Be Loyal to the Royal within You," in Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, 1973, 88).

We are called upon to pursue the gifts and fruit of the Spirit and to do so with patient maturity and dignity, acknowledging that God knows far better than we what we are prepared to receive.

I know that God lives and that Jesus Christ is his Only Begotten Son and our only hope for peace here and eternal reward hereafter. I know that there is a new life, a new life in Christ that comes to us as we repent of our sins and seek to cultivate that sacred gift we know as the Holy Ghost. I know there is peace and quiet and rest in Christ; there is also an energy and a zest and a freshness about life in Christ that transcends anything earthly. To a small degree I have tasted of the sweet fruits of gospel living and know to prize the gifts of God as more precious than silver or gold. I pray that we will strive to become new creatures alive in Christ, fitted and adapted and prepared one day to dwell with and be like him who has called us, our Prototype of Salvation.
