BIRTH AND PARENTAGE OF ELDER JOHN TANNER--HIMSELF AND TWO CHILDREN ARE
BITTEN BY A MAD DOG--THEY ARE HEALED--HE BECOMES WEALTHY--AFFLICTED
WITH UNKNOWN DISEASE--PHYSICIANS FAIL TO CURE HIM--"MORMON" ELDERS
VISIT HIM--HE IS CONVERTED--IS MIRACULOUSLY HEALED--GOES TO KIRTLAND--
FREELY GIVES MONEY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE CHURCH--HIS ELDER'S
CERTIFICATE.

Elder John Tanner, son of Joshua and Thankful Tanner, and grandfather of Apostle F. M. Lyman, was born August 15th, 1778, in the state of Rhode Island. At the age of thirteen years his parents moved to Greenwich, Washington county, New York, where, at the death of his father, who was a farmer, he took charge of the business and settled his father's estate. Early in the year of 1800, he married Tabitha Bently, by whom he had a son, Elisha, born March 23rd, 1801. The mother died on the 9th of the following month. He afterwards married Lydia Stewart, by whom he had nine children, eight sons and one daughter.

One evening in 1808, when he returned home from his work, he found that two of his children had been bitten by his dog, which had gone mad, and in attempting to confine the dog, he also was bitten on the calf of the leg. Realizing immediately that he had no time to lose, he grasped a pair of sheep-shears, and cut out the affected parts and filled the wound with salt. He thus succeeded in saving his own life; and, with the aid of a prescription he obtained, was also successful in curing his children.

In the Spring of 1818, he moved with his large family to North West Bay, where a son and daughter were born. In 1823 he moved into the town of Bolton, and here, in 1825, he had another son born, but in May of that year his wife, Lydia, died. He then married a third wife, Eliza Benwick, by whom he had four sons.

At this time, notwithstanding all the care, labor and expenditure of raising his numerous family, he had acquired wealth, and had become a man of much influence, was extensively known and universally respected. His name was synonymous with benevolence, honesty and integrity.

In the mysterious dispensations of Providence, a terrible calamity was appointed him in the form of a painful disease, which, according to the most consummate human skill, was incurable, and entirely unknown to the medical faculty. His left leg from the thigh down was covered with black sores, through which the muscles of the limb, having formed into hollow tubes, or pipes, projected outward to the surface, out of which, matter was constantly oozing.

He had employed seven of the most eminent physicians in the country, but all their efforts were unavailing; the last one, Dr. Black, frankly told him that he could run up a heavy bill for medical attendance; "but," said he, "you are beyond the reach of medicine, and I can do you no good!"

For six months Mr. Tanner had neither let his diseased limb hang down nor his foot touch the floor, but was obliged to keep the leg in a right angle with his body, resting it on pillows placed on some object directly in front of him. And yet, with all his bodily suffering, his mind was active and his noble, generous heart, ever sympathizing with his fellow-man, beat with untiring zeal for the welfare of humanity. Feeling assured that he must soon die, he sought opportunities for doing good.

He had a vehicle so constructed that he could move himself from place to place without assistance. In the fore part of September, 1832, a notice was circulated in the place where he lived, that two Latter-day Saint Elders would preach on a certain evening, at a place specified, not far from Mr. Tanner's residence. He hailed the announcement with delight. It afforded him an opportunity (he thought) of doing an immense amount of good. He was conversant with the Bible and felt himself amply qualified to battle with heresy, especially that of the Latter-day Saints, and by doing so, he could confer lasting benefit on his fellow-creatures. That was his aim and such his anticipations when the appointed evening arrived. He seated himself in his locomotive and wended his way to the meeting, feeling confident that he could silence the so-called "Mormons," whom he sincerely supposed were imposters; but long before the two Elders, who were Simeon and Jared Carter, finished their discourses, a wonderful change had come over the mind of Mr. Tanner, and when they closed the evening services, he invited them to his home.

That evening a new era dawned upon his existence. After spending the evening in earnest conversation, when the clock struck the hour of eleven, he told the missionaries he was ready to be baptized, but that it would not be possible for him to receive the ordinance. They asked him, "Why not?" He said on account of his lameness, as he had not put his foot to the floor for the last six months, and could not possibly do it. One of the Elders asked him if he did not think there was power enough in the gospel of Jesus Christ anciently to heal all manner of diseases, to which he replied in the affirmative. He was then asked if he did not think that the same cause produced the same effect in all ages, and if there was not sufficient power in the gospel to heal him. Mr. Tanner replied that such a thought had not occurred to him, but he believed that the Lord could heal him. Elder Jared Carter then arose and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to arise and walk, when, to use his own expression, "I arose, threw down my crutches, and walked the floor back and forth--back and forth, praising God, and I felt as light as a feather."

That same night he walked three-quarters of a mile to Lake George, and was baptized by Simeon Carter, and walked back, giving thanks to God, for his complete restoration to health.

As soon as the "Word of Wisdom" was made known to him, he quit the use of tobacco, tea, coffee and also the use of liquor, and never used them again during the remainder of his life.

In the Spring of 1834 he fitted out his two sons, John J. and Nathan and sent them up to Kirtland, where they joined Zion's Camp and went up to Missouri, with team, wagon and a first class outfit. A little later in the season he fitted out seven families, and sent them to Kirtland or to Missouri.

In the Fall of the same year he sold two large farms and two thousand and two hundred acres of timber land, preparatory to moving to Missouri in the coming Spring. About the middle of December he received an impression by dream or vision of the night, that he was needed and must go immediately to the Church in the West. He told his family of the instruction he had received and forthwith made preparations for the start, while his neighbors, with deep regret at what they considered an insane purpose, tried their utmost to dissuade him; but he knew the will of God in the present crisis and nothing could deter him from doing it.

On Christmas day he commenced his journey with all his earthly effects, and in the dead of Winter traveled the distance of five hundred miles, to Kirtland where he arrived about the 20th of January, 1835, on the Sabbath.

On his arrival in Kirtland, he learned that at the time he received the impression that he must move immediately to the Church, the Prophet Joseph and some of the brethren had met in prayer-meeting and asked the Lord to send them a brother or some brethren with means to assist them to lift the mortgage on the farm upon which the temple was being built.

The day after his arrival in Kirtland, by invitation from the prophet, he and his son, Sidney, met with the High Council, and were informed that the mortgage of the before mentioned farm was about to be foreclosed. Whereupon he loaned the prophet two thousand dollars and took his note on interest, with which amount the farm was redeemed. He loaned to the Temple Committee, Hyrum Smith, Reynolds, Cahoon and Jared Carter, thirteen thousand dollars in merchandize at cost prices in New York, and took their note for the same. This amount, and that loaned to the prophet, were not included in his liberal donations to the building of the temple, from time to time. He also signed a note with the Prophet Joseph and others for thirty thousand dollars for goods purchased in New York, in which he had no pecuniary interest. The foregoing is substantial proof of his confidence in the prophet and in the validity and importance of the work he had embraced.

Here follows a copy of his Elder's certificate:

"TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.--This certifies that John Tanner has been received into this Church of the Latter-day Saints, organized on the sixth day of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and thirty, and has been ordained an Elder, according to the rules and regulations of said Church, and is duly authorized to preach the gospel agreeably to the authority of that office.

"From the satisfactory evidence which we have of his good moral character, and his zeal for the cause of righteousness, and diligent desire to persuade men to forsake evil and embrace truth, we confidently recommend him to all candid and upright people, as a worthy member of society.

"We therefore, in the name, and by the authority of this Church, grant unto this our worthy brother in the Lord, this letter of commendation as a proof of our fellowship and esteem; praying for his success and prosperity in our Redeemer's cause.

"Given by the direction of a conference of the Elders of said Church, assembled in Kirtland, Geauga county, Ohio, the third day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and thirty-six.

"F. G. WILLIAMS, Clerk.

"JOSEPH SMITH, JR., Chairman."
