ACCOUNT OF MY ANCESTORS--MY BIRTH--REMARKABLE VISION--ITS EFFECT UPON
THOSE WHO HEARD OF IT--MY FATHER AND GRAND-FATHER BECOME INTERESTED
IN READING THE SCRIPTURES--MY GRAND-FATHER'S PROPHECY--HIS DISLOCATED
SHOULDER REPLACED BY THE POWER OF GOD--MY GRAND-FATHER'S VISION AND
DEATH--"MORMON" ELDERS VISIT THE NEIGHBORHOOD--I GO TO HEAR THEM
PREACH--BELIEVE THEIR DOCTRINES--MY FATHER OPPOSED TO THE ELDERS.

I am a descendant of Job and Mary Tyler, which said Job Tyler was born in Wales or England, about the year 1619, or 1620, and emigrated to America about 1640, some ten years after the landing of the pilgrim fathers on Plymouth Rock. My emigrant ancestor, Job Tyler, settled in Andover, Massachusetts, where he raised a family of four sons and several daughters. I descended from Moses Tyler, the oldest son of Job and Mary. The town of Andover having been burned and the records destroyed, I have only tradition, which is rather vague, for much of the early history of my family. Enough, however, is known to show that several eminent lawyers, ministers, officers and soldiers of the war of the revolution were among them. My father, Andrews Tyler, was in the fourth generation from Job and Mary. He was born at Boxford, adjoining Andover. His father, Nathaniel Tyler, served as a lieutenant in the continental army in the revolutionary war. My grand-father with his family removed from Boxford, Mass., to Herkamer county, New York, where my father, Andrews Tyler, married Elizabeth Comins, daughter of lieutenant and regimental quartermaster, John Comins, Jr., in the year 1806, to whom were born eleven sons and one daughter.

I was born in Sempronious, Cayuga county, New York, on the 23rd of November, 1816.

About the year 1820, or early in 1821, I had a remarkable vision, which, after sixty-one years have passed away, is as vivid in my recollection as the scenes of yesterday. I had occasion to rise from my bed about midnight. Suddenly the room was filled with a brilliant light, brighter than the noon-day sun. I looked into the fire-place only to discern a few smouldering coals covered with ashes. I gazed upon everything visible in the house. All seemed natural except that the light gave things a brighter hue. I looked over head to an opening between two loose boards or planks where my father usually kept his saw, auger and other small tools. There I beheld a hand and wrist which were nearly transparent, with a wrist-band whiter than the pure snow. I called to my mother, who awoke at the second call and inquired what I wanted. I asked who was in the chamber, and was told there was no one there, and that if there had been I could not have seen him in the darkness. I replied it was not dark. On my stating that it was lighter than day-light, and that I could see to pick up a pin, I was told to go to bed, which I did, when the vision closed, and it was so dark I could not see my hand before me, although I held it close to my face.

On relating the vision to my mother next morning, she wept like an infant, and said: "O, my child, I fear you are not long for this world." I, however, began to amend from that time and soon recovered from a chronic ailment, and was soon quite well.

The news of the vision soon spread abroad, and was much exaggerated. As is natural, our house was thronged with visitors, and I had to relate the vision over and over again. The conclusion was that I would either die, or the Lord had a great work for me to do. It was predicted that I would become a preacher of the gospel. This was then considered about the greatest work in which mortals could engage.

In 1823, my father, with his family, moved to Springfield, Erie Co, Pa., where his father and some other relatives had previously gone. About this time my father and grand-father became unusually interested in reading the scriptures and talking about them to their neighbors. One day my father happened to open to Mark, 16th chapter, 16th and 17th verses. After reading them several times carefully he said, "There is not a true believer in the world," as the promise was that the signs spoken of should follow those who believed. He showed the passage to several ministers, mostly Methodists, and argued with them. The more he argued the more convinced he was that the gospel was not on the earth, and he was able to confound the most learned divines, although he was quite illiterate. My grand-father also had the same views and he prophesied that he would die, but my father would live to see the true church organized with all the apostolic gifts and blessings.

For this cause much unfavorable comment in the neighborhood was indulged in, and my grand-father was often asked, usually in a derisive way, why he did not have his dislocated shoulder, which had been out of place for some thirty years, replaced by the power of faith. He argued that it would be done if he had sufficient faith.

One morning he came from his bed room and told my father's family, with whom he lived, that the Lord had revealed to him that, "Whereas physicians had said your shoulder could not be set He would let them know it could be done, for He would do it Himself."

My father replied that if the Lord had given him such a revelation it would be so, for He could not lie. He, however, was rather incredulous, notwithstanding he had been advocating the doctrine of miracles for some time. It happened, not long afterwards, that while my grand-father was lying in his bed at the dawn of day, thinking quietly of the blessings of God to him, his shoulder slipped into place with a snap that he thought might have been heard for a distance of one or two rods. Previous to this he carried his arm in a sling most of the time and could not raise his hand to his head, but from that time it was as limber as the other and had its full strength. This was a testimony that could not be impeached. Outside of the family, however, it was looked upon as a mere accident; but the previous revelation to my grand-father convinced the family that it was done by the power of God. This was in 1827, and in 1829 my grand-father died.

After my grand-father was taken with his last illness, he told my parents that an angel appeared to him clothed in white, and told him he would not recover, for his sickness was unto death. Ten days later he died. To save ridicule, however, this vision was kept secret and only told me afterwards by my mother. The true church of Christ was not then on the earth (February, 1829), nor had such an occurrence been heard of by us at the time. Although the Father and the Son had appeared to Joseph Smith some years previously, we had not heard of the vision. The vision of my grand-father seemed so strange that my parents hardly knew whether to attribute it to imagination or a reality, as they could not question his sincerity, he having always been strictly reliable. I have never doubted, however, his having had the vision.

He walked half a mile to bid my parents good by, although in poor health. On parting, my grand-father wept like a child, and said, "This is the last time I shall over visit you while I live."

My father continued his researches of the scriptures, and found that everything he read confirmed his views. He never allowed a traveling minister to leave the neighborhood without an argument if he could avoid it, and his arguments were in no instance refuted.

In the Spring of 1832, Elders Samuel H. Smith and Orson Hyde, of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, came to our neighborhood and held a few meetings. Elder Smith read the 29th chapter of Isaiah at the first meeting and delineated the circumstances of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, of which he said he was a witness. He knew his brother Joseph had the plates, for the prophet had shown them to him, and he had handled them and seen the engravings thereon. His speech was more like a narrative than a sermon. Elder Hyde made a few closing remarks and appointed another meeting. At the close of the first meeting my father, as his custom was, sprung his usual question about the spiritual gifts and was quite surprised to hear Elder Smith say, "That is our doctrine, and we have those gifts in our Church."

This meeting was held in the house of Mr. Joseph Hartshorn, one of our neighbors. At the close of the meeting I picked up the Book of Mormon, which they had left lying on the table, and began to read the preface in relation to Martin Harris losing 116 pages of the original manuscript. When I had read as far as a quotation from a revelation, now found in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, my brother, William, took the book out of my hands and closed it, remarking that good people said it carried with it a spirit of witchcraft, which caused those who read it to be bewitched and join the "Mormon" church. I was then over fifteen years of age and my brother, who was next older than myself, was in his eighteenth year. He was wild and sometimes profane, especially when angry, and I was quite taken by surprise to hear him quote what "good people said," as previously I had never heard him speak of them, except in derision. The last words I read where so riveted upon my mind that I sometimes feared there was some truth in the remark about the book being bewitching. The words were, "I will show unto them" (the wicked who had designed to change the manuscript in case Joseph re-translated it) "that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil."

Before leaving the place the Elders baptized three persons. My father soon became a bitter enemy. I believed every word of the first discourse referred to previously, but dared not make my belief known because of my youth and the bitterness of my father. He admitted that the "Mormon" doctrines were true, but claimed that the members of that church had adopted them to cover up a fraud. All classes of people joined in the cry, "Beware of false prophets who come to you in sheep's clothing," etc, telling ridiculous stories about "Old Joe Smith walking on the water," pretended miracles, angels being caught, etc. The stories were about the same as those which the Elders now have to refute.
