MY COVENANT WITH THE LORD--MY SISTER DESIRES BAPTISM--MY BROTHERS'
THREAT--VISIT OF HYRUM SMITH--MY SISTER BAPTIZED--I BREAK MY
COVENANT--MY FATHER'S DREAM--MY BAPTISM--EXHORTATION TO THE
YOUNG--SPIRITUAL GIFTS RECEIVED--MEETING DISTURBED BY MOBS--AFTER
TALKING TO THEM THEY BECOME QUIET AND LEAVE THE PLACE--SOME OF THE MOB
JOIN THE CHURCH--THE LEADER OF THE MOB DIES SUDDENLY--MOBBINGS CEASE.

There was no human being to whom I dared make known the fact that I believed in the teachings of the despised "Mormons." I had, however, for some time been in the habit of engaging in secret prayer, and now, in this hour of trial, I went to my place of secret resort and poured out my soul to the Lord and made covenant with Him that in case my only sister would believe and be baptized I would go with her. I soon learned that she, like myself, had believed the work from the beginning and was resolved to be baptized at the first opportunity. She was then in service at one of our neighbors. When she came home on a visit father asked her if what he had heard, that she intended to join the "Mormons," was true. She answered that she believed they were right and felt it her duty to join them. He remonstrated until he saw that her mind was bent on being baptized at the first opportunity. He then said, "If you do join them, you must never darken my door afterwards." Still her resolution was unchanged. My older brothers told her they would shoot any "Mormon" Elder who dared to baptize her. Thus matters continued for several months, during which time I continued praying, not only for my sister, but for my parents and brothers, although my mother said but little either way.

About December, 1832, Elder Hyrum Smith, brother to the prophet, came to our neighborhood. My father told him that his daughter, who was present, was bent on being baptized into his church, stating at the same time, that the Elder who baptized her would do so at his peril. The Elder quite mildly remarked in substance as follows: "Mr. Tyler, we shall not baptize your daughter against your wishes. If our doctrine be true, which we testify it is, if you prevent your daughter from embracing it, the sin will be on your head, not on ours or your daughter's."

This remark pricked him to the heart. He began to think that possibly the "Mormons" were right and he was wrong. He therefore decided to counsel his daughter in the matter and then permit her to exercise her free agency. He would thus relieve himself of any responsibility.

His remarks to my sister were to the effect that if this new religion was true, it was the best religion in the world, but, if false, it was the worst. "These men," said he, "know whether it is true or false, but I do not." He wished her to reflect upon all these things before making a move in the matter. She replied that she had weighed them long ago and believed it to be her duty to be baptized. He took her on an ox-sled to Lake Erie, a distance of two miles, where, after a hole was cut through three feet of solid ice, she was baptized and confirmed into the Church by Elder Hyrum Smith.

But where was the writer who had covenanted with the Lord to go with his sister in case she was baptized?

He remained at home, a broken-hearted, bashful boy, without stamina enough to come out and confront a wicked world. Soon after, my grand-father appeared to my father in a dream, and told him that this was the people he prophesied of while living, and my parents were baptized. Then my persecuting brothers followed. When the last named went into the water I stood on the shore, feeling as though my ease was almost hopeless. I had twice failed to keep my covenants with the Lord and now the third promise was about to be broken. At this juncture my father, who knew nothing of my covenants, observing that I looked downcast, stepped to my side and asked what was the matter. I was speechless and could not utter a word. I had been studying how I could ever have a heart to call upon the Lord again. How could He trust me further? On my father asking if it was not hard for my sister, parents and brothers to leave me, I broke completely down and wept aloud. My father then for the first time told me I could be baptized if I wished. I, however, waited until the next Wednesday, this being on Sunday. During the interval, however, I plead with the Lord to forgive me of my sin of covenant-breaking; and when I came up out of the water, not before, did I feel that He had answered my prayers, and that all my sins were pardoned. This was on the 16th day of January, 1833. I was a little over sixteen years of age.

I hope my young readers will keep their covenants with the Lord and not have the sorrow of heart I had. It was so intense that I question very much whether I could survive the same length of time with my present infirmities of age. I had not the advantages of the present period. I had only what I had learned from reading the Bible. I had only heard perhaps from two to four gospel sermons and those mainly by young Elders. I do not mention this fact in justification of my course, yet I do believe that the Lord was more merciful towards me than He would have been if I had had the advantages that the people have now, especially those of our young people who have kind parents who are Latter-day Saints to encourage and lead them along in the right way. One kind word of invitation and persuasion on the part of my parents at a proper time would have removed all obstacles, and been hailed as a heavenly boon. I desired to break the fetters which seemed to bind me.

Here let me exhort all parents to do all they can to encourage their children to be baptized at eight years of age, and much earlier to pray, ask a blessing on the food, and attend the primary meetings and Sabbath schools. At and prior to the time of my serious convictions, of which I have spoken, such institutions and encouragement would have been prized above all earthly things.

I did attend a Methodist Sabbath school, the only one I knew anything about; but at the tender age of fifteen years I was better versed in the true interpretation of the scriptures than the teacher. But attending Sabbath school kept me out of the company of wicked boys, and had a tendency to teach me a reverence for the Sabbath day.

After I was baptized, however, I never attended the Methodist Sabbath school any more, although it was desired that I should. My teachers said I was always honest and truthful, and they believed I was sincere in my religion, and if I would continue to attend their Sunday school I would see my error. They believed I had been converted, and that when I got a few years older I would be called to preach the gospel, and would be the means of saving many souls.

I admitted having been converted and that I knew my sins were forgiven, and further testified that obedience to "Mormonism," so-called, was what had brought peace to my soul; and the nearer I lived to it, the more of the peace of the Holy Spirit I felt.

The gift of prophecy was poured out upon me. I also received the gift and interpretation of tongues. But what then and ever since has seemed to me the greatest gift I received was to speak easily and fluently in my own language. This was the first gift I received. It came upon me in great power. A few months after my baptism several leading Elders from Kirtland, Ohio, were about to be dragged from our school house by a mob who had assembled to tar and feather them. When the Elders and others failed to stop them from disturbing the meeting, I stepped upon a form or bench and began to talk to the people. Five minutes had not elapsed when, aside from my voice, a pin dropping upon the floor might have been easily heard. After I had spoken about ten or fifteen minutes the mob left the house, and, after consulting outside a few moments, retired, and we had a good meeting.

This circumstance had gone out of my mind until about 1849, while stopping over night at the house of a brother named Brim. Alfred O. Brim, who was one of the mob, called my attention to it, and asked me if I knew that they had a keg of tar and a feather bed in the carriage in which they came to the meeting.

I replied that I did not think I ever heard of it. He said they brought the tar and the feathers with the full intent to use them on the Elders, but they were so surprised at the power with which I spoke that they knew I was helped by some invisible spirit. They had known me since I was seven years old, and were satisfied that I had not made up the speech, and that I was not capable of doing so. They decided that it must be of the Lord or of the devil. Of this they could not be the judges, not, as they said, having the discerning of spirits. Hence one of them suggested that lest they be found fighting against God, they had better retire. All agreed to it and they left.

Brim and several of his brothers afterwards joined the church, and were at one time prominent tanners in Salt Lake county, Utah.

Dr. Rion, an eminent physician of Springfield, who, I believe, was the leader, it was said, died instantly of apoplexy, some time after, while sitting in his chair.

I never heard any more talk of mobbing in that neighborhood. Thus the Lord made use of a humble, unlearned boy to break up a spirit of mobocracy which had existed for some months, and saved His servants from cruel treatment and possible death.
