A CASE OF PALSY HEALED--ITS EFFECT ON THE PEOPLE--MR. BRIDGES
UNBELIEF--THE CASE OF WIDOW CADE--SHE IS PARTIALLY CURED BY
FAITH--TEMPTS THE LORD AND DIES--I AM CALLED ON A MISSION TO
EUROPE--TERRIBLE SEA-STORM--THE PRAYERS OF THE ELDERS ARE HEARD AND THE
WINDS CEASE--WE ARRIVE SAFELY IN A BADLY SHATTERED SHIP.

While traveling and preaching in the state of Mississippi, in 1841 or 1842, I was invited to remain all night with a Mr. John Knight, who was prostrate with the palsy, and had been in that condition for several weeks. This man was an infidel although his family belonged to the Methodist church. Being called upon to pray, before going to bed, I remembered the afflicted head of the family. When the prayer was ended he said, that as I was praying for him, a warming influence such as he had never felt before, extended down his palsied side. After I had tarried over a few nights with him, he desired to receive the ordinance of the laying on of hands. I called in two other Elders, and we explained to him that should he be healed and then refuse to obey the gospel he would incur a great responsibility. He finally agreed that if he ever was so far relieved as to be able to get to the water he would be baptized. At this time he had lain upon what is termed a cricket, or tribet, for about six or eight weeks. His left side and limbs were powerless. When he desired to be turned over it was done by pulling a blanket, kept under him for that purpose. There lived in that vicinity a Methodist preacher by the name of Bridges. Like many of his class, he persecuted the Saints, never forgetting to demand a sign. In his public discourses he would say, "Let the Mormons heal old man Knight and we will all believe on them." But we did not propose to tempt the Lord by asking a sign to gratify the curiosity of a wicked man. We, however, anointed the palsied side, according to Mr. Knight's request, and laid our hands upon him, and when the palsey was rebuked he straightened the afflicted arm while our hands were yet upon him.

I now had to go out in my district and fill appointments which I had made; but when I returned at the end of two weeks, I learned that Mr. Knight had walked nearly half a mile and had been baptized. A goodly number of others had also been baptized, and we organized a branch of the Church with Samuel L. Gully (known as Lieutenant Gully, in the history of the Mormon Battalion), as presiding Elder. All apostatized shortly afterwards excepting Elder Gully and a few others who had believed and were anxious to get baptized before this remarkable case of healing occurred, thus proving the truth of the revelation which says, "Those who seek signs shall have signs, but not unto salvation." Even the man who received this manifestation of God's power went back to the beggarly elements of the world, although he still bore testimony to the fact that he was healed, but said he "did not know whether Joseph Smith was a true prophet or an imposter."

But what of Mr. Bridges? This wicked preacher, when reminded of his own sayings in regard to believing if shown a sign, answered that the old man had been "playing the possum" all the time, and that there had been nothing the matter with him. "Playing the possum," simply means pretending to be sick when one is well. The proverb is derived from an animal known as the "opossum." It is something larger than a common domestic cat, and when pursed by dogs or men will lie upon the ground and feign itself dead. Thus the preacher pretended to believe Mr. Knight feigned his illness to "palm off a Mormon deception," although he had been prostrated some time before he knew anything about the Latter-day Saints, or they of him.

During my travel, I often stopped with a widow woman by the name of Cade. She had two sons living with her, one a widower, the other a bachelor; all where friendly and had some little faith. This lady, whom I should judge was about seventy years of age, had a wen, or growing tumor, on her throat about the size of a hen's egg. On one of my calls she requested me to administer to her for the removal of this tumor. I complied with her request, and in half an hour afterwards the lump was half gone. I left her with the swelling still going down; but my story ends badly, for after I was gone, Satan tempted her sons to believe that the virtue was in the olive oil with which she was anointed. This view weakened her faith and the healing power departed from her. Her sons went to the store and purchased a bottle of oil, similar to that which I had anointed her with, but to no effect. The circumstance was related to a physician of the neighborhood, who told the family that what had happened to her was simply the natural effect of the oil in softening the tumor; that it could only be cured by being taken out with surgical instruments; that he could remove it without difficulty and prolong her life, but it would eventually prove fatal unless removed. She consented to have the doctor try his skill on her, and she died under the operation. There were not a few, even among outsiders, who attributed her death to tempting the Lord. That their conclusion was correct, I think none of my young readers will doubt. I always felt sorry for her, as she was a kind-hearted, good woman, but was deceived by the persuasion of others. Her sons always regretted what they had done, but never joined the Church.

Had her faith continued in the Lord she would doubtless have been entirely healed in a very short time and lived to glorify God for a number of years.

Thus we see that His "anger is kindled against those who do not acknowledge His hand in all things." I hope no one who reads this little book will be guilty of tempting the Lord as this woman did, or fail to acknowledge His hand in all things. Even in losses, sickness or death in our families His hand should be acknowledged, and all will be sanctified for our good in the end.

At the Spring conference, in 1853, I was called on a mission to Europe, with a number of others. While crossing the ocean, when about two hundred miles from Liverpool, we encountered, what the captain said, was the severest storm he had experienced during thirty years of sea-faring life. There were seven Elders on board the English sail ship, Ashburton. When the storm became the most severe only four could be got together. We had taken second cabin passage, and, of course, had a room with bunks in which to sleep. To this room Elders Charles R. Dana. Israel Barlow and myself repaired, leaving Brother Thomas Colburn outside to watch and tend the door while we prayed and rebuked the raging wind and boisterous sea. We had but just commenced to pray when the door of the ventilator of our room flew open and let a large stream of water upon us. Brother Barlow sprang upon one of the upper bunks and closed the door and held it to its place while Brother Dana and myself continued the prayer. By this time the ship had come so near capsizing that a bottle of ink being open and standing over one door-post, which was about six feet high, emptied its contents upon the opposite post about one and a half feet from the door sill, making an angle, by actual measurement, of over fifty degrees, which was just about as far as she could go without capsizing. Just at this juncture the wind was rebuked by the servants of the Lord, and so sudden was the reaction that the ship creaked from stem to stern and we did not know but what she might fall to pieces. But the main damage done was to lose her sails and cause the yard-arm to fall and break the ship-carpenter's leg. The cargo was shiped to one side so that she could not run level during the remainder of the voyage. We had on board, among other passengers, a Presbyterian temperance lecturer, with whom we had had many arguments on the use of the spiritual gifts, he taking the view that they were done away because no longer needed. His berth was on the opposite side of the ship. Before the prayer was closed and the door opened, he stood trembling with excitement outside No sooner was the door opened than he exclaimed hastily and in an excited manner, "Havn't you been praying? havn't you been praying?" On Elder Dana inquiring why he asked that question, he nervously answered, "I thought you had; the wind stopped blowing so suddenly."

During the remainder of the journey, whenever there was more than a gentle breeze of wind, this man and his friends were sure to find their way to our cabin, as though they thought, if all the balance of the ship sank, our side would float all right.

This is one of the many incidents that might be cited to show that our enemies are not sincere in opposing our doctrines. I firmly believe that many people who hear the gospel preached have an inward conviction of its truth; but the love of riches and popularity with the fear of their friends deserting them and the frowns of the world, in many instances, cause their love to grow cold and they smother their convictions and become our enemies. On this subject the Lord has said, "Every ear shall hear and every heart shall be penetrated." I think both occur at the same time; that there may be a time in the future when they will feel it much stronger, when it is too late to benefit them, I also admit; for they will even seek death and not be able to find it.

Among the passengers was a young man, son of an Irish widow, who lived in Dublin, Ireland. Becoming consumptive, he went to New York for his health. Growing worse, he decided to return and die in the land of his fathers, and have a tender mother's care to soothe his last hours. But, alas, when the land-breeze struck him, the night before we sighted land, he expired, and was buried in the sea.

We sailed along at the rate of about ten miles per hour until about seven o'clock in the evening when the sky was suddenly darkened by a thick fog, a contrary wind arose and simultaneously with it a brig struck our ship's stern, took off her helm or rudder, got tangled in her rigging and took off her top-mast and top-sail and damaged her generally. The brig's rudder was also taken away by our ship, and she was so damaged that her captain asked permission to lash her to our ship, but our captain replied that his ship was so badly damaged that he dared not allow it. A wail went up from the little craft that they would all go to the bottom. They were soon out of our sight.

The wind and fog continued, and Captain Williams, of the Ashburton, lay drunk in his cabin, most of the time. There was but one man on board who understood the channel in which we were sailing. And he was mate of another vessel of the same line (the "Black Ball"), which sailed previous to ours. He was on a spree when his ship left New York, and, although an excellent officer, could not be induced for love or money to go on board until "he had had it out." Being over his drunken spree he entered our ship, the control of which, during our last calamity, was intrusted entirely to him. Our only method of guiding the ship was by a rope tied to the corner of the main sail and pulling it from one side to the other. To do this required the assistance of all the passengers and for three days and nights we barely escaped being dashed to pieces on the rocks which abounded all around us. Finally we succeeded in landing in Belfast harbor.

Here we left our ship waiting repairs and took steamer for Liverpool, where we arrived a few hours later.

The brig we came in contact with was wrecked on the coast of the Isle of Man, but no lives were lost.

During my stay in England, which was less than a year, there were many cases of healing and other incidents of interest occurred, but such things being usual with all the Elders I need not rehearse them.
