MY BIRTH AND PARENTAGE--MY FATHER'S BUSINESS--HE EMPLOYS JOSEPH SMITH,
JUN.--CHARACTER OF THIS YOUTH--I START IN BUSINESS FOR MYSELF--MY
HEALTH COMPELS ME TO CHANGE OCCUPATION--JOSEPH SMITH, JUN., A CONSTANT
VISITOR AT MY HOUSE--HE RELATES HIS EXPERIENCE--HIS STATEMENTS LEAVE NO
ROOM FOR DOUBT IN ME--HE IS BITTERLY PERSECUTED.

I was born September 13th, 1800, in Marlborough, Windham county, Vermont. My father's name was Joseph and my mother's maiden name was Polly Peck.

My father moved into the state of New York, when I was nine years of age, and settled on the Susquehanna river, near the bend in Chenango county, town of Bainbridge, and stayed there two years. He then moved down the river six miles into Broome county, town of Colesville, and there remained nineteen years.

My father owned a farm, a grist-mill and carding machine. He was not rich, yet he possessed enough of this world's goods to secure to himself and family, not only the necessaries, but also the comforts of life.

His family, consisting of my mother, three sons and four daughters, he raised in a genteel and respectable manner, and gave his children a good common school education.

My father was a sober, honest man, generally respected and beloved by his neighbors and acquaintances. He did not belong to any religious sect, but was a believer in the Universalian doctrine.

The business in which my father was engaged often required him to have hired help, and among the many he from time to time employed was a young man by the name of Joseph Smith, Jun., to whom I was particularly attached. His noble deportment, his faithfulness and his kind address, could not fail to win the esteem of those who had the pleasure of his acquaintance. One thing I will mention, which seemed to be a peculiar characteristic with him in all his boyish sports and amusements; I never knew any one to gain advantage over him, and yet he was always kind and kept the good-will of his playmates.

I continued to live with my father until I was twenty-five years old, or nearly so; and on June 7th, 1825, I married a respectable young lady, by the name of Sally Coburn. Her health was rather delicate. She had long held an honorable position in the choir of one of the most respectable churches in the vicinity; her father was a musician, and spent much of his time from home, which threw a heavy burden upon her mother in raising the family; this, however, she bore with much patience.

On leaving my father I went a few miles distant and put in operation a carding machine, but I soon sold it, and afterwards became engaged in running a grist-mill. During this time my wife gave birth to a child, which did not live and her sufferings were very great. I found my health was gradually declining, and was advised to leave the mill, as it did not agree with my constitution to work in it. I had no taste for farming, so I continued in the mill business until the physician told me I had the consumption, and he thought my case doubtful. I applied to a skillful Indian doctor, from whom I obtained some relief, but was obliged to change my business, and I moved back to Colesville, near to where my father lived.

In settling up my business affairs I suffered a heavy loss, and this, with the expenses incurred by my sickness, considerably reduced my pecuniary affairs. But I was not discouraged, for all my labor prospered in my hands, and I again entered into business.

My oldest brother. Nahum, was married, and lived close at hand; also my sisters Esther and Anna, with their husbands William Stringham, and Freeborn Demill, so that I was happy, not only in the society of my father's immediate family, but also of many relatives who lived in the same vicinity. Peace, prosperity and plenty, seemed to crown our labors, and indeed we were a happy family, and my father rejoiced in having us around him.

During this time we were frequently visited by my young friend, Joseph Smith, who would entertain us with accounts of the wonderful things which had happened to him. It was evident to me that great things were about to be accomplished through him--that the Lord was about to use him as an instrument in His hands to bring to pass the great and mighty work of the last days. This chosen instrument told us of God's manifestations to him, of the discovery and receiving of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, of his persecutions for the gospel's sake, and many other items of his eventful life.

So honest and plain were all his statements that there was no room for any misgivings with me on the subject. Besides, I found by reading and searching the Bible, that there would be a great falling away from the gospel as preached and established by Jesus and His apostles, that in the last days God would set His hand again to restore that which was lost. Then why should any one persecute this boy? I could not. Yet, to my certain knowledge, many did; and those who professed to be preacher's of the gospel, were often his vilest persecutors; and notwithstanding they all professed to doubt the reality of his having the plates of which he had spoken, yet so eager were they to get them from him, that it was only by the Lord, or a kind angel, warning him from time to time of the pursuit of his enemies, that he was enabled to preserve the sacred records. In fact, it seemed very much like it was with Joseph and Mary, the mother of Jesus, being warned of God to flee from place to place, to save the young child; so has Joseph Smith been warned many times, and then barely escaped his pursuers. Of this I can bear a faithful testimony.
