I AM BAPTIZED--FIRST CONFERENCE OF THE CHURCH--REMARKABLE VISIONS--THE
PROPHET VISITS THE COLESVILLE BRANCH--HOLDS MEETING--PERSECUTIONS
BEGIN--A PRESBYTERIAN PREACHER TRIES TO MISLEAD MY SISTER-IN-LAW, BUT
FAILS--BAPTISMS--MOB GATHERS--JOSEPH ARRESTED BY CONSTABLE--WICKED
MEN LIE IN AMBUSH FOR HIM--HE IS DELIVERED FROM THE MOB BY THE
CONSTABLE--HIS UNJUST TRIAL--HE IS ACQUITTED.

DURING the last week in May I went on a visit to Fayette and was baptized by David Whitmer.

On the first day of June, 1830, the first conference was held by the Church. Our number consisted of about thirty, besides many others who came to learn of our principles, or were already believers, but had not been baptized. Having opened the meeting by singing and prayer, we partook of the emblems of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. A number were confirmed who had lately been baptized, and several were called and ordained to various offices in the Priesthood. Much good instruction was given, and the Holy Ghost was poured out upon us in a marvelous manner. Many prophesied, while others had the heavens opened to their view. It was a scene long to be remembered. I felt my heart filled with love, with glory, and with pleasure unspeakable. I could discern all that was going on in the room and a vision of futurity also suddenly burst upon me, and I saw, represented, the great work, which, through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, was to be accomplished. I saw the heavens opened, I beheld the Lord Jesus Christ seated at the right hand of the Majesty on High, and it was made plain to my understanding that the time would come when I should be admitted into His presence, to enjoy His society for ever and ever.

Such scenes as these were calculated to inspire the hearts of the Saints with joy unspeakable, and fill us with awe and reverence for that Almighty Being, by whose grace we had been called and made the happy partakers of such glorious blessings as were poured out upon us--to find ourselves engaged in the very same order of things as were observed and practiced by the holy apostles of old. To realize the importance and solemnity of the great work which had fallen upon our young friend Joseph, and to witness and feel with our natural senses the like glorious manifestations of the power of the Priesthood, the gifts and blessings of the Holy Ghost and the goodness and condescension of a merciful God unto such as obey the everlasting gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, combined to create within us sensations of rapturous gratitude and inspire us with fresh zeal and energy in the cause of truth, and also to confirm our faith in Joseph Smith being the instrument in the hands of God to restore the Priesthood again to man on earth and to set up the kingdom of God, which shall never more be overcome.

Soon after conference Joseph Smith the Prophet, accompanied by his wife, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer and David Whitmer, came to Colesville to make us a visit. There were many in our neighborhood who believed, and were anxiously waiting for an opportunity to be baptized. Meeting was appointed for the Sabbath, and on Saturday afternoon we erected a dam across a stream which was close by, with the intention of baptizing those who applied on Sunday, but during the night a mob collected and tore away the dam. This prevented us from attending to the ordinance of baptism that day. It was afterwards ascertained that the mob had been instigated to this act of molestation, by certain sectarian priests of the neighborhood, who began to think their craft was in danger, and took this plan to stop the progress of truth. The sequel will show how determinedly they prosecuted, their opposition, as well as to what little purpose in the end.

The Sabbath arrived, we held our meeting, Oliver Cowdery preached, others bore testimony to the Book of Mormon, the doctrine of repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, etc. In the audience were those who had torn down the dam. They seemed desirous of giving us trouble, but did not until after the meeting was dismissed, when they immediately commenced talking to those whom they considered our friends, to try to turn them against us and our doctrine.

Among those present I will mention the case of one young lady--Miss Emily Coburn, my wife's sister. The Rev. Mr. Shearer, a divine of the Presbyterian faith, who had considered himself her pastor, understanding that she was likely to believe our doctrine, came to labor with her a short time previous to our meeting. He spent some time without being able to persuade her against us, and then endeavored to have her leave her sister's house, and go with him to her father's, who lived ten miles distant: for this purpose he had recourse to stratagem, he told her that her brothers were waiting for her at a certain place and wished her to go home with them. He succeeded thus in getting her a little way from the house, when seeing that her brothers were not waiting for her, she refused to go farther with him. He thereupon took her by the arm and tried to force her along; my wife, her sister, was soon with them, and the two women being one too many for him he was obliged to sneak off without accomplishing his errand, after all his labor and ingenuity. Nothing daunted, however, he went to her father, and represented something to him, which induced the old gentleman to give him a power of attorney. Thus armed he returned, and as soon as our meeting was out on the Sunday evening, he served process upon her, and immediately carried her off to her father's residence. All his labor was in vain, however, for the said Emily Coburn in a short time afterwards was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church.

Early on Monday morning we were on the alert, and before our enemies were aware of it, Oliver Cowdery proceeded to baptize Emma Smith, Hezekiah Peck and wife, Joseph Knight and wife, William Stringham, Joseph Knight Jun., Aaron Culver and wife, Levi Hall, Polly Knight and Julia Stringham. But before the baptism was entirely finished, the mob began to collect again. We retired to my father's house, and the mob, which numbered about fifty surrounded the house, raging with anger, and apparently wishing to commit violence against us. So violent and troublesome were they, that the brethren were obliged to leave my father's house and they succeeded in reaching mine. The mob who soon found where they had gone, followed them and it was only by great prudence on our part and help from our Heavenly Father that they were kept from laying violent hands upon us.

A meeting had been appointed for the evening to confirm those who had been baptized in the morning. The time appointed had arrived, and our friends had nearly all collected together, when, to our great surprise and sorrow, the constable came and arrested Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., on a warrant charging him with being a disorderly person, and of setting the country in an uproar, by preaching the Book of Mormon. The constable soon after he had arrested Joseph, told him that the plan of those who had got out the warrant for his arrest, was to get him into the hands of the mob who were now lying in ambush for him, and that he, the constable, was determined to save Joseph from them, as he found him to be a different person to what he had been represented. This proved true, for they had not proceeded far from the house, when the wagon in which Joseph and the constable were riding, was surrounded by the mob, who seemed only to await some signal from the constable, but to their great discomfiture, he gave the horses the whip and was soon out of their reach. As the constable was driving briskly along, one of the wagon wheels came off, which accident left them almost in the hands of the mob, who had pursued them closely. But the constable was an expert man and managed to get the wheel on again, before the mob overtook him, and soon left them in the rear once more.

He drove on to the town of South Bainbridge, Chenango county, where he lodged Joseph in an upper room of a tavern; and in order that all might be safe for himself and Joseph, he slept, or laid during the night with his feet against the door, and kept a loaded gun by him, (Joseph occupied a bed in the same room) and declared that if they were unlawfully molested he would fight for Joseph, and defend him to the utmost of his ability.

On the following day a court was convened for the purpose of investigating the charges which had been made against Joseph Smith, Jun. On account of the many scandalous reports which had been put in circulation, a great excitement prevailed.

My father, Joseph Knight, Sen., did not let pass this opportunity of doing all in his power to assist this persecuted boy. He went to two of his neighbors. James Davidson and John Reid, Esqs., respectable farmers who were well versed in the laws of their country, and retained them in behalf of Joseph during his trial.

The trial commenced among a crowded multitude of spectators, who generally seemed to believe Joseph guilty of all that had been alleged against him, and, of course were zealous to see him punished for his crimes.

Among the many witnesses called up against Joseph, was one Josiah Stoal, a gentleman for whom Joseph formerly worked. He was examined as follows:

Question--"Did not the prisoner, Joseph Smith have a horse from you?"

Answer--"Yes."

Q.--"Did he not go to you and tell you an angel had appeared unto him, and told him to get the horse from you?"

A.--"No; he told me no such thing."

Q.--"Well, how did he get the horse from you?"

A.--"He bought it from me the same as any other man would do."

Q.--"Have you had your pay?"

A.--"That is not your business."

The question being repeated, the witness replied, "I hold his note for the price of the horse, which I consider as good as the money, for I am well acquainted with Joseph Smith, Jun., and know him to be honest, and, if he wishes, I am ready to let him have another horse on the same terms."

Mr. Jonathan Thompson was next called and examined.

Question--"Has not the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jun., had a yoke of oxen of you?"

Answer--"Yes."

Q.--"Did he not obtain them from you by telling you that he had a revelation to the effect that he was to have them?"

A.--"No; he did not mention a word of the kind concerning the oxen; he purchased them the same as any other man would."

After several more similar attempts the court was detained for a time in order that two young ladies, daughters of Josiah Stoal, with whom Joseph had at times kept company, might be sent for, in order if possible, to elicit something from them which could be made a pretext against Joseph.

The young ladies came, and were each examined as to his character and conduct in general, but in particular as to his behavior towards them in public and private; they both bore such testimony in Joseph's favor, as to leave his enemies without a cause for complaint. Several attempts were made to prove something against Joseph, and even circumstances which were alleged to have taken place in Broome county were brought forward. But these Joseph's lawyers would not admit against him, in consequence of which his persecutors managed to detain the court until they had succeeded in obtaining a warrant from Broome county. This warrant they served upon him at the very moment he had been acquitted by the court.
