SIDNEY RIGDON'S CONVERSION--THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE CHURCH--THE
SAINTS COMMENCE TO GATHER--AN ACCIDENT--MY AUNT'S DREAM--ITS
FULFILLMENT--MISSOURI CHOSEN FOR A GATHERING PLACE--MY MOTHER'S
WISH--REFLECTIONS ON THE PAST AND PRESENT--TEMPLE SITE LOCATED--LABORS
COMMENCE--THE FIRST DEATH.

BROTHER OLIVER COWDERY had been called by revelation to go with Parley P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson and Peter Whitmer, Jun., to preach to the Lamanites. Parley P. Pratt had belonged to the same church as Sidney Rigdon, and had been sent by his sect on some business to New York state, and while there he heard, and embraced the gospel, was ordained an Elder and immediately sent on this mission. Having been acquainted with Sidney Rigdon, he called on him, presented the Book of Mormon to him as a revelation from God, and before these brethren moved on to the fulfillment of their mission, Sidney Rigdon, with a large number of the members of his church, was baptized. The success of these brethren was immense. They preached in all the towns and villages on their road, bearing a faithful testimony wherever they could be heard.

In December, Sidney Rigdon visited Joseph Smith, Jun., to inquire of the Lord what he should do. This was a very pleasant meeting, and, by the voice of revelation, these brethren were called to labor together even from their first acquaintance.

A new year dawned upon us, with everything around us bright and cheerful, and the prospects a head such as to give us joy. In the midst of persecution we rejoiced, knowing that our God was with us, and His great work would roll on, and man could not stop its progress.

On the 2nd of January, 1831, the third conference of the Church assembled. Many of the Saints came together from the region around, and much good instruction was given. The Saints manifested unshaken confidence in the great work which they were engaged, and all rejoiced under the blessings of the gospel. Considerable business was transacted for the Church.

It was at this conference that we were instructed as a people, to begin the gathering of Israel, and a revelation was given to the prophet on this subject.

Having returned home from conference, in obedience to the commandment which had been given, I, together with the Colesville Branch, began to make preparations to go to Ohio. Towards the latter part of January Brother Joseph Smith and wife, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge started for Kirtland, Ohio.

As might be expected, we were obliged to make great sacrifices of our property. The most of my time was occupied in visiting the brethren, and helping to arrange their affairs, so that we might travel together in one company. Having made the best arrangements we could for the journey, we bade adieu to all we held dear on this earth and in the early part of April started for our destination.

We had proceeded but a few days on our journey, when I was subpoenaed as a witness, and had to go to Colesville. On arriving there it was very evident that this plan had been adopted by our enemies to add a little more to the persecutions already heaped upon us. The whole company declined traveling until I should return.

Soon after I left, my aunt, Electa Peek, fell and broke her shoulder in a most shocking manner; a surgeon was called to relieve her sufferings, which were very great. My aunt dreamed that I returned and laid my hands upon her, prayed for her, and she was made whole, and pursued her journey with the company. She related this dream to the surgeon who replied, "If you are able to travel in many weeks it will be a miracle, and I will be a Mormon too."

I arrived at the place, where the company had stopped, late in the evening; but, on learning of the accident, I went to see my aunt, and immediately on my entering the room she said, "O, Brother Newel, if you will lay your hands upon me, I shall be well and able to go on the journey with you." I stepped up to the bed, and, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, rebuked the pain with which she was suffering, and commanded her to be made whole; and it was done; for the next morning she arose, dressed herself, and pursued the journey with us.

We arrived at Buffalo without any further trouble, where we were to take passage on board a sloop for Fairport, Ohio. But the wind blew from the lake and filled the harbor with ice, so that we were detained nearly two weeks. When we set sail on the lake, the winds continued boisterous, and the vessel was tossed about in such a manner that nearly all the company were sea sick, which made it rather a disagreeable voyage. We arrived safely, however, at our destination.

On our arrival it was advised that the Colesville branch remain together, and go to a neighboring town called Thompson, as a man by the name of Copely had a considerable tract of land there which he offered to let the Saints occupy. Consequently a contract was agreed upon, and we commenced work in good faith. But in a short time Copely broke the engagement, and I went to Kirtland to see Brother Joseph, and to attend conference, which had been appointed to be held on the 6th of June, 1831.

Conference convened. The Elders, from various parts of the country where they had been laboring, came in, and the power of the Lord was displayed in our midst. A number were ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the hearts of the Saints rejoiced in the rich blessings bestowed upon them.

We now understood that this was not the land of our inheritance--the land of promise, for it was made known in a revelation, that Missouri was the place chosen for the gathering of the Church, and several were called to lead the way to that state.

A revelation was also given concerning the gathering, on the receipt of which we, who constituted the Colesville branch, immediately set to preparing for our journey, and on the third day of June, I took passage with the Colesville company at Wellsville, Ohio, and arrived at St. Louis, Mo., on the 13th. On the 18th we took passage on the steamer Chieftain for Independence.

My mother's health was very poor and had been for a considerable time, yet she would not consent to stop traveling; her only, or her greatest desire, was to set her feet upon the land of Zion, and to have her body interred in that land. I went on shore and bought lumber to make a coffin in case she should die before we arrived at our place of destination--so fast did she fail. But the Lord gave her the desire of her heart, and she lived to stand upon that land; where we arrived on the 25th of June.

This was the first branch of the Church which had emigrated to the land of Zion. I found it required all the wisdom I possessed to lead the company through so long a journey in the midst of their enemies, yet so great were the mercies and blessings of God to us, that not one of us was harmed.

Brothers Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, Joseph Coe, and A. S. Gilbert and wife, had started for Missouri on the 19th of June, and arrived at Independence about the middle of July. We were glad to find these brethren in good health and spirits, and it was indeed a joy to meet them once more.

But our feelings can be better imagined than described, when we, found ourselves upon the Western frontiers. The country itself presented a pleasant aspect with its rich forests bordering its beautiful streams, and its deep rolling prairies spreading far and wide, inviting the hand of industry to establish for itself homes upon its broad bosom. And this was the place, where the Lord had promised to reveal unto us where be built up, established--where the New Jerusalem should Zion should be and our hearts went forth unto the Lord desiring the fulfillment, that we might know where to bestow our labors profit-ably. We had not long to wait, for during the month the Lord gave a revelation to Brother Joseph, designating the spot.

Being no longer at a loss to know where the exact spot for the building of the temple and the city of Zion was, we immediately prepared for our labors. On the 2nd day of August, Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., the prophet of God, assisted the Colesville branch to lay the first log as a foundation for Zion in Kaw township, twelve miles west of Independence. The log was carried by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. At the same time, through prayer, Sidney Rigdon consecrated and dedicated the land of Zion for the gathering of the Saints. This was truly a season of joy and rejoicing to all the Saints, who took part in, or witnessed the proceedings.

On the 3rd of August the spot for the temple, a little west of Independence, was dedicated in the presence of Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, Martin Harris, Joseph Coe, and myself.

On the 4th, the first conference held in the land of Zion, convened at the house of Brother Joshua Lewis, in Kaw township. The Colesville branch was present, and much good instruction was given, and we felt to give thanks to that God who had brought us out of the land of our nativity and planted us in the land of Zion.

On the 6th, my mother died. She quietly fell asleep rejoicing in the new and everlasting gospel, and praising God that she had lived to see the land of Zion and that her body would rest in peace, after all the suffering she had endured from the persecutions of the wicked.

On the 7th, Brother Joseph attended the funeral, and addressed us in an impressive and consoling manner. This was the first death that had occurred in this Church in this land.

On the 9th, in company with several Elders, Brother Joseph Smith Jun., left Independence to return to Kirtland. They went down the river in canoes.
