MY APPOINTMENT--A VISIT FROM JOSEPH--ACCORDING TO JOSEPH'S PROMISE,
MY WIFE BEARS ME A SON--NEW REVELATIONS--MY AUNT OVERCOME BY THE EVIL
ONE--SHE MISLEADS MANY--HER ANGUISH AND RESTORATION.

The time now passed in our common labors, in building houses, plowing, sowing grain, and all other labors necessary to build up a new country. We were not accustomed to a frontier life, so things around us seemed new and strange and the work we had to do was of a different nature to that which had been done in the East. Yet we took hold with cheerful hearts, and a determination to do our best, and with all diligence went to work to secure food and prepare for the coming winter.

I had been appointed to preside over the Colesville branch in this place. We passed the Winter in a tolerably comfortable manner. Our meetings were well attended, the hearts of the Saints were united, and peace and happiness abounded.

On the 24th of April, 1832, Brother Joseph Smith visited us at Independence, and on the 26th, called a general council of the Church. Business of much importance was transacted, among which was the public acknowledgement by the Church of Joseph's true position as President of the High Priesthood. He had been ordained to that position in the previous January and now the right hand of fellowship was given him by the Church in the capacity of its Bishop. The Spirit and power of God were manifested in our midst, and those who had difficulties, settled them, so that the blessings of the gospel flowed without restraint. The brethren were full of good instructions, and we felt ourselves renewed in spirit.

Brother Joseph did not forget his old friends of the Colesville branch, and he came the twelve miles to visit us; we welcomed him heartily and were greatly rejoiced to see his face once more, and to shake him by the hand. He remained with us two days, and returned on the 30th to Independence, where he again sat in council with the brethren. Arrangements were made for printing the book of Doctrine and Covenants, and the Hymn Book, also for establishing a store by which the Saints could be supplied with whatever they needed, through the channels of the Church. It was also arranged that the Saints in Ohio should be supplied with stores in a similar manner. This gave great satisfaction to the brethren generally.

On the 14th of October, my wife bore me a son. She had never before given birth to a living child, and the doctors who had attended her before, had said it was impossible that she should. But Brother Joseph blessed her and said she should have the desire of her heart. She never doubted the prophet's words, and as soon as her son was born she desired him to be called Samuel, for she said she had asked him from the Lord. My wife soon recovered from her sickness.

Brother Joseph from time to time sent copies of revelations to me for the benefit of the branch over which I presided in common with all the Saints in Zion. On reading one of these revelations to the branch, my aunt of whom mention has been made, arose and contradicted the revelation, saying it must be taken in a spiritual light. She went to such a length that I felt constrained to rebuke her by the authority of the Priesthood. At this she was angry, and from that time sought to influence all who would listen to her. The result was a division of feeling in the branch, and her husband partook of her spirit until he became so enthusiastic, that he went from branch to branch crying, "hosanna, glory to God! Zion is redeemed! and blessed is he that bringeth good tidings to the people!" Sister Peck at length began to feel the weight of what she had done, but she could not recall it. She seemed racked with great torment, her mind found no rest, until a burning fever brought her to a sick bed. She sent for several of the Elders to administer to her, but found no relief. At last she sent for P. P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and myself, we laid our hands upon her and administered to her, after which she looked up in despair and said she hoped I would deliver her from the awful state she was in. Her whole frame was racked with intense anguish while her mind seemed almost in despair. Brother Parley said to me: "Brother Newel, you must do something for her." My soul was drawn out in pity for her, yet I knew not what to do. I felt impressed to call the branch together that evening.

When the meeting had been opened as usual, I arose, not knowing what to do or what to say. After requesting the prayers and united faith of all present, the Spirit of the Lord came upon me, so that I was able to make plain the cause of Sister Peck's illness--that she had risen up in opposition to the Priesthood which had been placed over that branch of the Church, and contradicted the revelations of God, and that by the sympathies shown her, a division of feeling had gained advantage over them, until Sister Peck had fallen completely under the power of Satan, and could not extricate herself. I told the brethren and sisters, if they would repent of what they had done, and renew their covenants one with another and with the Lord, and uphold the authorities placed over them, and also the revelations which the Lord had given unto us, it would be all right with Sister Peck, for this would break the bands of Satan and make us free.

I had no sooner closed my remarks than with one united voice, all came forward and agreed to do so. I then went to Sister Peck, and in the name of Jesus Christ, and by virtue of the Holy Priesthood, commanded the evil powers to depart from her, and blessed her with peace and strength, both of body and mind. I then dismissed the meeting and told the family to go to bed, and rest as usual, and all would be well. Early the next morning I called to see her, she stretched out her hand as soon as she saw me, and said, O, Brother Newel, forgive me! I did not believe one word you said last night, but when I awoke this morning I found I was not in hell. Her rejoicings were very great, and union again prevailed with us, and we all felt we had learned a lesson that would be of lasting benefit to us.

On the 6th of April, 1833, the Church met together at the ferry on Big Blue river to celebrate the Church's birthday. This was the first celebration of the kind and the Saints felt their privilege and enjoyed themselves in the worship of their Heavenly Father, and praised His holy name. The brethren returned to their homes renewed in spirit, and rejoicing in heart. Such peace and happiness were not however, to continue long without an interruption from our enemies, for when the Saints rejoice, the devil is mad and his children and servants partake of his spirit. This was proven in this instance, for before this month had closed, a most dreadful and diabolical spirit of persecution manifested itself all around us. An immense mob collected together expressing a determination to drive us from our homes for they would not allow the "Mormons" to live in their midst.

On hearing this news, a number of the brethren met together and prayed to God to overrule the wicked designs of the mob meeting, that they might not have power to agree upon their plans, or to execute their wicked threats. They broke up in a regular row, and for time all was well. As might be expected, this caused considerable uneasiness among us, and it required great wisdom and care on our part to keep the Saints quiet, and to keep them at their labors.

In the meantime the Lord had given a commandment to Zion to build a temple to His holy name.
