MR. PIXLEY'S BITTERNESS--OUR ENEMIES MAKE PLANS FOR OUR
OVERTHROW--THEIR RESOLUTIONS--OUR PRINTING OFFICE DESTROYED--BRETHREN
TARRED AND FEATHERED--OUR APPEAL TO THE GOVERNOR--HIS ADVICE--SAINTS
DRIVEN--UNEXPECTED ENGAGEMENT--SEVERAL KILLED AND WOUNDED.

While peaceful pursuits characterized the doings of the Saints, the mobocratic spirit of our enemies was but slumbering for a short time, and the uneasy, restless spirit of the people would occasionally manifest itself, until, at last, in July it again burst forth. The sectarian priests and missionaries around us were among the first to come out both secretly and openly against us. Among the more active of these was a Mr. Pixley, who did not content himself in slandering us to the people of Jackson co., but also wrote to eastern papers, telling horrible lies about us, with the evident intention of rousing a spirit of hatred against us. His talk was of the bitterest kind, his speeches perfectly inflammatory, and he appeared to have an influence among the people, to carry them with him in his hellish designs. Nor did he confine his actions to the white settlers, but tried to stir up the Indians against us, and used every means in his power to accomplish his purposes. His efforts were seconded by such men as Reverends McCoy, Fitzhugh, Bogard, Kavanaugh, Lovelady, Likens, Hunter and others; and by their perseverance, at last the public mind became so excited, that on the 20th of July a meeting was called and largely attended by not only the rabble of the county, but also by men holding official positions. A full account of this proceeding was published, and it was stated among other imaginary evils that we were poor, and that the members of our Church who gathered from various places did not possess much of this world's goods, which was, apparently, a crime in their estimation. We were also accused of believing in the gifts and blessings of the ancient gospel. Other things were enumerated, when it was resolved that "no Mormon shall in future move and settle in this county; that those now here shall give a definite pledge of their intention to move out of the county within a reasonable time; that the editor of the Star be required forthwith to close his office and discontinue the business of printing in this county; that the Mormon leaders here are required to use their influence to prevent any further emigration of their distant brethren to this county, and to counsel and advise their brethren here to comply with the above requisitions, and that those who fail to do so, be referred to those of their brethren who have the gift of divination and of unknown tongues to inform them of the lot that awaits them.

"These resolutions were read, considered and unanimously adopted. It was thereupon agreed that a committee of twelve be appointed forthwith to wait on the Mormon leaders, and see that the foregoing requisitions be strictly complied with by them; and upon their refusal, that said committee do, as the organ of this county, inform them that it is our unwavering purpose and fixed determination, after the fullest consideration of all consequences and responsibilities under which we act, to use such means as shall endure their full and complete adoption, and that said committee, so far as may be within their power, report to this present meeting.

"The following gentlemen were named as said committee: Robert Johnson, James Campbell, Col. Mores Wilson, Joel F. Chiles, Hon. Richard Fristoe, Abner T. Staples, Gad Johnson, Lewis Franklin, Russel Hicks, Esq., Col. S. D. Lucas, Thomas Wilson and James M. Hunter, to whom was added Col. R. Simpson, chairman.

"After an adjournment of two hours, the meeting again convened, and the committee of twelve reported that they had called on Mr. Phelps, the editor of the Star, Edward Patridge, the Bishop of the sect, and Mr. Gilbert, the keeper of the Lord's storehouse, and some others, and that they declined giving any direct answers to the requisitions made of them, and wished an unreasonable time for consultation, not only with their brethren here, but in Ohio.

"Whereupon it was unanimously resolved by the meeting that the Star printing office, should be razed to the ground and the type and press secured. Which resolution was, with the utmost order, and the least noise and disturbance possible, forthwith carried into execution, as also some other steps of a similar tendency; but no blood was spilled nor any blows inflicted. The meeting then adjourned until the 23rd instant, to meet again to know further concerning the determination of the Mormons."

In the meeting of the 23rd another committee was appointed to wait upon our leaders and learn from them what course they intended to pursue. At the meeting of this committee and our brethren it was stipulated that our people should leave the county before the 1st of January following, and that those who were then on the way to Zion should only remain sufficiently long to make a selection of another home.

In the minutes of their meetings the mob neglected to tell of the outrages inflicted on the persons of Bishop Partridge, Elder Charles Allen, and others, the two former of whom they took (after demolishing the printing office) to the public square, and tarred and feathered them, making at the same time the most horrid threats, merely because they would not renounce their religion. They have not told of the solemn covenant entered into by the mob, wherein they pledged their lives, their bodily power, fortunes and sacred honors to drive the Saints from Jackson Co. They have not set forth the unholy combination entered into, to lay waste and destroy the property of the Saints, and to drive them forth from their prosperous settlements which were being built up. But all these things are known to God and many of the Saints, and although the participators fail to record these things, they are written where it is beyond the power of men to erase them, and where our enemies will one day hear them read.

In the latter part of September Brothers Hyde and Gould came to us with counsel and instruction from Brother Joseph, so that they might help us in our unpleasant circumstances. It was decided to petition Governor Dunklin for redress and protection, and Brothers Orson Hyde and W. W. Phelps were sent to Jefferson city for that purpose, bearing a document setting forth our grievances, and giving details of the shameful proceedings of July.

The governor received these brethren courteously, but gave them no answer at the time as the attorney general was absent. He stated that he desired to maintain law and order in the state, and was willing to do anything in his power to assist in the protection of the Saints. He subsequently wrote:

"No citizen, nor number of citizens, have a right to take the redress of their grievances, whether real or imaginary, into their own hands; such conduct strikes at the very existence of society, and subverts the foundation on which it is based. Not being willing to persuade myself that any portion of the citizens of the state of Missouri are so lost to a sense of these truths as to require the exercise of force, in order to ensure respect for them.

"After advising with the attorney general, and exercising my best judgment, I would advise you to make a trial of the efficacy of the laws; the judge of your circuit is a conservator of the peace. If an affidavit is made before him by any of you, that your lives are threatened and you believe them in danger, it would be his duty to have the offenders apprehended and bind them to keep peace. Justices of peace in their respective counties have the same authority, and it is made their duty to exercise it. Take, then, this course; obtain a warrant, let it be placed in the hands of the proper officer, and the experiment will be tested whether laws can be peaceably executed or not. In the event that they cannot be, and that fact is officially notified to me, my duty will require me to take such steps as will enforce a faithful execution of them."

This communication comforted the hearts of the brethren, for they felt they were not entirely left in the hands of the ruthless mob, but that they would be protected in their rights. They renewed their labors and felt to rejoice before their Heavenly Father. In the meantime the brethren in Independence retained four lawyers from Clay Co., named, Wood, Reese, Doniphan, and Atchinson, with a fee of one thousand dollars. As soon as the mob heard of this they became very much enraged. They disregarded the compact and assembled together vowing vengeance on all the "Mormons," being determined that we should leave forthwith. From the 31st of October until the 4th of November, there was one continual scene of outrages of the most hideous kind. The mob collected in different parts of the county and attacked the Saints in most of their settlements, houses were unroofed, others were pulled down, leaving women and children, and even the sick and the dying exposed to the inclemency of the weather. Men were caught and whipped or clubbed until they were bruised from head to foot, and some were left upon the ground for dead. The most horrid threats and imprecations were uttered against us, and women and children were told, with cursings, that unless they left the country immediately they should be killed. The brethren had to get together to protect themselves, and they went from place to place to assist those who were threatened. In some instances these parties, when marching to the relief of their brethren, were intercepted and flagrant outrages committed upon them. Things continued in this state until the 4th of November, when the mob were hunting a small party of our brethren, and breaking down, and feeding upon our crops, and otherwise destroying them. While fifty or sixty were thus engaged, about thirty of the brethren came upon them and a battle ensued. As soon as the mob saw the brethren coming, some of them called out, "Fire, G--d d--m ye, fire!" and several shots were immediately fired into our party, which were promptly returned, when the mob fled, leaving some of their horses in one of the corn fields, and H. L. Brazile and Thomas Linvill dead on the ground. We also learned that several of their number were wounded. We had two or three wounded. One, a young man named Barber, received a mortal wound; he was the first man in this dispensation, who was martyred for the truth's sake. Another, Philo Dibble, was wounded in the abdomen at the first discharge; he was examined by a surgeon of great experience, who had served in the Mohawk war, and he said he never knew a man to live who was wounded in such a manner. The next day I went to see Brother Dibble, and found the house where he lay surrounded by the mob. I managed to get in, and went to the bed; two men came and seated themselves at the door; as I looked upon Brother Dibble lying there in extreme agony, I drew the bed curtains with one hand and laid the other upon his head, praying secretly to our heavenly Father in his behalf. I then left, as I did not wish to put myself into the power of the mob; and the next day business took me some ten miles from the place, were I met Brother Dibble making his escape from the county. He told me that as soon as I placed my hand upon his head, the pain and soreness seemed gradually to move as before a power driving it, until in a few minutes it left his body. He then discharged about a gallon of putrid matter, and the balls and pieces of clothing which had passed into his body.

My mill was doing business for the people generally, yet the mob was not disposed to let it escape their fury, and we were obliged to guard it day and night. On one occasion, when two or three companies of the mob were in the neighborhood, they sent two of their number as spies to learn our situation. Parley P. Pratt, who was on guard at the mill, on seeing them, went and accosted them, when one of the two raised his gun and struck Brother Pratt on the head, cutting a large hole, but Brother Pratt called to his men, who took the two spies prisoners, and disarmed them for the night, but the next morning returned their arms to them, and let them go without doing them any injury. Thus did we leave the result in the hands of the Almighty.
