COURT IN JACKSON COUNTY--OFFICERS AWED BY A MOB--ZION'S CAMP--MOB
MEETING--"A MAN STABBED"--CAMPBELL'S HORRIBLE FATE--GOD INTERPOSES
IN BEHALF OF ZION'S CAMP--THE CHOLERA--I GO TO KIRTLAND--MY LABORS
THERE--RETURN TO CLAY COUNTY.

The year 1834 opened upon the Church, in Missouri, with no flattering prospects. The Saints were scattered in every direction, awaiting the action of the government and courts to settle their difficulties with Jackson Co. On the 1st of January a conference was held, Bishop Partridge presiding, when everything possible was done to comfort the hearts of the distressed, and to help them in their afflictions.

On the 9th Brother Gilbert wrote again to Governor Dunklin, explaining the wishes and condition of the Saints, and suggested that the principal leaders of the Jackson county mob be bought out, as he thought it would help to bring about peace and give the Saints re-possession of their lands, house, and property, without the intervention of an armed force.

The governor answered this communication in a very gentlemanly manner, and also gave his views in regard to the best method to pursue under the unpleasant circumstances. In accordance with his instructions Judge Ryland proceeded to hold court in Jackson county, and as it was imprudent to call the witnesses, or proceed with the investigation, without a sufficient guard, Captain Atchinson was called on for his company, the "Liberty Blues," to do duty. The brethren who were subpoenaed were met on the banks of the Missouri by this company and guarded to about a mile from Independence where they camped for the night. So great was the excitement in Jackson county, that it was thought necessary to have more men, and an order, or requisition, was made on Col. Allen for two hundred more. The mob made a bold stand, and began to collect in bodies, pledging themselves to the death, that no arrests should be made, but that they would defend each other to the last. On the 24th of February, the brethren, and their military escort went into Independence and were quartered in the old store of S. Flomuoy, where they were visited by the attorney general and the district attorney, and told that all hope of a criminal prosecution was at an end. Thus were the officers of the civil law, even when supported by the military, awed by a mob, and the great promises of the governor and Judge Ryland fell to the ground, and the strong arm of justice became weak and fell powerless to her side.

Our witnesses were cautioned not to go before the grand jury, it being intimated that they might be in danger. Thus did these two men, with the circuit judge acknowledge that mob violence was superior, in Missouri, to both the civil and the military powers; for it was not long before Captain Atchinson received word from Judge Ryland that neither he nor his men were wanted any longer in Independence, and the witnesses were marched off to the tune of "Yankee Doodle," to carry to their brethren the news that justice had taken her flight before the fury of the rabble, and her ministers had not power to maintain her rights. They must now look to a higher power for redress, or bear their wrongs as best they can.

The mob continued their depredations wherever they could find an opportunity, not sparing the aged nor the weak, but abusing all alike. Father Lindsay is mentioned as being driven from his home, and then his house pulled down, and its contents destroyed or stolen.

Having seen that through the imbecility of the law, or the secret connivance of its administrators, there was no possible chance of obtaining redress, and being protected in our rights, it was next decided upon to petition the president of the United States, in accordance with the revelation given to that effect. An able document was drawn up and sent to that officer, but it availed us nothing. We also wrote to the governor, asking him to issue an order to have our weapons, of which we had been deprived in November last, restored to us. But, notwithstanding the orders of the governor to Colonels Lucas and Pitcher, we never received our arms, but they were taken and distributed among the mob.

Our brethren in Kirtland, on hearing of our sufferings, did all in their power to help us; and immediately on receiving the revelation concerning the redemption of Zion, began to gather together young men and middle aged men to come to our relief.

We received the news of the coming of these brethren with much joy and thankfulness.

When the news got abroad of the movement, the mob once more became infuriated. They got together in large bodies, armed and provided themselves with cannon. Hundreds from the surrounding counties volunteered to help them in case Governor Dunklin should attempt to restore us to our homes, which he had said he would do as soon as enough of our brethren came together to enable us to protect ourselves in them.

In the midst of this intense excitement, Judge Ryland called a meeting of the brethren, citizens, and the Jackson county mob, with a view of an amicable adjustment, as he said, of our difficulties.

On Monday, June 16th, about one thousand citizens of Clay county, and a few from Jackson county, assembled in the court-house, in Liberty, according to appointment. Judge Turnham was appointed moderator, or chairman.

Judge Ryland used his best endeavors to allay the angry feelings of the mob, and to effect an adjustment of our difficulties in his own way, but not to our satisfaction.

A document from our opponents was introduced by war speeches by S.
C. Owens and Rev. M. Riley, who, even in this meeting, advocated the
idea of driving us from Clay Co. But Gen. Doniphan and Judge Turnham defended the cause of right, begging that the people of that county would not disgrace themselves in the manner. Jackson county had done; but let the "Mormons" remain in their midst and enjoy equal rights with them, "for," he said, "they are good citizens, and even better than many of the old settlers."

Gen. Doniphan said: "The Mormons have armed themselves, and if they don't fight they are cowards. I love to hear that they have brethren coming to their assistance, greater love can no man show, than he, who lays down his life for his brethren."

But such was the excitement caused by this discussion that a row and fight appeared certain, and many seemed to be preparing for it all over the room. The confusion was increasing, when somebody called into the room, "A man stabbed!"

There was a sudden rush to the spot, when it was found that a quarrel between two Missourians had ended in one of them being severely wounded. This broke up the meeting and gave the brethren a chance to state in writing why they could not accept the propositions offered.

At the meeting a report was circulated that an army of our brethren was coming to help us, and to go into Jackson county by force. All kinds of strange stories were set afloat, and a small party, with Owens and Campbell at their head, went directly to Independence to collect an army to go and prevent their entering Clay county. Campbell swore, while adjusting his pistols in the holsters, "The eagles and turkey buzzards shall eat my flesh if I do not fix Joe Smith and his army, so that their skins will not hold shucks, before two days are past."

They sent word to Richmond, Ray county, and had their agents working in Clay county, intending to raise force sufficient to annihilate our brethren. About two hundred volunteered in Jackson, seventy in Clay, and fifty in Ray counties, and were to form a junction near Fishing river ford. Their plans were all laid, as they thought, to enable them to accomplish their purpose, but the Lord interposed His strong arm, for the preservation of our brethren, and while the mob were crossing the river to the north side, a squall met them on their return so that they were delayed; some attempted to cross the river after dusk, so great was their anxiety to be at their hellish work, but when near the middle of the river the boat sunk, and seven out of twelve men were drowned; among them was James Campbell, who had made use of such a terrible oath in the day. He floated down the river, and, lodging on some drift wood, his flesh was eaten by the eagles and turkey buzzards; thereby fulfilling his oath, and feeling the vengeance of an offended God. S. C. Owens came near being drowned, and was glad enough the next morning to make his way to Independence. Those who had crossed the river the day before, returned to join their companions in the morning, and felt glad that they had escaped with their lives. Immediately around our brethren was the protecting hand of the Almighty, and at the approach of the mob from Ray county, a tremendous hail and thunder storm raged, pelting them severely even to the cutting of holes in their hats; their ammunition was perfectly soaked, and they were glad enough to get back home. During this time scarcely any hail fell in the camp of the brethren, but all around them could be seen the work of destruction--limbs of trees were cut off by the storm, and trees themselves were twisted like withes.

In the morning Big Fishing river had raised forty feet, and our enemies said that Little Fishing river raised thirty feet in thirty minutes. Thus were our brethren preserved from their enemies.

On the night of the 28th the cholera, of which the brethren had been warned by the servant of God, broke out in Zion's camp. About twelve o'clock cries and groans were heard from those who had been taken sick, and they fell before the destroyer. So violent were the attacks that in some instances those who were on guard, fell with their guns in their hands; and it was only by great exertion that we were able to take care of the sick and dying. In the morning the camp was divided into small bands and dispersed among the brethren.

Out of sixty-eight taken by the disease, thirteen died, among whom was A. S. Gilbert. The rest recovered, for an effectual remedy was discovered, namely, to dip the patient in cold water, or pour it copiously upon him. This stopped the cramp, purging and vomiting. Whenever this remedy was adopted in season it did not fail to cure. We were indeed sorry to see our brethren who had come so far--one thousand miles--to our relief thus fall before the hand of the destroyer.

The Summer passed without anything special transpiring. The inhabitants generally manifested a kind feeling towards the Saints; yet, owing to the exposure of the previous winter and the hunger and privation, which the brethren had suffered, many of them were afflicted with fever and ague.

I began to make preparation to go on my appointed mission to Kirtland; but it seemed as if a struggle had commenced. Both my wife and myself took the fever and ague, also my aunt, Esther Culver; she was an aged woman, whose husband had died previous to our exile from Jackson county, and whom I had taken into my family as she had no child to care for her.

On the 15th of September, Sally, my wife, died; truly she died a martyr to the gospel of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. She was of a frail constitution, and the hardships and privations she had to endure were more than she could survive. A short time previously she had given birth to a son, which had also died.

My health continued poor, so that I could do but little work until the time had arrived for the Elders, who had been called to go to Kirtland, to start. I made the best arrangements I could for the care of my little son Samuel and aged aunt; and in company with a number of my brethren, got on board some canoes, which we had got for the purpose, and floated down the Missouri river. We traveled on the river by day, and at night camped on its shore. I was hardly able to walk when I started on this journey but my strength gradually increased. When we had got far enough from those who were so bitterly prejudiced against the gospel, that we could get a hearing, we left our canoes and parted, traveling two by two preaching the gospel to those who would listen to us.

I arrived in safety in Kirtland, in the Spring of 1835, and commenced labor on the temple, where I continued to work until it was finished, and ready for the endowments.

On the 24th of November I was united in the holy bonds matrimony with Lydia Goldthwait by the Prophet Joseph, this being the first marriage ceremony that he ever performed.

I remained in Kirtland until the temple was finished and dedicated. I then received my anointings, and was also a witness to the great manifestations of God's power in that sacred edifice.

On Thursday, April 7th, 1836, all things being ready, Lydia and I started for Clay county. Brother Hyrum Smith let me have his horses to go to Liverpool, on the Ohio river, where we were intending to take passage on a steamer for our destination; the roads were very muddy. On the 9th in the afternoon it rained very hard, and we stopped, before night, at a sectarian priest's, who treated us with great politeness until in the evening while we were sitting with the family in the parlor, in the course of conversation it was mentioned that we were "Mormons." The family immediately left the room, and the reverend gentleman politely informed us, that if it had not been raining so very heavily, he would have at once put us out of the house. As it was we were introduced into the kitchen, where we spent the night, and early the next morning I got my horses in readiness, paid my bill, and bade this sectarian host adieu. We traveled several miles, when we came to a house, were we got breakfast, and were kindly treated. Soon after resuming our journey we found ourselves in deep water, for the road was flooded for a long distance, and it was with difficulty that I could pick out the way; as I attempted to cross a bridge the logs rolled from under the horses, and I was barely able to rescue them by detaching them from the wagon. I then got Lydia on one of the horses and took her across to dry land, but had to leave the wagon for the night.

The water had abated by the 11th, and we continued our journey to Liverpool, Ohio, where we were compelled to remain a few days. We finally arrived in Clay Co. on the 6th of May.
