SAINTS MOVE TO CALDWELL COUNTY--PERSECUTIONS BEGIN ANEW--CAPTAIN
BOGART AND HIS MOB--THE BATTLE--HAWN'S MILL MASSACRE--COLONEL HINKLE'S
TREACHERY--THE BRETHREN IMPRISONED.

When the Saints were driven from Jackson county, the people of Clay county kindly permitted us an asylum in their midst and many individual acts of kindness might be recorded in their favor; but the more turbulent spirits among them began to stir up anger against us, and the smouldering embers of persecution began to show signs of blazing forth again. However, there were many gentlemen who were desirous of peace, and who tried to sooth and quell the spirit of mobocracy.

During June and July, 1836, meetings were held by our people as well as by those who desired our removal to some other locality, and it was finally decided, after due deliberation, that the Saints should again move. This time the place of refuge chosen was Caldwell Co., and immediately the exodus began.

My personal affairs were such that I could not move with the majority of the Saints but was compelled to remain until February, 1838, when I was able to leave Clay Co. entirely free of debt, and with a little means on hand. I felt much gratified, however, at being able to greet the Prophet Joseph, and several other brethren, who arrived in Far West with their families on the 14th of March following my arrival.

These brethren had come from Kirtland to shelter themselves from the heavy storm of persecution that had set in upon them there, and which was started by apostates. The mob had followed them on the road, armed, and with murder in their hearts. Frequently the brethren had to hide themselves in their wagons, their pursuers were so close upon them; and on two or three occasions they were together in the same house. Once they remained all night in the same building with only a partition between them, and the oaths and threats of their enemies could be distinctly heard. Late in the evening these fiends went into the room where the brethren were and examined them, but although they were very well acquainted with the brethren, they decided it was not them.

The Saints were not, however, destined to remain long in peace in Caldwell county. Their enemies who lived in the adjoining counties could not bear the idea of the "Mormons" becoming prosperous and they therefore began to arouse public indignation against them. Every unjust act of which wicked men could conceive was perpetrated against us in the vain hope that we would retaliate on our opposers, and thereby afford an excuse for extermination. But we calmly submitted to the numerous indignities heaped upon us, feeling that it was better to suffer wrong than to do wrong. Our people made many concessions to the mob in the hope of pacifying them, but it was useless.

In this instance, as in the Jackson county mobbings, the principal instigators were priests of various denominations. On the 24th of October, Captain Bogart, a Methodist priest, marched a company of men towards Far West with the avowed intention, to use his language, of giving our city "thunder and lightning" before noon of the next day. On receipt of this information from Brother Parson, who had watched the movements of Bogart, and seen him camp on Crooked river, a company of seventy-five volunteers went out to disperse the mob, and retake three prisoners, whom the mob had kidnapped from their homes, and to prevent the descent upon Far West.

On the following morning about daylight sixty of the brethren reached the ford on the Crooked river, and dismounting their horses left them in charge of a few brethren, and then went to look for the encampment. The enemy watched the approach of the brethren, and greeted them with a round of musketry. As soon as the brethren saw the position of the enemy Captain David W. Patten ordered a charge, and the two parties engaged in a hand to hand fight, when the enemy retreated, and while pursuing them Captain Patten was mortally wounded, two or three of the brethren were killed, and Bogart must have lost quite a number although he only reported one.

The report of this battle spread through the country and created quite an excitement. Rumors were afloat that Bogart's company had been massacred, and the whole country was in commotion. This was followed on the 27th by the infamous exterminating order of Governor Boggs. Before sufficient force could be collected to carry out Gov. Bogg's instructions, a party of men who had collected from Daviess, Ray, Livingston, Carroll, and Chariton counties, led by some of the principal men of those places, made a descent upon Hawn's Mill, where a company of our brethren and sisters were camped. The enemy numbered two hundred and forty mounted men. Immediately on riding up they poured a volley from a hundred guns into our little band who had principally taken refuge in the blacksmith shop. The massacre became general, and but few escaped the fury of those inhuman wretches. Boys, eight, nine, and twelve years old were murdered even while begging for mercy, and a young lady, while fleeing from the mob, was shot through the hand, and fell, fainting over a log, into which her would-be murderers lodged about twenty balls.

The mob now grew bolder and bolder, and committed depredations upon the settlements in Caldwell and Daviess counties, so that our people had to flee into Far West from all quarters to save themselves. Many could not get into houses, and had to take shelter in wagons, tents, and under bed-clothes, and while in this situation we had a severe snow storm, which rendered their sufferings intense.

On the 29th, the news reached the city that a large number of troops had advanced into our county, and committed great depredations. It was thought advisable to send out a company of about one hundred and fifty men to ascertain the situation of affairs. On the 30th, these troops showed themselves before the city, and immediately the brethren flew to arms, with the determination to defend their wives and children to the last extremity. The troops withdrew to about a mile from the town and camped, Those who had been sent out were on the other side of the troops but came into the city about sundown, in two parties. These brethren without going to their homes joined the ranks of the brethren, and assisted to barricade and fortify the town.

A white flag was sent by each party, but judge our surprise, when on enquiring their designs, our flag-bearer was informed that they wanted three men out of our city, and then they designed to massacre the rest.

The day following a flag was sent by the enemy, and some of our brethren went and learned that they were commissioned by the chief executive, and that their commission authorized them to exterminate the Mormons en masse, and they had three thousand troops to carry these orders into effect.

Col. Hinkle went out to meet a flag of truce and secretly made arrangements to deliver up the Church leaders to be tried and punished; to have the property of the Saints delivered over to pay the expenses of the expedition and the damage done to them, and arranged that the Saints should leave the state, and their arms should be delivered up to the enemy.

In the evening the first step in this base treachery was taken. Col. Hinkle represented to Brother Joseph and others that the officers of the militia desired an interview in the hope that the matter might be settled without carrying out the exterminating order. They complied with the request, and were delivered up to the mob by Hinkle, and claimed as prisoners of war. They were put into a small hollow square, and strongly guarded; and the enemy set up a most horrid yell, and continued it for hours; the noise was past description, and had there been ten thousand wolves yelling for their prey it would not have been worse.

On the morning of November 1st, Hinkle took another step to carry out his nefarious designs. The bugle sounded for the brethren to assemble, armed and equipped. Every man went out well armed and was paraded and delivered over to the enemy. The brethren were surrounded and required to surrender their arms, and were then guarded all day while the rapacious soldiery went from house to house, plundering, pillaging, and destroying, and even driving many helpless women and children from their homes, and committing deeds even worse than these in some instances.

A court martial was held by the officers and priests, and without being heard in their own defense, the brethren were sentenced to be shot on Friday morning on the public square in Far West, in the presence of their wives and families. At this imprecedented action General Doniphan objected, saying he would have nothing to do with such cold-blooded actions, and he would draw off his brigade from the army. This probably saved the lives of the prisoners, as the sentence was changed and the prisoners were taken to Independence, Jackson county.

The designs of the enemy were, without doubt, to destroy the brethren when they arrived there, but the Lord did not suffer it, for their work was not yet finished. They were thrust into prison and held until a demand was made by General Clark to have them forwarded to Richmond, where they underwent a mock trial and were remanded to Liberty jail to await a further investigation.

On November 6th, General Clark paraded the brethren at Far West and delivered a most insulting speech, requiring the fulfillment of Col. Hinkle's stipulations in full, and telling us to get out of the state as quickly as possible; also that we need not look to see our prophet or his brethren any more who were in the hands of the militia, "for," said he, "their fate is fixed, their die is cast, their doom is sealed."

Although our arms had been taken from us and treaties made that we should remain in peace until the Spring, yet small parties of armed men, were continually making incursions into Caldwell county, insulting our women, driving off our stock, and plundering wherever they could get a chance. Even life was not held sacred, and Brothers Tanner and Carey were grossly misused while prisoners, the latter having his brains dashed out with a gun.

Our persecutions did not abate in the least and it seemed as though all hell was aroused to do us injury. The brethren confined in Liberty jail after being subjected to the most terrible indignities during their six month's imprisonment, finally succeeded in making their escape and soon joined the body of the Saints.
