I MOVE TO COMMERCE--NO SAFETY FOR THE SAINTS--JOHN C. BENNETT'S
WICKEDNESS--THREATS OF THE MOB--WE START FOR THE WEST--DEATH OF THE
AUTHOR

Again I prepared to leave my home and with my family gather to Commerce, which was the place that had been chosen for the future location of the Saints. Some few families had already gone there and a nucleus of a "Mormon" town had been formed.

I soon selected a piece of ground and commenced to build a home for myself, but before many days had passed I was advised by Brother Joseph to assist in the erection of a flouring mill, so that the Saints might thereby be benefited. I therefore ceased my own operations and began the new labor to which I had been assigned. From that time until I left Nauvoo with the Saints to find a home in the barren wilds of Western America, I was engaged more or less in the building and working of grist and saw mills for the benefit of the Saints. Sometimes I was without the necessaries of life, being bereft of the food and clothing which my family needed; sometimes I was surrounded by not only the necessaries but also the comforts of life; sometimes I rejoiced in the society of my friends, and sometimes enemies surrounded me, seeking my destruction because of my religion. But in the midst of these varied circumstances I never felt to doubt the truth of the gospel or the divinity of Joseph Smith's mission.

The persecutions of the Saints in Missouri soon began to be re-enacted in Illinois, where large numbers of our people had settled and built up the beautiful city of Nauvoo. Our enemies of the former place would not allow us to enjoy peace in the latter, but did everything in their power to arouse public indignation against us. Men who professed to be members of the Church also turned away from the truth and sought to injure the work. Notable among this latter class was John C. Bennett. He came to Nauvoo and joined the Church; with considerable ostentation he brought himself before the people, and seemed to enter into the work with a whole-heartedness which was quite commendable. He was instrumental in obtaining the charter for Nauvoo, the legion and the university; was elected mayor of the city, major general of the legion, and chancelor of the university. He defended the Prophet Joseph by writing over the non de plume of "Joab, general in Israel," and was altogether a popular man, and run a rapid race. But he was only an adventurer, and his deeds of evil were eventually brought to light; for no sooner had he attained to these responsible positions than he sought to use the influence they gave him to accomplish his evil designs, and gave himself up to practices, not only diabolical in themselves but ruinous to the souls of those he entrapped. Thus he brought great scandal upon the Church, by seeking to destroy the innocent and virtuous; and when his acts were questioned by his intended victims he asserted that Joseph taught and sanctioned such doings. If his own assertions were not sufficient then he called on some of his tools--men he had in league with him--to bear testimony to his base lies. In this manner his deeds were brought to light, and then he used all his power to injure those whom he had before defended, and sought to bring about a renewal of the persecutions.

Through the instrumentality of persons of this class, the sufferings of the Saints were renewed. Many of the brethren were kidnapped from their homes and were abused in a most shameful manner, while others suffered imprisonment on trumped up charges that could not be sustained in court. One day the arrest of an apostate--Augustine Spencer--for an assault on his brother, Orson, was attempted in the neighborhood of Brother Joseph's home. Some trouble ensued and in the same Charles Foster attempted to shoot the prophet, who was near at hand. Both he and Higbee said they would consider themselves the favored of God if they could but kill "Joe Smith." Thus was our leader in constant danger for the sake of his religion, and from this time until his death, the horrors of which are known to all, on the 27th of June, 1844, his life was one continued scene of trial, hardship and persecution. His followers found no rest from their oppressors; they had no rights, according to popular judgment, that should be respected, and after we had agreed to leave Nauvoo and go to the Rocky Mountains, the mob would not leave us unmolested so that we could arrange our business. One man by the name of Bostwick came to the city to warn Amos Davis and others living there, but who did not belong to us, to move their stores out of the place if they wanted to save them, "for," said he, "this city shall be laid in ashes; and Brigham Young shall be taken if I have to go to hell to raise troops enough to take him." In this affair the Lord overruled in behalf of His people, for as this wicked man was returning to Madison he fell through the ice and was drowned; and as he was the leading man among our enemies around Madison it put an end to their operations.

The troops of Carthage, with the United States marshall at their head, were almost constantly in our city, with warrants for the apprehension of the twelve and others of the brethren. These warrants had been sworn out under false pretention, being nothing else but malicious and vexatious proceedings. But in vain did they search, for the Lord was our shield and our protector.

At one time these men attempted to search the temple, but the glory of God was there, and came upon them insomuch that they were glad to get out again.

Surrounded by such circumstances the Saints were glad to flee from their homes, feeling that it was much better to be at the mercy of the elements than that of a ruthless mob. Those therefore, who were able soon fitted themselves out and started to traverse the barren prairies in the west. I was blessed of the Lord insomuch that I was among the first to leave Illinois in search of another home.

We had, however, scarcely got beyond the reach of our enemies before an improper spirit began to manifest itself among the Saints caused by the actions of Wm. Miller who was a bishop in the Church. His conduct finally became so improper that he was called up before the high council and was censured for his unrighteous deeds, but this had scarcely any effect upon him, and he did not heed the counsels of his brethren at all. He finally returned to the companies that were behind us. He shortly afterwards apostatized.

We were, at this time, in a country which was claimed by the Indians, and where law and restraints were unknown. It was therefore necessary for us to use the utmost caution, so as not to enrage the owners of the soil. The Pawnees, Poneas, Sioux and other Indian tribes permitted us to pass through the country almost unmolested. We sought their friendship and they gave it, and many friendly meetings were held with our Lamanite brethren.

Brother Knight's journal ends here, his wife, Lydia, adding the following:

"On Monday morning, January 4th, 1847, Brother Knight, whose health had been failing for some time, did not arise as usual, and, on my going to him, he said, 'Lydia, I believe I shall go to rest this winter.' The next night he awoke with a severe pain in his right side, a fever had also set in, and he expressed himself to me that he did not expect to recover. From this time until the 10th of the month, the Elders came frequently and prayed for my husband. After each administration he would rally and be at case for a short time and then relapse again into suffering. I felt at last as if I could not endure his sufferings any longer, and that I ought not to hold him here. I knelt by his bed side, and with my hand upon his pale forehead asked my Heavenly Father to forgive my sins, and that the sufferings of my companion might cease, and if he was appointed unto death, and could not remain with us, that he might be quickly eased from pain and fall asleep in peace. Almost immediately all pain left him, and in a short time he sweetly fell asleep in death, without a struggle or a groan, at half past six on the morning of the 11th of January, 1847. His remains were interred at sun-set on the evening of the day he died.

"It was the 3rd of October, 1850, before I had the privilege of entering the valley, but my joy in arriving here has been unbounded."
