Discovery Bible study method for an interactive study of scripture.

Directions for the leader:

First and foremost realize that you are primarily a facilitator of a relationship between God and your study participants. God does not really need you to teach or preach or feel like you must answer all questions. He will be able to do those things quite nicely Himself.

Preparation

Pray for the people that are going to participate in the study, focusing on your desire that God will help you lead and facilitate in a way that they discover Him and understand His will better. I always like to close my eyes and envision he group and then circle the table one by one praying briefly for each person and their future understanding.

Then I pray that God will forgive me and not hold any of my shortcomings including preparation for the study against me. That He will release me to be His Agent.

Then I pray that God will open my eyes to the scripture that we are about to study and that He will show me something I have never seen that is worthy of sharing with the group. Further I pray that He will provide me questions of interest to the group.

Although these prayers do not need to be really long, I have found I am not ready to read the scripture until I have done each of these.

Then I read the scripture over quickly, centering myself and either learning or reminding myself of the obvious message. Then I read it a second time very slowly, looking for things I have never realized that are interesting including the grouping and sequencing of events or commands etc. My goal is to develop 1-‐3 thought provoking questions that do not lead to obvious answers.

When I have read it slowly I start writing those questions down. Many of them start like this “ I wonder why God thought/did (something) that way? “ or “I never noticed that this scripture was included in this story. I wonder why”. After I have developed my three questions I am ready for the study.

A note of encouragement here. I have never failed to develop three questions when I pray as described before I study.

As the leader, when we arrive at he study we always begin with prayer. My favorite way to pray is to sit around the table with an empty chair and each guy talks briefly to Jesus, in the empty chair, about what is happening in their life or what help they need. This usually takes about a minute a person.

Then I ask someone to read the scripture in question, smoothly and quickly. Then I ask someone else or the same person to read it again slowly. Afterwards I ask the group what they saw in the scripture that surprised them or provided them some clear understanding. From there I simply monitor the conversation and make sure it stays centered on the scripture at hand. If wait until we hit a lag in the conversation and then I ask one of my questions.

Sometimes my questions never come up and I have never used all three questions in a one hour study. In other words God over prepares me every time. In my case I am careful not to make any comments in the study that I believe others will make. I only share things that I think might be overlooked. This way everyone “owns” the conversation. All questions and comments are allowed for the purpose of discovery but “preaching and strong teaching” are discouraged. This is best used as a group of us discover what God might want to teach us from his word.

We have found that believers at all stages of their walk can participate equally in a study like this and all can grow, if we trust God for the dialogue and we respectfully consider each others views and are sincerely concerned about each others spiritual growth.

At the end of the study the leader asks the question “How can we best apply this learning from today in our lives this coming week”. The goal of the question is to produce an action or behavior that we use to apply our learning.

The leader closes in prayer and privately As I go home I am always truly humbled and appreciative that God has shown up in a greater way than I could have imagined.

If you are reading this I hope your walk with our Lord is blessed in some measure as mine has been. Truly He is an awesome God.

In His service,

Rusty
