Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Temple WorkSmith, George Albert255"Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars' Worth of Genealogy"

255George Albert Smith

255In Chicago a number of years ago, during the Century of Progress Exposition, I went into our Church booth one day and inquired of the missionaries as to who had charge of that great cultural and scientific fair.

255They told me the man's name was Dawes, and I asked "Is he the brother of Charles G. Dawes, who was vice president of the United States and also ambassador to Great Britain?"

255And they answered, "Yes."

255"Well," I said, "I am delighted to know that. I happen to know him."

255I said to myself, "I think I will go and call on him. He will be Henry Dawes." I knew Henry Dawes, so I went to the telephone and called his office. His secretary answered and I inquired, "Is Mr. Dawes there?"

255She said, "Yes, sir."

255"May I come over and see him?" I said.

255She said, "There are already a hundred people ahead of you, and they all want a job."

255I smiled to myself, and said, "Well that may be true, but I am probably the one man he would like to see, because I have a job."

255"Do you know him?"

256"Yes," I said, "I am from Salt Lake City. I just want to pay my respects."

256She said, "Just a minute."

256She told Mr. Dawes that George Albert Smith of Salt Lake City was there and wanted to meet him, and he told her to have me come over. So, instead of running me behind a hundred people to wait my turn, she took me to a side door, and there stood before me a tall man whom I had never seen before in my life.

256He said, "I am Mr. Dawes."

256He was very pleasant, but you can imagine how embarrassed I was. He was Mr. Dawes, and he was Ambassador Dawes' brother, but he was Rufus Dawes. I did not know there was a Rufus Dawes in the world.

256"Well," I said, "I have only come to tell you that this is a wonderful fair, and to express to you my appreciation for what you have done in organizing and seeing it through. It is marvelous what has been accomplished, and what an education it is to so many people. Now, I understand that you are a busy man, and that is all I wanted to come and say, and to congratulate you and thank you."

256"That is very considerate," he said. "Come in."

256"No, that is all I came to say," I replied.

256He said, "Come right in."

256I said, "No, there are a hundred people waiting to see you."

256"None of them will say anything as nice as what you have said."

256So I went in, out of ideas and out of breath, almost. He insisted on my sitting down, and the next thing I said was: "By the way, Mr. Dawes, where do your people come from?"

256"Do you mean in America?" he asked.

256"I mean anywhere."

256He said, "Are you interested in genealogy?"

256-257"I certainly am," I answered. "We have one of the finest genealogical libraries in Salt Lake City to be found anywhere."

257He said, "Excuse me just a moment," and walked out of his office and came back with a carton about the size of an old family Bible. He took his knife, opened the carton, and took out a package wrapped in white tissue paper. He took the tissue paper off and put on the table one of the most beautifully bound books I have ever seen. It was well printed and profusely illustrated, and the cover was elegantly embossed with gold.

257As I looked it over, I said, "Mr. Dawes, that is a beautiful piece of work."

257"It ought to be. It cost me twenty-five thousand dollars."

257"Well," I said, "it is worth it."

257He said, "Is it worth anything to you?"

257I said, "It would be if I had it."

257He said, "All right, you may have it!"—twenty-five thousand dollars worth of genealogy placed in my hand by a man whom I had met only five minutes before! Well, I was amazed. Our visit continued but a short while longer. I told him how delighted I was to have it and that I would place it in the genealogical library in Salt Lake City.

257Before I left the room, he said, "Mr. Smith, this is my mother's genealogy, the Gates' genealogy. We are also preparing my father's genealogy—the Dawes' family. It will be one just like this. When it is finished, I would like to send you a copy of that also."

257Fifty thousand dollars worth of genealogy!—and just because I tried to be polite to someone.

257-258I do not think that was an accident. The Dawes family is one of the most prominent families in the United States; and in that line is the Gates family, including Jacob Gates. Other Church families also run through these books.

258This man Rufus Dawes died before the second volume was finished. He left word with Charles G. Dawes, his elder brother, to be sure to send me a copy of that book when it was finished. Well, I was afraid that Charles G. Dawes didn't know anything about it, so about a year later I called on him and told him how I had obtained the other volume. He said, "I know all about it, and we will have another of my father's line for you as soon as it is completed." And this second volume, according to promise, also came to me.

258The Lord is helping us; it is marvelous how the way is opened and how other people frequently are prompted to prepare their genealogies. But sometimes we fail to take advantage of our opportunities to prepare our genealogies, notwithstanding the Lord has very pointedly said that unless we take care of our temple work we will be rejected with our dead. This is a very serious thing. This is something that we cannot change, if we have wasted our opportunities until life passes.

258There may be other such men—there may be a Charles G. Dawes or Rufus Dawes in your line, or mine, someone who is prompted by the Lord to gather these wonderful records. And if there is, we shall have been greatly blessed—if we use such findings for the purpose for which they have been given us, but we cannot expect others to do this work for us.

258So the Lord, in one way or another, encourages, advises, and counsels us to do our work. Some families who can't do the work themselves have someone else working all the time on their temple genealogy, and records.

259If we do our part, our genealogies will be unfolded to us—sometimes in one way, sometimes in another. So I want to suggest to you, my brethren and sisters: let us do our part.

259George Albert Smith, Sharing the Gospel with Others, selected and compiled by Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948), pp. 175-80.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
