Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

ConversionGrant, Heber J.263My Brother's Conversion

263Heber J. Grant

263As I stand here today, I remember what to me was the greatest of all the great incidents in my life, in this tabernacle. I saw for the first time, in the audience, my brother who had been careless, indifferent, and wayward, who had evinced no interest in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

264As I saw him for the first time in this building, and as I realized that he was seeking God for light and knowledge regarding the divinity of this work, I bowed my head and I prayed God that if I were requested to address the audience, that the Lord would inspire me by the revelations of His Spirit, by that Holy Spirit in whom every true Latter-day Saint believes, that my brother would have to acknowledge to me that I had spoken beyond my natural ability, that I had been inspired of the Lord.

264I realized that if he made that confession, then I should be able to point out to him that God had given him a testimony of the divinity of this work.

264Brother Milton Bennion was sitting on the stand that day, and he had been asked to address the congregation. President Angus M. Cannon came to me and said, "Before you entered the building, Brother Grant, I had invited Brother Milton Bennion to speak, but he can come some other day."

264I said, "Let him speak."

264Brother Cannon said, "Well, I will ask him to speak briefly, and you will please follow him."

264Brother Bennion told of his visit around the world; among other things, of visiting the sepulcher of Jesus.

264-265I took out of my pocket a book that I always carried, called a Ready Reference, and I laid it down on the stand in front of me, when I stood up to speak. It was opened at the passages that tell of the vicarious work for the dead, of the announcement that Jesus went and preached to the spirits in prison, and proclaimed the gospel of Jesus Christ to them. I intended to read about the baptism for the dead, and I intended to preach upon the fact that the Savior of the world had not only brought the gospel to every soul upon the earth, but also that it reached back to all those who had died without a knowledge of it, or in their sins, that they would have the privilege of hearing it; that, as I understood and had read in the Doctrine and Covenants, Jesus came into the world to be crucified for the world and to die for the sins of the world and that he saved all except only those who denied the Son after the Father had revealed Him—those who had lived and those who had died.

265I remember standing there feeling that this was perhaps the greatest of all the great themes that we as Latter-day Saints had to proclaim to the world. I laid the book down, opened at that page; I prayed for the inspiration of the Lord, and the faith of the Latter-day Saints, and I never thought of the book from that minute until I sat down, at the end of a thirty-minute address. I closed my remarks at twelve minutes after three o'clock, expecting that President George Q. Cannon would follow me. Brother Angus came to the upper stand, and said, "George, please occupy the balance of the time."

265He said, "No, I do not wish to speak." But Brother Angus refused to take "No" for an answer.

265Brother Cannon said, finally: "All right, go take your seat, and I will say something." And he arose and said in substance:

265"There are times when the Lord Almighty inspires some speaker by the revelations of His Spirit, and he is so abundantly blessed by the inspiration of the living God that it is a mistake for anybody else to speak following him, and one of those occasions has been today, and I desire that this meeting be dismissed without further remarks," and he sat down.

265I devoted the thirty minutes of my speech almost exclusively to a testimony of my knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and to the wonderful and marvelous labors of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and bearing witness to the knowledge God had given me that Joseph was in very deed a prophet of the true and living God.

265The next morning my brother came into my office and said, "Heber, I was at a meeting yesterday and heard you preach."

265I said, "The first time you ever heard your brother preach, I guess?"

265"Oh, no," he said, "I have heard you many times."

265I said, "I never saw you in meeting before."

265-266He said, "I generally come in late and go into the gallery. I often go out before the meeting is over. But you never spoke as you did yesterday. You spoke beyond your natural ability. You were inspired of the Lord." The identical words I had uttered the day before, in my prayer to the Lord!

266When I heard George Q. Cannon, after I sat down, and before his brother spoke to him, say to himself, "Thank God for the power of that testimony," the tears gushed from my eyes like rain and I rested my elbows on my knees and put my hands over my face, so that the people by me would not see that I was weeping like a child. I knew when I heard those words of George Q. Cannon, that God had heard and answered my prayer. I knew that my brother's heart was touched, the next day when he came and repeated my words, I said to him, "Are you still praying for a testimony of the gospel?"

266He said, "Yes, and I am going nearly wild."

266I asked, "What did I preach about yesterday?"

266He replied, "You know what you preached about."

266I said, "Well, you tell me."

266"You preached upon the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith."

266I answered, "And I was inspired beyond my natural ability; and I never spoke before—at any time you have heard me, as I spoke yesterday. Do you expect the Lord to get a club and knock you down? What more testimony do you want of the gospel of Jesus Christ than that a man speaks beyond his natural ability and under the inspiration of God, when he testifies of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith?"

267The next Sabbath he applied to me for baptism.

267Conference Report, October 1922, pp. 188-90.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
