Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Book of Mormon Pratt, Parley P.27A Barrel of Beans

27Parley P. Pratt

27The inhabitants of that vicinity [Palmyra, New York], having been informed that Mr. Smith had seen heavenly visions, and that he had discovered sacred records, began to ridicule and mock at those things. And after having obtained those sacred things, while proceeding home through the wilderness and fields, he was waylaid by two ruffians, who had secreted themselves for the purpose of robbing him of the records. One of them struck him with a club before he perceived them; but being a strong man, and large in stature, with great exertion he cleared himself from them, and ran towards home, being closely pursued until he came near his father's house, when his pursuers, for fear of being detected, turned and fled the other way.

27-28Soon the news of his discoveries spread abroad throughout all those parts. False reports, misrepresentations, and base slanders flew as if upon the wings of the wind in every direction. The house was frequently beset by mobs and evil designing persons. Several times he was shot at and very narrowly escaped. Every device was used to get the plates away from him. And being continually in danger of his life, from a gang of abandoned wretches, he at length concluded to leave the place, and go to Pennsylvania and accordingly packed up his goods; putting the plates into a barrel of beans, and proceeded upon his journey.

28He had not gone far before he was overtaken by an officer with a search warrant, who flattered himself with the idea that he should surely obtain the plates; after searching very diligently, he was sadly disappointed at not finding them. Mr. Smith then drove on; but before he got to his journey's end, he was again overtaken by an officer on the same business, and, after ransacking the wagon very carefully he went his way, as much chagrined as the first at not being able to discover the object of his search. Without any further molestation he pursued his journey until he came into the northern part of Pennsylvania, near the Susquehanna river, in which part his father-in-law resided.

28Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology/A Voice of Warning, Classics in Mormon Literature ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. 65.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
