Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Revelation Brown, Hugh B.279"He Does Speak"

279Hugh B. Brown

279I should like to give some reasons for [my] faith and attempt to justify my allegiance to the Church. Perhaps I can do this best by referring again to an interview I had in London, England, in 1939, just before the outbreak of World War II.

279I had met a very prominent English gentleman, a member of the House of Commons and formerly one of the justices of the supreme court of Britain. In a series of conversations on various subjects, "vexations of the soul," he called them, we talked about business and law; about politics, international relations, and war; and we frequently discussed religion.

279He called me on the phone one day and asked if I would meet him at his office and explain some phases of my faith. He said, "There is going to be a war, and you will have to return to America, and we may not meet again." His statement regarding the imminence of war and the possibility that we would not meet again proved to be prophetic.

279-280When I went to his office, he said he had been intrigued by some things I had told about my church. He asked me if I would prepare a brief on Mormonism and discuss it with him as I would discuss a legal problem. He said, "You have told me that you believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that you believe that God the Father and Jesus of Nazareth appeared to him in vision.

280"I cannot understand," he said, "how a barrister and solicitor from Canada, a man trained in logic and evidence and unemotional cold fact, could accept such absurd statements. What you tell me about Joseph Smith seems fantastic, but I wish you would take three days at least to prepare a brief and permit me to examine it and question you on it."

280I suggested that, as I had been working on such a brief for more than 50 years, we proceed at once to have an examination for discovery, which is, briefly, a meeting of the opposing sides in a lawsuit where the plaintiff and defendant, with their attorneys, meet to examine each other's claims and see whether they can find some area of agreement and thus save the time of the court later on.

280I said perhaps we could find some common ground from which we could discuss my "fantastic ideas." He agreed, and we proceeded with our "examination for discovery."

280Because of time limitations, I can only give a condensed or abbreviated synopsis of the three-hour conversation that followed. I began by asking, "May I proceed, sir, on the assumption that you are a Christian?"

280"I am."

280"I assume that you believe in the Bible—the Old and New Testaments?"

280"I do!"

280"Do you believe in prayer?"

280"I do!"

280"You say that my belief that God spoke to a man in this age is fantastic and absurd?"

280"To me it is."

280"Do you believe that God ever did speak to anyone?"

280"Certainly, all through the Bible we have evidence of that."

280"Did he speak to Adam?"

280"Yes."

280-281"To Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jacob, and to others of the prophets?"

281"I believe he spoke to each of them." "Do you believe that contact between God and man ceased when Jesus appeared on the earth?"

281"Certainly not. Such communication reached its climax, its apex at that time."

281"Do you believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God?"

281"He was."

281"Do you believe, sir, that after the resurrection of Christ, God ever spoke to any man?"

281He thought for a moment and then said, "I remember one Saul of Tarsus who was going down to Damascus to persecute the saints and who had a vision, was stricken blind, in fact, and heard a voice."

281"Whose voice did he hear?"

281"Well," he said, "the voice said ÂI am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.'"

281"Do you believe that actually took place?"

281"I do."

281"Then, my Lord"—that is the way we address judges in the British commonwealth—"my Lord, I am submitting to you in all seriousness that it was standard procedure in Bible times for God to talk to men."

281"I think I will admit that, but it stopped shortly after the first century of the Christian era."

281"Why do you think it stopped?"

281"I can't say."

281"You think that God hasn't spoken since then?"

281"Not to my knowledge."

281"May I suggest some possible reasons why he has not spoken. Perhaps it is because he cannot. He has lost the power."

281-282He said, "Of course that would be blasphemous."

282"Well, then, if you don't accept that, perhaps he doesn't speak to men because he doesn't love us anymore. He is no longer interested in the affairs of men." "No," he said, "God loves all men, and he is no respecter of persons."

282"Well, then, if you don't accept that he loves us, then the only other possible answer as I see it is that we don't need him. We have made such rapid strides in education and science that we don't need God any more."

282And then he said, and his voice trembled as he thought of impending war, "Mr. Brown, there never was a time in the history of the world when the voice of God was needed as it is needed now. Perhaps you can tell me why he doesn't speak."

282My answer was, "He does speak, he has spoken; but men need faith to hear him."

282Conference Report, October 1967, pp. 117-18.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
