Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Jesus Christ, Appearances ofMcKay, David O.284"It Was the City Eternal"

284David O. McKay

284On Tuesday, May 10, 1921, we sailed all day on the smoothest seat of our entire trip. The slightly undulating waves had been so free from even signs of unrest that the slight ripples discernible appeared on the surface like millions of little squares—like plaited cloth with the rich design of the same deep blue material as the body.

284Nearing Savaii, we could see with the aid of field glasses the "Spouting Horns," which looked like geysers. On our right we caught a glimpse of the little village nestling safely in the mouth of an extinct volcano on the little island of Apolima.

284-285Towards evening, the reflection of the afterglow of a beautiful sunset was most splendid! The sky was tinged with pink, and the clouds lingering around the horizon were fringed with various hues of crimson and orange, while the heavy cloud farther to the west was somber purple and black. These various colors cast varying shadows on the peaceful surface of the water. Those from the clouds were long and dark, those from the crimson-tinged sky, clear but rose-tinted and fading into a faint pink that merged into the clear blue of the ocean. Gradually, the shadows became deeper and heavier, and then all merged into a beautiful calm twilight that made the sea look like a great mirror upon which fell the faint light of the crescent moon!

285Pondering still upon this beautiful scene, I lay in my berth at ten o'clock that night, and thought to myself: Charming as it is, it doesn't stir my soul with emotion as do the innocent lives of children , and the sublime characters of loved ones and friends. Their beauty, unselfishness, and heroism are after all the most glorious!

285I then fell asleep, and beheld in vision something infinitely sublime. In the distance I beheld a beautiful white city. Though far away, yet I seemed to realize that trees with luscious fruit, shrubbery with gorgeously-tinted leaves, and flowers in perfect bloom abounded everywhere. The clear sky above seemed to reflect these beautiful shades of color. I then saw a great concourse of people approaching the city. Each one wore a white flowing robe and a white headdress. Instantly my attention seemed centered upon their leader, and though I could see only the profile of his features and his body, I recognized him at once as my Savior! The tint and radiance of his countenance were glorious to behold! There was a peace about him which seemed sublime—it was divine!

285The city, I understood, was his. It was the City Eternal; and the people following him were to abide there in peace and eternal happiness.

285But who were they?

285As if the Savior read my thoughts, he answered by pointing to a semicircle that then appeared above them, and on which was written in gold the words:

285"These Are They Who Have Overcome the World—Who Have Truly Been Born Again!"

286When I awoke, it was breaking day over Apia harbor.

286David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay, compiled by Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955), pp. 101-2.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
