Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Protection, DivineSmith, Mary Fielding299Escaping the Mob

299-300Mary Fielding Smith

300I felt much pleased to see Sisters Walton and Snider who arrived here on Saturday about noon, having left Brother Joseph Smith and Rigdon about twenty miles from Fairport [Ohio] to evade the mobbers. They were to come home in Dr. [Sampson] Avards carriage and expected to arrive about 10 o'clock at night but to their great disappointment they were prevented in a most grievous manner. They had got within four miles of home after a very fatiguing journey, much pleased with their visit to Canada and greatly anticipating the pleasure of seeing their homes and families, when they were surrounded with a mob and taken back to Painesville and secured as was supposed in a tavern where they intended to hold a mock trial. But to the disappointment of the wretches the housekeeper was a member of the church who assisted our beloved brethren in making their escape, but as Brother Joseph Smith says not by a basket let down through a window, but by the kitchen door.

301No doubt the hand of the Lord was in it or it could not have been effected. The day had been extremely wet and the night was unusually dark and you may try if you can to conceive what their situation was. They hardly knew which way to steer, as it had by that time got to be about 10 o'clock. The first step they took was to find the woods as quick as possible where they thought they should be safe. But in order to reach thereto they had to lay down in a swamp or by an old log just where they happened to be, so determinedly were they pursued by their mad enemies in every direction, sometimes so closely that Brother[J[oseph] was obliged to entreat Brother Rigdon, after his exertion in running, while lying by a log to breath more softly if he meant to escape.

301When they would run or walk they took each other by the hand and covenanted to live and die together. Owing to the darkness of the night their pursuers had to carry lighted torches which was one means of the escape of our beloved sufferers as they could see them in every direction while they were climbing over fences or traveling through brush or corn fields until about 12 o'clock. When after traveling as they suppose in this manner five or six miles they found the road which led homeward and saw no more of their pursuers. After traveling on foot along muddy slippery roads till near three in the morning they arrived safe at home almost fainting with fatigue.

301He, Brother[J[oseph], told us that he decreed in his heart when first taken that he would see home before sun rise and thank God so it was. And notwithstanding all he had to endure he appeared in the house of the Lord throughout the Sabbath in excellent spirits and spoke in a very powerful manner and blessed the congregation in the name of the Lord and I do assure you the saints felt the blessing and left the house rejoicing abundantly returning their blessing upon him. Brother Rigdon through his great weariness and a small hurt received from a fall did not attend the house but is now well. I suppose all these things will only add another gem to their crown.

301Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 64-65.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
