Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Protection, DivineWoodruff, Wilford306"Get Up and Move Your Carriage"

306Wilford Woodruff

306In 1848, after my return to Winter Quarters from our pioneer journey, I was appointed by the Presidency of the Church to take my family and go to Boston, to gather up the remnant of the Saints and lead them to the valleys of the mountains.

306While on my way east I put my carriage into the yard of one of the brethren in Indiana, and Brother Orson Hyde set his wagon by the side of mine, and not more than two feet from it.

306Dominicus Carter, of Provo, and my wife and four children were with me. My wife, one child and I went to bed in the carriage, the rest sleeping in the house.

306I had been in bed but a short time when a voice said to me: "Get up, and move your carriage."

307It was not thunder, lightning or an earthquake, but the still, small voice of the Spirit of God—the Holy Ghost.

307I told my wife I must get up and move my carriage. She asked: "What for?"

307I told her I did not know, only the Spirit told me to do it.

307I got up and moved my carriage several rods, and set it by the side of the house.

307As I was returning to bed, the same spirit said to me, "Go and move your mules from that oak tree," which was about one hundred yards north of our carriage.

307I moved them to a young hickory grove and tied them up. I then went to bed.

307In thirty minutes a whirlwind caught the tree to which my mules had been fastened, broke it off near the ground and carried it one hundred yards, sweeping away two fences in its course, and laid it prostrate through that yard where my carriage stood, and the top limbs hit my carriage as it was.

307In the morning I measured the trunk of the tree which fell where my carriage had stood, and I found it to be five feet in circumference. It came within a foot of Brother Hyde's wagon, but did not touch it.

308Thus by obeying the revelation of the Spirit of God to me, I saved my life and the lives of my wife and child, as well as my animals.

308Wilford Woodruff, Leaves from My Journal (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor's Office, 1882), p. 88.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
