Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Protection, DivineCornaby, Hannah320Point of the Mountain

320Hannah Cornaby

320In a few weeks, [my husband] started for Spanish Fork to seek a new home; having heard while in Provo of the advantages it offered to new settlers;—namely, plenty of land, with a good supply of water. This was in August 1856. . . .

320We rented a house, purchased a good building site, and built a small room in which to winter. This had just been accomplished when my husband was taken very sick; but he recovered in a month sufficiently to take a journey to Salt Lake City on business. He had just reached his destination when unfortunately he took a heavy chill and became entirely prostrated by rheumatic and lung fever. . . .

321At this time, I received a letter from a friend in Salt Lake City, informing me that if I wished to see my husband alive, I must go to him at once; but the difficulties in the way seemed almost insurmountable. The roads were nearly impassable for snow. I was sixty miles from Salt Lake City. . . .

321On the third day of January, 1857, the teams started for Salt Lake City, and I with them, having arranged to leave my two eldest children in the care of Sister Isabella Rockhill. The first day we traveled twelve miles, reaching Provo at dark. Greatly to my surprise, I met Brother John B. Milner, with whom we [had become] acquainted in crossing the ocean on board the Ellen Marie. He, with his wife, made me welcome for the night, offering the best accommodation their house afforded. The following night I spent at Lehi, at the house of Elder Robert Winter, my husband's brother-in-law, who accompanied me the next day on the journey.

321I must mention a very providential deliverance I had that day. We had to pass what is known as the "Point of the Mountain"—the divide separating Utah and Salt Lake Valleys. The ascending grade made it impossible for the teams, six in number, to travel without doubling. This slow operation rendered it very tedious sitting so long in the wagon; and I became so benumbed that, following the advice of the teamster, I dismounted and walked on, with my babe well wrapt. But the piercing wind and blinding snow made it hard work [to keep moving], yet necessity compelled me to walk fast to keep from freezing. This took me so far ahead of the teams that [suddenly I realized I was lost]. I attempted to retrace my steps, but was met by the wind and drifting snow, which I could not face; so I continued on. At length I became so exhausted, I thought I must sit down; but knowing this would mean death, I prayed to God for help and waded through snow, drifted so deep in some places that it was impossible to trace the road. Stupified and benumbed as I was, I wandered into a ravine, sinking down into a deep snow-drift, which nearly covered me.

321I had just enough consciousness to wonder whether my babe was alive, and how long it would be until the teams would find me, when a stupor came over me, from which I was aroused by a kindly voice. [Looking up] I saw a horse's head quite close. A man passing with a sleigh had seen me and was trying to lift me out, yet fearing his assistance had come too late. He helped me into the sleigh, and drove to a house about two miles distant. By the time the teams came up, I had quite recovered. My babe was in deep sleep and had not suffered.

322We stayed at Draperville that night. Next day, Mr. Winter went ahead of the teams, to inform my husband of my coming, and then sent a sleigh to meet me.

322I found my husband very sick, but the worst was over; and in six weeks from that time he was sufficiently convalescent to return.

322On reaching home, we found the children all right. They had been well cared for in our absence.

322Spring had set in; my husband, as soon as [he was] able, taught the ward school; and we spent the summer very comfortably and began to enjoy country life.

322Hannah Cornaby, Autobiography and Poems (Salt Lake City: J. C. Graham Co., 1881), pp. 43-49.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
