Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Healing

HealingsCoray, Howard"I Think I Am Also Entitled to a Blessing"

329Howard Coray

329In June, 1841, I met with an accident. The Prophet [Joseph Smith] and I, after looking at his horses and admiring them across the road from his house, started thither. The Prophet at the same time put his arm over my shoulder. When we had reached about the middle of the road, he stopped and remarked, "Brother Coray, I wish you were a little larger, I would like to have some fun with you."

329I replied, "Perhaps you can as it is"—not realizing what I was saying. The fact that Joseph was a man of over 200 lb., while I was scarcely 130 lb., made it not a little ridiculous for me to think of engaging with him in anything like a scuffle.

329However, as soon as I made this reply, he began to trip me. He took some kind of a lock on my right leg, from which I was unable to extricate it, and throwing me around, broke it some three inches above the ankle joint.

329-330He immediately carried me into the house, pulled off my boot, and found at once that my leg was decidedly broken; then got some splinters and bandaged it. A number of times that day he came in to see me, endeavoring to console me as much as possible.

330The next day when he happened in to see me after a little conversation, I said: "Brother Joseph, when Jacob wrestled with the angel and was lamed by him, the angel blessed him. Now I think I am also entitled to a blessing." To that he replied, "I am not the Patriarch, but my father is, and when you get up and around, I'll have him bless you." . . .

330In nine days after my leg was broken, I was able to get up and hobble about the house by the aid of a crutch, and in two weeks thereafter I was about recovered—so much so that I went to meeting on foot, a distance of a mile. I considered this no less than a case of miraculous healing.

330Hyrum L. Andrus and Helen Mae Andrus, comps., They Knew the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974), pp. 135-37.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
