Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

356"Maybe the Lord Can Save Her, but I Cannot"

356LeGrand Richards

356Following the visit of Elder Melvin J. Ballard at Jacksonville, Florida, on December 8, 1935, one of the elders, with only thirty-five cents in his pocket, started out to return to his field of labor in South Georgia. He attempted to hitchhike on the highway without the usual success, apparently for a wise purpose. About nine o'clock in the evening he found himself still quite a distance from his field of labor, so he decided he would "tract-in" (seek entertainment) for the night.

356-357After being unsuccessful at two homes, he called at the third and was met at the door by a minister of the Gospel. He introduced himself as a Mormon missionary, whereupon he was invited in. The minister explained that he was in deep distress—that his little daughter was very sick and the doctor gave them no hope for her recovery. By this time, they had entered the living room where the family was sitting, and the doctor was at the side of the bed upon which the little girl was lying.

357The minister remarked, "You believe in anointing the sick with oil, do you not?" To this the elder replied in the affirmative. He then added, "I wish you would anoint my little girl—I have prayed for her without avail," and he offered the missionary a bottle of olive oil. The elder asked if it had been consecrated, to which the minister replied, "I am afraid I do not understand what you mean"; so the elder suggested that he would use his own oil, as he had a small bottle with him, and he invited the family to kneel with him about the bed to engage in prayer before performing the sacred ordinance. They seemed rather reluctant, as though they had given up all hope. The doctor remarked, "Maybe the Lord can save her, but I cannot." The elder led in prayer and then administered to the little girl, and as he removed his hands from her head she relaxed, and the doctor immediately reached for her pulse as though he feared she was breathing her last.

357For about twenty minutes, the elder sat visiting with the minister and his family, at which time the doctor again felt the girl's pulse and remarked, "There is no need of my remaining any longer—your little girl will be all right. I have seen it with my own eyes and yet I cannot believe it."

358Addressing the elder, the minister said, "You were seeking a bed for the night, were you not?" and being informed by the missionary that he was, he explained that he was not prepared to accommodate him, but that he was willing to take him to the hotel and pay for his room, or he would drive him in his auto wherever he wanted to go. He explained that his destination was sixty miles from there, but the minister was perfectly willing to take him that distance, and upon reaching his destination, the minister offered the elder ten dollars for what he had done in his home, but he refused to accept the money, explaining the instruction of the Master to the Twelve when he sent them forth: "Freely ye have received, freely give."

358Conference Report, April 1936, pp. 117-18.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
