Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Missionary WorkWoodruff, Wilford368Benbow Farm

368Wilford Woodruff

368March 1st, 1840, was my birthday, when I was thirty-three years of age. It being Sunday, I preached twice through the day to a large assembly in the City Hall, in the town of Hanley, and administered the sacrament unto the Saints.

368In the evening I again met with a large assembly of the Saints and strangers, and while singing the first hymn [I felt] the Spirit of the Lord resting upon me, and the voice of God said to me, "This is the last meeting that you will hold with this people for many days."

368I was astonished at this, as I had many appointments out in that district.

368When I arose to speak to the people, I told them that it was the last meeting I should hold with them for many days. They were as much astonished as I was.

368At the close of the meeting four persons came forward for baptism, and we went down in to the water and baptized them.

368In the morning I went in secret before the Lord, and asked him what his will was concerning me.

368The answer I got was, that I should go to the south, for the Lord had a great work for me to perform there, as many souls were waiting for the word of the Lord.

368-369On the 3rd of March, 1840, in fulfillment of the word of the Lord to me, I took coach and rode to Wolverhampton, twenty-six miles, and spent the day there.

369On the morning of the 4th I again took coach, and rode through Dudley, Stourbridge, Stourport, and Worchester, and then walked a number of miles to Mr. John Benbow's, Hill Farm, Castle Frome, Ledbury, Herefordshire. This was a farming country in the south of England, a region where no elder of the Latter-day Saints had visited.

369I found Mr. Benbow to be a wealthy farmer, cultivating three hundred acres of land, occupying a good mansion, and having plenty of means. His wife, Jane, had no children.

369I presented myself to him as a missionary from America, an elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who had been sent to him by the commandment of God as a messenger of salvation, to preach the gospel of life unto him and his household, and the inhabitants of the land.

369Mr. Benbow and his wife received me with glad hearts and thanksgiving. It was in the evening when I arrived, having traveled forty-eight miles by coach and on foot during the day, but after receiving refreshments we sat down together, and conversed until two o'clock in the morning.

369Mr. Benbow and his wife rejoiced greatly at the glad tidings which I brought unto them of the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which God had revealed through the mouth of his Prophet, Joseph Smith, in these last days.

369I rejoiced greatly at the news that Mr. Benbow gave me, that there was a company of men and women—over six hundred in number—who had broken off from the Wesleyan Methodist, and taken the name of United Brethren. They had forty-five preachers among them and had chapels and many houses that were licensed according to the law of the land for preaching in.

369-370This body of United Brethren were searching for light and truth, but had gone as far as they could, and were continually calling upon the Lord to open the way before them, and send them light and knowledge that they might know the true way to be saved.

370When I heard these things, I could clearly see why the Lord had commanded me, while in the town of Hanley, to leave that place of labor and go to the south, for in Herefordshire there was a great harvest-field for gathering many Saints into the kingdom of God.

370I retired to my bed with joy after offering my prayers and thanksgiving to God, and slept sweetly until the rising of the sun.

370I arose on the morning of the 5th, took breakfast, and told Mr. Benbow I would like to commence my Master's business, by preaching the gospel to the people.

370He had a large hall in his mansion which was licensed for preaching, and he sent word through the neighborhood that an American missionary would preach at his house that evening.

370As the time drew nigh many of the neighbors came in, and I preached my first gospel sermon in the house. I also preached on the following evening at the same place, and baptized six persons, including Mr. John Benbow and his wife, and four preachers of the United Brethren.

370I spent most of the following day in clearing out a pool of water, and preparing it for baptizing in, as I saw many to be baptized there. I afterwards baptized six hundred in that pool of water.

370On Sunday, the 8th, I preached at Frome's Hill in the morning, at Standley Hill in the afternoon, and at John Benbow's Hill Farm in the evening.

371The parish church that stood in the neighborhood of Brother Benbow's, presided over by the rector of the parish, was attended during the day by only fifteen persons, while I had a large congregation, estimated to number a thousand, attend my meeting through the day and evening.

371When I arose in the evening to speak at Brother Benbow's house, a man entered the door and informed me that he was a constable, and had been sent by the rector of the parish with a warrant to arrest me.

371I asked him, "For what crime?"

371He said, "For preaching to the people."

371I told him that I, as well as the rector, had a license for preaching the gospel to the people, and that if he would take a chair I would wait upon him after meeting.

371He took my chair and sat beside me. I preached the first principles of the everlasting gospel for an hour and a quarter. The power of God rested upon me, the Spirit filled the house, and the people were convinced.

371At the close of the meeting I opened a door for baptism, and seven offered themselves. Among the number were four preachers and the constable.

371The latter arose and said, "Mr. Woodruff, I would like to be baptized."

371I told him I would like to baptize him. I went down to the pool and baptized seven. We then met together, and I confirmed thirteen and broke bread unto the Saints, and we all rejoiced together.

371The constable went to the rector and told him if he wanted Mr. Woodruff taken up for preaching the gospel, he must go himself and serve the writ, for he had heard him preach the only true gospel sermon he had ever listened to in his life.

371The rector did not know what to make of it, so he sent two clerks of the Church of England as spies, to attend our meeting, and find out what we did preach.

371But they were both pricked in their hearts and received the word of the Lord gladly and were baptized and confirmed members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

371-372The rector became alarmed and did not dare to send anybody else.

372The ministers and rectors of the south of England called a convention and sent a petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to request Parliament to pass a law prohibiting the "Mormons" from preaching in the British dominion. In this petition the rector stated that one "Mormon" missionary had baptized fifteen hundred persons, mostly members of the English church, during the last seven months.

372But the archbishop and council, knowing well that the laws of England gave free toleration to all religions under the British flag, sent word to the petitioners that if they had the worth of souls at heart as much as they had the ground where hares, foxes, and hounds ran, they would not lose so many of their flock.

372I continued to preach and baptize daily.

372On the 21st day of March I baptized Elder Thomas Kingston. He was the superintendent of both preachers and members of the United Brethren.

372The first thirty days after my arrival in Herefordshire, I had baptized forty-five preachers and one hundred-and-sixty members of the United Brethren, who put into my hands one chapel and forty-five houses, which were licensed according to law to preach in.

372This opened a wide field for labor and enabled me to bring into the Church, through the blessing of God, over eighteen hundred souls during eight months, including all of the six hundred United Brethren except one person; also including some two hundred preachers of various denominations.

372This field of labor embraced Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and Worchestershire, and formed the conferences of Garway, Godfield, Elm, and Frome's Hill.

373I was visited by President Young and Dr. Richards.

373Brother Benbow furnished us with 300 pounds to print the first Book of Mormon that was published in England; and on the 20th of May, 1840, Brigham Young, Willard Richards, and I held a council on the top of Malvern Hill, and there decided that Brigham Young go directly to Manchester and publish 3,000 copies of the hymnbook and 3,000 copies of the Book of Mormon, this being the first publication of these books in England.

373The power of God rested upon us and upon the mission.

373The sick were healed, devils were cast out, and the lame were made to walk. . . .

373The whole history of this Herefordshire mission shows the importance of listening to the still small voice of the Spirit of God and the revelations of the Holy Ghost.

374The Lord had a people there prepared for the gospel. They were praying for light and truth, and the Lord sent me to them, and I declared the gospel of life and salvation unto them, and some eighteen hundred souls received it, and many of them have been gathered to Zion in these mountains. Many of them have also been called to officiate in the bishopric, and have done much good in Zion. But in all these things we should ever acknowledge the hand of God, and give him the honor, praise and glory, forever and ever. Amen.

374Wilford Woodruff, Leaves from My Journal (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor's Office, 1882), pp. 77-83.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
