Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Missionary WorkTaylor, John Missionary WorkJenson, Andrew378"The Laborer Is Worthy of His Hire"

378Andrew Jenson

378-379When [John Taylor's] means were exhausted, with an inexhaustible store of faith, he would stop and preach the gospel. The Lord would raise up friends who would give him money, with which he would proceed on his journey. In doing this he would never ask a human being for help. He asked the Lord, and his prayers never went unanswered.

379When they were about to sail from New York to Liverpool, he and two other brethren were almost destitute of means, not having sufficient to pay one passage, much less three. Notwithstanding their predicament, a very short time before the vessel was to sail Elder Taylor told one of his companions to go and engage passage for all three to Liverpool. His fellow-laborers were non-plussed and asked where on earth could they get means in so short a time. Elder Taylor answered that there was plenty of means in the world and the Lord would send them enough before the vessel sailed to pay their way. His words were most remarkably fulfilled. He asked no person for money, and yet immediately after he made the prediction one after another came to them and proffered assistance, until enough was provided to meet their expenses to Liverpool.

379He arrived in Liverpool January 11, 1840, and immediately commenced his missionary work, preaching, baptizing, organizing branches, and with his brethren regulating the Church throughout the British Isles. He introduced the gospel into Ireland and the Isle of Man, extending his labors into Scotland. He published several tracts, setting forth principles of the gospel and refuting falsehoods. He corrected the proof sheets of the Book of Mormon, and with President Young and Elder Parley P. Pratt prepared and published the first edition of the Latter-day Saints' Hymn Book.

379-380While laboring on the Isle of Man he had secured the printing of some tracts, which he wrote in reply to the falsehoods circulated by ministers and others regarding the character and doctrines taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. When the tracts were ready the printer would not deliver them until every penny was paid which was due him. Elder Taylor did not have sufficient to meet the demand, and being very anxious to obtain the tracts went immediately into a private room, and, kneeling down, told the Lord in plain simplicity exactly how much he needed to pay for the matter he had published in defense of his cause. In a few minutes after his prayer was offered a young man came to the door, and upon being invited to enter handed Elder Taylor an envelope and walked out. The young man was unknown to him. The envelope contained some money and a little note which read: "The laborer is worthy of his hire," and no signature was placed thereon.

380In a few minutes later a poor woman engaged as a fish vender came to the house and offered a little money to assist him in his ministerial labors. He told her there was plenty of money in the world and he did not wish to take her money. She insisted that the Lord would bless her the more and she would be happier if he would accept it, whereupon he received the offering, and to his surprise the poor woman's mite, added to what the young man had given him, made exactly the amount sufficient to pay the printer the balance due him.

380Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Andrew Jenson History Co., 1901), 1:16.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
