Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Missionary WorkJenson, Andrew382"You Are No Preacher"

382-383Andrew Jenson

383While on this mission, which [Edwin D. Woolley] was performing in the good old way by traveling without money to pay for the necessaries of life, the following interesting incident occurred. While walking through the country one day he reached a toll gate (common in those times) at Strasburg, Lancaster county, Pennsylvania. It was customary to allow ministers or preachers to pass through free of charge, and when Bro. Woolley stated that he was a preacher of the gospel, the gate keeper allowed him to pass. He had gone about three miles farther on his journey, when he heard the clatter of horses' hoofs on the road behind him; turning, he saw two horsemen coming down the road at a hard gallop. He was soon overtaken and one of the men, placing his hand on the Elder's shoulder, with an oath claimed him as a prisoner, saying, "You are no d—d preacher, and you have got to go back with us, and not only pay your fare, but a fine as well."

384Elder Woolley remarked that if they would procure a hall and furnish an audience, he would show them whether or not he was a preacher. This seemed to suit the men, who at once decided to put him to the test; they provided a hall and gave out notices of the meeting to be held, holding the assumed preacher in custody meanwhile. A large congregation gathered, attracted, no doubt, by the novelty of the occasion, more than from any real desire to learn the truth. The Elder must have had the assistance the Lord usually gives to those who trust in Him, for the men who had him in charge were thoroughly convinced that he was a preacher and released him from custody without toll or fine being paid. He was so well satisfied with the reception he met at this meeting that he remained in that neighborhood for some time, preaching and making converts.

384Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Andrew Jenson History Co., 1901), 1:631.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
