Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Missionary WorkMcKay, David O.394"Whate'er Thou Art, Act Well Thy Part"

394David O. McKay

394I remember as a missionary in Scotland fifty-seven years ago, after having been in Stirling only a few weeks, I walked around Stirling Castle with my senior companion, Elder Peter G. Johnston of Idaho. We had not yet secured our lodging in Stirling. I confess I was homesick. I did not like the attitude of the people there as they were so suspicious that we were there for ulterior motives. We had spent a halfday around the castle, and the men out in the field ploughing, that spring day, made me all the more homesick, and took me back to my old home town.

394-395As we returned to the town, I saw an unfinished building standing back from the sidewalk several yards. Over the front door was a stone arch, something unusual in a residence, and what was still more unusual, I could see from the sidewalk that there was an inscription chiseled in that arch.

395I said to my companion: "That's unusual! I am going to see what the inscription is." When I approached near enough, this message came to me, not only in stone, but as if it came from One in whose service we were engaged: "Whate'er Thou Art, Act Well Thy Part."

395I turned and walked thoughtfully away, and when I reached my companion I repeated the message to him.

395That was a message to me that morning to act my part well as a missionary of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is merely another way of saying—what is more precious because it comes from the words of the Savior—"Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven" ( Matt. 7:21 ).

395David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay, compiled by Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955), pp. 182-83.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
