Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

410"My Boy, Come and Live with Me"

410B. F. Grant

410-411My father [Jedediah M. Grant] died when I was only a few weeks old. Mother made moccasins out of deer skins, and sold them to stores at a very small margin of revenue to her. She did housework for different families when it was obtainable. When I was two years old, mother married outside of the Mormon Church. As she was going to Denver, Colorado, to live, grandmother persuaded her to leave me in her care. Grandmother was a cripple. It was difficult for her to care for a little boy and so after a time, she gave me to Beason Lewis, who lived in Richmond, Cache Valley. I remained with this family until I was between eleven and twelve years old. About this time mines were discovered in Montana and trains passed through Utah buying flour, butter, eggs, etc., to be carried to the Montana mines. One of these trains stopped at the Lewis place for a few months to make repairs to their wagons. I made arrangements to run away from home and go with this train to Montana. I remained there until I was 14. The terminus of the Union Pacific was located at Corinne, where the freight from Montana was delivered. I met one of the freighters, who, learning that I was a son of Jedediah M. Grant, invited me to go back to Utah with him. I returned to Salt Lake City when I was between fourteen and fifteen years of age. I went to work in a coal and wood yard.

411I had been in Salt Lake City only a short time when in some way President [Brigham] Young learned where I was and what I was doing. President Young's son, Feramorz, and my brother, Heber, at the request of President Young, searched me out and informed me that President Young wanted to see me.

411The next day I called on him at his office, and he happened to be alone. I told him who I was, and he did not merely reach out his hand to shake mine, but he arose from his chair and gave me a father's handshake. In so doing, he discovered that the callouses on my hands were hard and thick, and he remarked, "My boy, what kind of work are you doing?" I replied, "I am unloading coal and chopping wood."

411He then resumed his seat and continued his inquiry regarding my past life and what I had been doing. He remarked, "Isn't it pretty heavy work, shoveling coal and chopping wood, for a boy of your age?"

411I replied, "No, sir, I have been used to hard work all of my life."

411He answered, "Wouldn't you like to have something easier than your present work, for instance, a position in a store?"

411I replied, "I haven't got sense enough to work in a store."

411He said, "What do you mean by that?"

411I replied, "I can neither read nor write."

411I discovered this good and great man's heart was touched by this remark; I saw tears rolling down his cheek, and he took his handkerchief and wiped them off and said, "My boy, come and live with me; I will give you a home; I will clothe you; I will send you to school; and you can work during the vacation for me."

412I accepted his kind offer. He became a father to me. He furnished a home; he clothed me; and provided an opportunity for me to attend school; and he gave me $5.00 a week for spending money, which was a very princely allowance in those days of hardship and trial. His own sons would laughingly tell me they thought I was their father's pet.

412Soon after I went to live with President Young, I was given a team and was doing general work on his farm and performing other duties incident to Pioneer life. . . .

412In addition to his large family at the time I was living with him, there were six orphaned boys and girls who were being cared for by him. I lived with one of his families and was treated most royally by all the members; in fact, I felt I was indeed a real member of the family so far as treatment was concerned.

412During the vacation when I was driving a team, at times breakfast would be served a little late. There was a certain time when every team was supposed to be hooked up and going to its work. When breakfast was late I could not always be on time with my team. The foreman complained to me about this and I told him that I milked the cows and fed the pigs and did the chores, but could not go to work without my breakfast. One morning he became angry and told me if I couldn't get out on time to quit. I, boy like, took his advice without calling on President Young, left, and went to work in the coal yard again.

412President Young was soon informed of this and sent for me. When I went into his office he shook hands and wanted to know why I left home. I told him the boss had discharged me.

412"Oh," he said, "The boss? Who is he?" I gave the foreman's name.

412He laughed, and said, "No, my boy, I am the boss. Didn't I make arrangements for you to come and live with me?"

412I replied, "Yes, sir."

412He then said, "Remember, when you are discharged I will attend to it myself; now, go back, get your team and go to work."

412I replied, "I don't know whether ________ will allow me to go to work now."

412"Never mind, my boy," he assured me, "I'll attend to it myself."

413The next morning when I went to the barn to get my team I found there was a new foreman. I never did learn why this change was made, but I had a boy's suspicion.

413Preston Nibley, Faith Promoting Stories (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1943), pp. 146-49.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
