Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

LoveBryner, Ellen R.413An Indian Wail

413Ellen R. Bryner

413It was an early fall morning. The air was crisp and cold. The comforts of the impoverished two rooms of log with earthen floor and roof were very few. Caroline Butler awakened after a night of restless anxiety. There were eleven hungry mouths to feed. For days their rations had been scanty. A little wild game had come to them occasionally from members of the camp, while the husband and father, with his teams and wagons, assisted poorer Saints into Winter Quarters. The food in the larder was not sufficient to satisfy the needs for one meal of the hungry, growing family. As the anxious mother placed the last scanty store of food upon the rough table and urged her family to make preparations for their morning meal, her heart was full of entreaty to God to send help from some source that day.

413As they were about to partake, an old Indian woman walked into the room and asked for bread. Caroline was conscious of her family's needs for food and of her own physical weakness from lack of it, because she had given most of her portion to satisfy the hunger of her smaller children. "This is all we have," she answered, "but we will share it with you."

413-414The Indian woman partook and went on her way; not far away through the woods she had thriftily stored some food after the Indian fashion.

414Caroline learned that day that bread cast upon the water to satisfy the hungry shall come back a hundredfold. Grandmother Indian (as the old Indian was known from day forth) returned with sufficient dried buffalo meat and dried berries to stay the pangs of hunger until other supplies came. Many times during the Butlers' three years' stay in Winter Quarters, she came to the cabin and shared her own savings of food with her adopted family.

414Poverty was the order of the day with these driven and much persecuted Latter-day Saints. As many were doing, this large family was planning the long journey westward without sufficient footwear and clothing, a consequence of the confiscation of their possessions and of being driven from their homes.

414Hearing that the journey to the mountains was soon to continue, Grandmother Indian determined to make heavy buckskin moccasins for each member of her adopted family. After tedious weeks of labor, all of the moccasins were finished with the exception of a pair for Caroline. Grandmother Indian spent extra time decorating this pair as a visible sign of her deep devotion. Early one morning, knowing that the time for their departure was near, she approached the little log house only to find her loved ones gone. Almost overcome with disappointment and sorrow, she wailed an Indian wail and started to follow the wagon tracks.

415The family traveled five miles that first day. After the campfires had burned low and the oxen were cared for, and all the weary travelers were settled in their beds, an Indian wail was heard in the distance, growing louder as it came nearer. Grandmother Indian had followed her newfound family in order to present her last token of love before a final goodbye. With the moccasins she had brought a generous supply of dried pulverized venison in a pouch, and a sack of dried berries.

415Leon R. Hartshorn, comp., Remarkable Stories from the Lives of Latter-day Saint Women (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), 2:29-30.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
