Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

LoveSmith, George Albert425Visit to President Truman

425George Albert Smith

425When the war was over, I went representing the Church, to see the president of the United States. When I called on him, he received me very graciously—I had met him before—and I said: "I have just come to ascertain from you, Mr. President, what your attitude will be if the Latter-day Saints are prepared to ship food and clothing and bedding to Europe."

425He smiled and looked at me, and said: "Well, what do you want to ship it over there for? Their money isn't any good."

425I said: "We don't want their money." He looked at me and asked: "You don't mean you are going to give it to them?"

425I said: "Of course, we would give it to them. They are our brothers and sisters and are in distress. God has blessed us with a surplus, and we will be glad to send it if we can have the co-operation of the government."

425He said: "You are on the right track," and added, "we will be glad to help you in any way we can."

425I have thought of that a good many times. After we had sat there a moment or two, he said again: "How long will it take you to get this ready?"

425I said: "It's all ready."

425-426The government you remember had been destroying food and refusing to plant grain during the war, so I said to him:

426"Mr. President, while the administration at Washington were advising the destroying of food, we were building elevators and filling them with grain, and increasing our flocks and our herds, and now what we need is the cars and the ships in order to send considerable food, clothing and bedding to the people of Europe who are in distress. We have an organization in the Church that has over two thousand homemade quilts ready."

426[That organization was] . . . the Relief Society. . . . They had two thousand quilts made by their own hands ready to ship. The result was that many people received warm clothing and bedding and food without any delay. Just as fast as we could get cars and ships, we had what was necessary to send to Europe.

426Conference Report, October 1947, pp. 5-6.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
