Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

LoveBabbel, Frederick W.426 Ezra Taft Benson Assists the European Saints

426Frederick W. Babbel

426-427It was Elder [Ezra Taft] Benson whose phone call . . . had set off the exciting chain of events which had brought me to Europe [in 1946] on a second mission for the Church. The First Presidency had called him to reestablish the European Missions following the long night of war, and to arrange for the distribution of such necessaries as food, clothing and bedding to the distressed saints in Europe. The thrilling assignment was mine to assist him in this great work. . . .

427[Our visits to Frankfurt, Germany, were] made in the interest of getting supplies and materials to meet pressing needs for our saints. . . .

427We proceeded to the offices of General Joseph T. McNarney, the four-star general in charge of all American forces in Europe. Our first request for an audience was quickly and routinely dismissed. The general's aide, a very businesslike major, advised us that it would be impossible to arrange such a meeting for at least three days.

427Somewhat disappointed, we returned to our car where President Benson suggested that we unite our faith in petitioning the Lord. He humbly asked the Lord to be mindful of our situation and to open the way before us.

427When we returned to General McNarney's office several minutes later, we were greeted by another officer who was apparently relieving the major. Without mentioning our earlier contact with the major, President Benson requested an audience with the general. . . . Within fifteen minutes we were ushered in for a meeting with the general.

427As we entered, it was evident that he regarded this interview as strictly a perfunctory one which he was anxious to terminate as quickly as possible. . . . President Benson warmly shook his hand and stood there looking squarely at him and talking very earnestly. This was a crucial moment. . . .

427-428At first the general seemed visibly annoyed. . . . President Benson continued to gaze intently into the general's eyes as he talked with him, and he spoke with such feeling and conviction that the general's eyes became moist with tears and his cold militaristic manner gave way to a warm, spirited expression of, "Mr. Benson, there's something about you that I like. I want to help you in every way I can!" . . .

428As President Benson explained the nature of our mission and the organization of the Church and its welfare program, General McNarney exclaimed, "Mr. Benson, I have never heard of a church with such vision!"

428The general then advised us that for the present time regulations required that all relief supplies be handled and distributed through military channels. However, as he became acquainted with our mission organization and our ability to make our own distribution equitably, he continued to express his amazement . . . [and] suggested that we begin to gather our relief supplies.

428When President Benson informed him that we had ninety large welfare storehouses bulging with food and clothing, which could be ready for shipment within twenty-four hours, one could fairly feel the general's astonishment. He then agreed to give us written authorization to make our own distribution through our own channels. In exchange, we agreed to provide a reasonable amount of our foodstuffs for use in the existing child-feeding program.

429After this point was reached, General McNarney seemed willing to consider favorably our every request.

429Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972), pp. 2, 43, 45-47.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
