Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

HumorSmith, Joseph Fielding447Mixed Memories of Juny

447Albert L. Zobell Jr.

447He [Joseph Fielding Smith] learned to work on the family farm in Taylorsville, Salt Lake County. An early memory is of milking the family cow without permission "before I was baptized." Milking was a task that had been given to an older sister, but apparently he did it well enough that he soon found himself given the job.

447He learned early to work with animals, with nature, with men, and with God. His own growing testimony was aided by the faith and works of his father, who had been a full-time missionary at fifteen and an apostle ten years before Joseph Fielding was born, and who had been called as second counselor in the First Presidency when his namesake son was only four years of age.

447Another of the family tasks that fell his lot was that of being stable boy for his mother in her capacity as a licensed midwife. At all hours of the night he was called from his deep boyhood sleep to harness a horse so she could go where she was needed. He would light a kerosene lantern and go to the barn, and soon the horse would be ready.

447-448Reflecting on those early years, he has mixed memories of Juny, a fine horse that his father had purchased from President George Q. Cannon of the First Presidency:

448"She was so smart she learned how to unlock one kind of corral fastener after another that I contrived, until Father said to me, half humorously, that Juny seemed to be smarter than I was. So Father himself fastened her in with a strap and buckle. As he did so, the mare eyed him coolly; and, as soon as our backs were turned, she set to work with her teeth until she actually undid the buckle and followed us out, somewhat to my delight. I could not refrain from suggesting that I was not the only one whose head compared unfavorably with the mare's."

448Improvement Era, March 1970, pp. 4-5.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
