Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

HumorBrown, Hugh B.449Escapades with Bud

449Hugh B. Brown

449An] influence on my upbringing was my older brother Bud. One day Bud and I saw a weasel. The little animal ran into his hole, and we got a spade and began to dig him out. We dug down quite a ways, and Bud said, "I think I can hear him down there, we are pretty close to him. Maybe you'd better reach in and see what he's doing." I rolled up my sleeve and reached down into the hole. Well, the weasel got me by the finger, and I still have a scar.

449-450On another occasion, Bud and I went out to the barn, where he helped me up until I could get ahold of the rafters across the top with my hands. Bud said, "I will swing you back and forth. When you get going pretty good, I will tell you when to let loose of that rafter and when to grab the next one." He gave me a good long swing and then said, "Now." I let loose of the rafter, but the other one was not within reach. It took me six hours to wake up as I landed on the back of my head. Needless to say, mother was very concerned for my welfare.

450So things went on between Bud and me. But I never felt any animosity or ill-will towards him. It seemed to be part of my education, although he certainly had me in trouble most of the time. But the time soon came when I wanted to get even with Bud for all of his mischief. I had read a story in which a man died, was put in a big vault, and then came to life again. He got out of his casket in the night and walked around, trying to find his way out, but he kept placing his hands on the faces of the other dead men around him. It was a terrible, horrifying story. I knew if I could get Bud to read it he would react as I had. So I asked him to read it. As he read and marked the book I watched him carefully. When he got to the place where the man was walking around among the dead men, Bud was very excited, to say the least.

450At the time, we slept on some hay in the basement of a big barn at Lake Breeze (where my father managed a fourteen-acre orchard between North Temple and 200 South streets on Redwood Road). When Bud got to this place in the book, I said, "Leave your book now and we'll go to bed." He put it down reluctantly and we went out to the barn. I pulled the barn door open. Inside was as dark as a stack of black cats. I had previously arranged for a cousin to be in the basement in a sheet. When we opened the door and he saw this ghost standing at the bottom of the steps, Bud gave an unearthly scream and started to run. I overtook him and brought him back. "That's just the result of the book you've been reading," I said. "Don't be so foolish. I'll show you there's no ghost there." I went down the steps, felt all around, and could not feel the ghost.

451Bud decided to trust me. He went down, got into bed, and covered up his head, but he was shaking all over. I said, "Don't be so foolish, Bud. Uncover your head and look around you. You'll see that there are no ghosts here." He uncovered his head and the ghost was standing right at the foot of his bed. He let out another unearthly scream, covered his head again, and began to pray. I felt very guilty because he told the Lord all the bad things he had done and promised never to do any more. Finally, the ghost went away. I guess Bud's prayer had a great effect on him, as well.

451Edwin B. Firmage, ed., An Abundant Life: The Memoirs of Hugh B. Brown (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1988), pp. 2-4.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
