Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

InspirationCahoon, William F.63"The Prophet Came to the Door"

63William F. Cahoon

63I was called and ordained to act as a [ward] teacher to visit the families of the Saints. I got along very well until I was obliged to pay a visit to the Prophet [Joseph Smith]. Being young, only seventeen years of age, I felt my weakness in visiting the Prophet and his family in the capacity of a teacher. I almost felt like shrinking from my duty.

63Finally, I went to the door and knocked, and in a minute the Prophet came to the door. I stood there trembling and said to him:

63"Brother Joseph, I have come to visit you in the capacity of a [ward] teacher, if it is convenient for you."

63-64He said, "Brother William, come right in. I am glad to see you; sit down in that chair there and I will go and call my family in."

64They soon came in and took seats. He then said, "Brother William, I submit myself and family into your hands," and took his seat. "Now, Brother William," said he, "Ask all the questions you feel like."

64By this time, my fears and trembling had ceased, and I said, "Brother Joseph, are you trying to live your religion?"

64He answered, "Yes."

64I then said, "Do you pray in your family?"

64He answered "Yes."

64"Do you teach your family the principles of the gospel?"

64He replied, "Yes, I am trying to do it."

64"Do you ask a blessing on your food?"

64He answered "Yes."

64"Are you trying to live in peace and harmony with all your family?"

64He said that he was.

64I then turned to Sister Emma, his wife, and said, "Sister Emma, are you trying to live your religion? Do you teach your children to obey their parents? Do you try to teach them to pray?"

64To all these questions she answered, "Yes, I am trying to do so."

64I then turned to Joseph and said, "I am now through with my questions as a teacher; and now if you have any instructions to give, I shall be happy to receive them."

64He said, "God bless you, Brother William; and if you are humble and faithful, you shall have power to settle all difficulties that may come before you in the capacity of a teacher."

65I then left my parting blessing upon him and his family, as a teacher, and took my departure.

65Juvenile Instructor 27:492-93.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
