Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

69Beginnings of the Relief Society

69Ivan J. Barrett

69-70Early in 1842 Sarah M. Kimball [wife of Hiram Kimball] offered to furnish material if Miss Cook, her seamstress, would make shirts for the workmen on the Nauvoo Temple. Other women became interested in the project and suggested a society be organized for that purpose. At the home of Sarah Kimball, Eliza R. Snow was asked to draw up a constitution and by-laws to be submitted to the Prophet Joseph Smith for his approval.

70Joseph read Sister Snow's composition and said it was the best he had ever seen. "But," said he, "this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and He has something better for them than a written constitution. Invite them all to meet me and a few of the brethren in the Masonic Hall over at my store next Thursday afternoon, and I will organize the sisters under the priesthood after the pattern of the priesthood. This church will never be perfectly organized until the women are thus organized."

70Accordingly, the next Thursday, March 17, 1842, the Prophet . . . organized the women of Nauvoo into an association known today as the Relief Society. . . .

70There were seventeen meetings held by the Relief Society during the first year of its existence. The last meeting, on September 28, 1842, was held in the grove. The room above Joseph's store had long since become too small, for the membership had grown from 18 to 1,189. At some of these meetings Joseph met with and counseled the sisters. On April 28, 1842, he said:

71"Let this Society teach women how to behave towards their husbands, to treat them with mildness and affection. When a man is borne down with trouble, when he is perplexed with care and difficulty, if he can meet a smile instead of an argument or murmur—if he can meet with mildness, it will calm down his soul and soothe his feelings; when a mind is going to despair, it needs a solace of affection and kindness. You will receive instructions through the order of the Priesthood which God has established through the medium of those appointed to lead, guide and direct the affairs of the Church in this last dispensation; and I now turn the key in your behalf in the name of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the beginning of better days to the poor and needy, who shall be made to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads."

71Ivan J. Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1970), pp. 504-7.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
