Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

PioneersJudd, Camilla Woodbury88A Bright Red Shawl

88Camilla Woodbury Judd

88In May, 1856, [Robert and Ann Hartley Parker] with their four children, Max, 12; Martha Alice, 10; Arthur, 5; and Ada, one year old, left England by sailing vessel to join the Saints in Utah. . . . They went by rail to Iowa City where they continued their journey by handcart. All had their share of the work. Robert and Ann pulled the heavily loaded cart, Maxie pushed and Martha Alice followed with the younger children, taking care of little brother Arthur.

88-89One day, while going through the timberlands of Nebraska, Arthur became feverish and ill, and unnoticed by the other children, sat down to rest beside the trail. He was soon fast asleep. In the afternoon a sudden storm came up and the company hurried to make camp. Finding that Arthur was not with the children, they hurriedly organized a posse and went back to search for him. They returned with grim faces after two days' searching. The captain ordered the company to move on. Ann pleaded with him, but he set his jaw hard—the food was giving out and not another day could be lost.

89Ann Parker pinned a bright shawl about the thin shoulders of her husband and sent him back alone on the trail to search again for their child. If he found him dead he was to wrap him in the shawl; if alive, the shawl would be a flag to signal her. Ann and her children took up their load and struggled on with the company, while Robert retraced the miles of forest trail, calling, searching, and praying for his helpless little son. At last he reached a mail and trading station where he learned that his child had been cared for by a woodsman and his wife. He had been ill from exposure and fright. [But] God had heard the prayers of his people.

89Out on the trail each night Ann and her children kept watch, and when, on the third night, the rays of the setting sun caught the glimmer of a bright red shawl, the brave little mother sank in a pitiful heap in the sand. Completely exhausted, Ann slept for the first time in six long days and nights. God indeed was kind and merciful, and in the gladness of their hearts the Saints sang, "All is well. . . ."

89Kate B. Carter, comp., Treasures of Pioneer History (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1956), 5:240-41.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
