Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

PioneersSmith, Joseph Fielding93Mary Fielding Smith's Oxen Are Healed

93-94Joseph Fielding Smith

94After this," says President [Joseph F.] Smith, "we moved smoothly until we reached a point about mid-way between the Platte and Sweetwater, when one of our best oxen laid down in the yoke as if poisoned and all supposed he would die." The ox stiffened out spasmodically evidently in the throes of death. The death of this faithful animal would have been fatal to the progress of Widow Smith on the journey to the valley. She knew this, so also did Father ________. Naturally when the ox dropped to the ground all the wagons that were following came to a sudden stop.

94"At this Father ________ came up and seeing the cause of the disturbance he blustered about," President Smith has said, "as if the world were about at an end. ÂThere,' said he, ÂI told you you would have to be helped and that you would be a burden on the company.' But in this he was mistaken."

94Producing a bottle of consecrated oil, Widow Smith asked her brother and James Lawson if they would please administer to the ox just as they would do to a sick person, for it was vital to her interest that the ox be restored that she might pursue her journey. Her earnest plea was complied with. These brethren poured oil on the head of the ox and then laid their hands upon it and rebuked the power of the destroyer just as they would have done if the animal had been a human being. Immediately the ox got up and within a very few moments again pulled in the yoke as if nothing had ever happened. This was a great astonishment to the company.

94Before the company had proceeded very far another of her oxen fell down as the first, but with the same treatment he also got up, and this was repeated the third time; by administration the oxen were fully healed. This brought great chagrin to the countenance of the captain of the company.

94-95Widow Smith was not disturbed again until the company reached the Rattlesnake bend on the Sweetwater. At this place "Old Bully," one of the old oxen, laid down and died of sheer old age. He was hardly missed, however, as he had been unable to render but little service for some time.

95On reaching the last crossing of the Sweetwater, three of the Captain's oxen and his best mule laid down near the camp-ground and died. This was a sore trial to him, and, says President Joseph F. Smith, "a very great loss, as he was obliged to get help for himself before he could proceed."

95Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 150-51.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
