Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

PioneersMcArthur, Daniel D.98The Mishaps of Mary Bathgate and Isabella Parks

98-99 Daniel D. McArthur

99On 16 August 1856 on the pioneer trail] Sister Mary Bathgate was badly bitten by a large rattlesnake, just above the ankle, on the back part of her leg. She [and Sister Isabella Park were] about half a mile ahead of the camp at the time it happened. . . . They were both old women, over sixty years of age, and neither of them had ridden one inch since they had left Iowa campground. Sister Bathgate sent a little girl hurrying back to have me and Brothers Leonard and Crandall come with all haste, and bring the oil with us, for she was bitten badly.

99As soon as we heard the news, we left all things, and, with the oil, we went posthaste. When we got to her she was quite sick, but said that there was power in the priesthood, and she knew it. So we took a pocketknife, cut the wound larger, and squeezed out all the bad blood we could. . . . We then . . . anointed her . . . and laid our hands on her in the name of Jesus, and felt to rebuke the influence of the poison, and she felt full of faith. We then told her that she must get into the wagon, so she called witnesses to prove that she did not get into the wagon until she was compelled to because of the cursed snake. We started on and traveled two miles, when we stopped to take some refreshment. Sister Bathgate continued to be quite sick, but was full of faith, and after stopping one and a half hours we hitched up our teams. As the word was given for the teams to start, old Sister Isabella Park ran in before the wagon to see how her companion was. The driver, not seeing her, hallooed at his team, and they being quick to mind, Sister Park could not get out of the way, and the fore wheel struck her and threw her down and passed over both her hips. Brother Leonard grabbed hold of her to pull her out of the way, before the hind wheel could catch her. He only got her part way and the hind wheel passed over her ankles.

100We all thought that she would be all mashed to pieces, but to the joy of us all, there was not a bone broken, although the wagon had something like two tons burden on it, a load for four yoke of oxen. We went right to work and applied the same medicine to her that we did to the sister who was bitten by the rattlesnake, and although quite sore for a few days, Sister Park got better, so that she was [back walking] before we got into the Valley, and Sister Bathgate was right by her side, to cheer her up.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
