Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Handcart CompaniesKimball, Solomon F.PioneersHafen, Anne W.PioneersHafen, LeRoy R.100Rescue of the Willie and Martin Handcart Companies

100Solomon F. Kimball

100On the evening of the 20th [of October], they [the rescue party] turned down to a sheltered place on the Sweetwater, and camped for the night, for men and animals were completely exhausted. Just as they were located, here came Captain Willie and Joseph B. Elder, on two worn-out mules, with news that their company, east of Rocky Ridge, was in a freezing, starving condition, and would perish unless immediate relief was given.

100-101The boys [sent on the rescue] soon hitched their teams again and continued on their way as long as their animals could stand it. At daylight the next morning another start was made, and they continued going until the Willie camp was reached. Before they had time to alight from their wagons they witnessed sights that were enough to move the hardest heart. These poor unfortunates, numbering a little less than five hundred, were caught in a place where there was neither wood nor shelter. They had not had anything to eat for forty-eight hours, and were literally freezing and starving to death.

101The Salt Lake boys were soon mounted on harnessed mules, with axes in hand, and in a short time dragged from the distant hills several cords of wood to the Willie camp below. Bonfires were soon made, and the cooking began in earnest, every available person taking a hand. This was kept up until every member of the Willie company had enough to eat and to spare. Soon there was an improvement in camp, but the relief came too late for some, and nine deaths occurred that night.

101This is what Brother John Chislett, a member of that ill-fated company, had to say about that portion of the journey:

101"We traveled on in misery and sorrow, day after day, sometimes going quite a distance, and at other times we were only able to walk a few miles. We were finally overtaken by a snowstorm which the fierce winds blew furiously about our ears, but we dare not stop, as we had sixteen miles to make that day in order to reach wood and water. . . .

101"Just as the sun was sinking behind the distant cliffs west of our camp, several covered wagons were seen coming towards us. The news spread through the camp like wildfire, and all who were able turned out en masse. Shouts of joy rent the air, strong men wept, and children danced with gladness. As the brethren entered our camp the sisters fell upon them and deluged them with their tears and kisses. Our rescuers were so overcome that they could hardly speak, but in choking silence attempted to repress the emotions that evidently mastered them. Soon, however the feeling was somewhat abated, and such a shaking of hands, such words of comfort, and such invocations of God's blessings were never before witnessed. . . ."

101-102The next morning, agreeable to plans adopted by the relief party, at a meeting held the evening before, Captain George D. Grant, with seventeen men and nine teams, pushed on to the relief of the Martin, Hodgett and Hunt companies, taking most of the provisions with him, while William H. Kimball, with the remainder of the outfit, started back to Salt Lake in charge of the Willie company. It was late in the day before Elder Kimball got the handcart people started, as they were in such a weakened condition. About forty of their number had already perished, and others were dying. . . .

102On the morning of October 22, 1856, fifteen members of the relief party, under the leadership of Captain George D. Grant, bade farewell to the handcart folks, at Rocky Ridge, and proceeded to their journey to the east. . . .

102Sunday, 26th, was a day of rest in very deed, a good, necessary thing for both men and beasts. After traveling more than three hundred miles, in a little less than nineteen days, over almost impassable roads, the boys were so completely exhausted that Captain Grant was compelled to call a halt. The day was spent in fasting and prayer, and in preparing themselves to receive the mind and the will of the Lord in relation to their future movements. . . .

102[Several days later], "We found the Martin company in a deplorable condition, they having lost fifty-six of their number since crossing the North Platte, nine days before. Their provisions were nearly gone, and their clothing almost worn out. Most of their bedding had been left behind, as they were unable to haul it, on account of their weakened condition. We advised them to move on, every day, just as far as they could, as that was the only possible show they had to escape death. . . .

102"When we overtook the Martin company, we found them strung out for miles. Old men were tugging at loaded carts, women pulling sick husbands, children struggling through the deep snow, and so it went. They camped that night in a place where there was neither wood nor shelter, and the weather was bitter cold. Several deaths occurred that night, and others were dying." . . .

102-103On the morning of November 3, Captain Grant sent by couriers the following dispatch to President Brigham Young:

103"There is not much use for me to attempt to give a description of these people; for this you will learn from your son, Joseph, and from Brother Garr, who are the bearers of this message. You can imagine between five and six hundred men, women and children, worn down by drawing carts through mud and snow, fainting by the wayside, children crying with cold, their limbs stiffened, their feet bleeding, and some of them bare to the frost. The sight is too much for the stoutest of us, but we go on doing our duty, not doubting, nor despairing. Our party is too small to be much of a help. The assistance we give is only a drop in the bucket, as it were, in comparison to what is needed. I believe that not more than one-third of the Martin company will be able to walk any further. You may think this extravagant, but, nevertheless, it is true. Some of the emigrants have good courage, but a great many of them are like children, and do not realize what is before them.

103"I have never felt so much interest in any mission that I have ever before been called to perform, and all the boys who came with me feel the same. We have prayed without ceasing, and the blessings of the Lord have been with us. Brother Charles F. Decker, who has traveled this road forty-nine times, declares that he never before saw so much snow on the Sweetwater as there is at the present time.

104"Brother Hunt's company is two days back on the road, and Cyrus H. Wheelock and some of the other brethren are with him. We will try to move towards the Valley every day, even if we have to shovel snow to do it, the Lord being our helper. I have never before seen such energy and faith among the boys as is manifested on this trip." . . .

104To describe conditions surrounding the old fort at Devil's Gate during the first few days of November, 1856, would be a difficult task. About twenty-five out of the nine hundred emigrants who had arrived there since the 2nd of the month, had already perished, and others were lying at the point of death. Their food supply was nearly exhausted, and there were no signs of help. The snow was eighteen inches deep on the level, and the weather intensely cold. Feed was scarce, and cattle were dying by the score. Wood was almost out of the question, and the more feeble among the Saints were literally freezing to death. Unless immediate steps were taken to relieve the situation, all would perish together.

104Captain Grant, thoroughly conversant with these facts, ordered his men to make a start for the west in charge of the Martin company even if they accomplished no more than to find a better camping ground where wood and feed could be secured in greater abundance. Those of the handcart people who were unable to walk were crowded into the overloaded wagons, and a start was made; the balance of the company hobbling along behind with their carts as best as they could.

104-105When the boys came to the first crossing of the Sweetwater west of Devil's Gate, they found the stream full of floating ice, making it dangerous to cross, on account of the strong current. However, the teams went over in safety and continued on their way until they came to a sheltered place, afterwards called "Martin's Hollow." Here they camped for the night and, after burying a number of Saints who had died during the day, busied themselves in getting ready to receive the remainder of the company who were expected at any moment.

105When the people who were drawing carts came to the brink of this treacherous stream, they refused to go any further, realizing what it meant to do so, as the water in places was almost waist deep, and the river more than a hundred feet wide by actual measurement. To cross that mountain torrent under such conditions to them meant nothing short of suicide, as it will be remembered that nearly one-sixth of their number had already perished from the effects of crossing North Platte, eighteen days before. They believed that no earthly power could bring them through that place alive, and reasoned that if they had to die it was useless to add to their suffering by the perpetration of such a rash act as crossing the river here. They had walked hundreds of miles over an almost trackless plain, pulling carts as they went, and after making such tremendous sacrifices for the cause of truth, to lay down their lives in such a dreadful manner was awful to contemplate. They became alarmed, and cried mightily unto the Lord for help, but received no answer. All the warring elements of nature appeared to be against them, and the spirit of death itself seemed to be in the very air.

105After they had given up in despair, after all hopes had vanished, after every apparent avenue of escape seemed closed, three eighteen-year-old boys belonging to the relief party came to the rescue, and to the astonishment of all who saw, carried nearly every member of that ill-fated handcart company across the snowbound stream. The strain was so terrible, and the exposure so great, that in later years all the boys died from the effects of it. When President Brigham Young heard of this heroic act, he wept like a child, and later declared publicly, "that act alone will ensure C. Allen Huntington, George W. Grant and David P. Kimball an everlasting salvation in the Celestial Kingdom of God, worlds without end." . . .

106On the evening of the 11th, the food supply was found to be exhausted, and no signs of relief in sight. A half dozen or more deaths were occurring daily, and the strongest emigrants in camp were fast becoming discouraged. The snow was badly drifted, and the weather bitter cold. Not a word from the Valley had reached the ears of Captain Grant since the company of rescuers left there thirty-six days before, and unless substantial aid reached them within the next few days, that region of country would become a veritable graveyard.

106Just before sundown, a dark something in the distance, was seen working its way through the deep snow. It was thought to be a wild beast of some kind. At first but little attention was paid to it, but as it drew nearer, all eyes were turned in that direction. It finally took the form of a man, and two animals, which caused a general sensation throughout the camp. Everybody by this time was on the tiptoe of expectancy and in a few moments their surprise was complete when the chief scout of all scouts, Ephraim K. Hanks, came limping into camp with horses loaded with buffalo meat.

106In substance the following is the story told by Elder Hanks and verified in many instances by those who were well acquainted with most of the circumstances:

106"I was down to Provo on a fishing expedition, and felt impressed to go to Salt Lake, but for what reason I knew not. On my way there, I stopped overnight with Gurney Brown at Draper. Being somewhat fatigued after the hard day's journey, I retired to rest early, and as I lay awake in my bed, I heard a voice calling me by name and then saying: ÂThe handcart people are in trouble, and you are wanted; will you go help them?' I turned instantly in the direction from whence the voice came, and beheld an ordinary-sized man in the room. Without any hesitation I answered, ÂYes, I will go.' I then turned over to go to sleep, but had slept only a few minutes when the voice called a second time, repeating almost the same words as on the first occasion. My answer was the same as before. This was repeated the third time.

106"When I got up the next morning, I said to Brother Brown, ÂThe handcart people are in trouble, and I have promised to go out and help them.'

107"After breakfast I hastened on to Salt Lake and arrived there on the Saturday preceding the Sunday on which the call was made for volunteers to go and help the last handcart company in. When some of the brethren responded by saying that they would be ready to start in a few days, I spoke out at once, saying, ÂI am ready now.'

107"The next day I was wending my way eastward over the mountains with a light wagon, all by myself. About ten miles east of Green River, I met quite a number of teams that had been sent to the relief of the belated companies but had turned back on account of the deep snow. Those in charge had come to the conclusion that the emigrants as well as the twenty-seven heroes who had gone to their relief, had all perished, and they did not propose to risk their lives by going any further.

107"I helped myself to such things as I was in need of, and continued on my way. Just before I reached South Pass, I was overtaken by one of the worst storms that I ever witnessed. Near the summit, I came to a wagon partly loaded with provisions in charge of Redick N. Allred. After enjoying a needed rest, I secured from him a saddled horse and pack animal, and continued on my way in snow almost to my waist.

107"After traveling for a day or two, I met Joseph A. Young and one of the Garr boys on their way to Salt Lake with important messages for Brigham Young. The next evening as I was making my bed, I thought to myself how nice it would be to have a buffalo robe to lie on, and some fresh meat for supper. I kneeled down and asked the Lord to send me a buffalo. Looking around, imagine my surprise when I beheld a big, fat, buffalo bull within fifty yards of my camp. As soon as I could get my gun I brought him down with the first shot. After eating tongue and tenderloin to my heart's content, I went to sleep while my horses were loading up on sagebrush.

107-108"The next day I reached Ice Spring Bench, about sixty miles west of Devil's Gate, and killed another big, fat, buffalo. I cut the meat into long, thin, strips, and lashed it onto my horses. I traveled on until towards evening when I spied in the distance a black streak in the snow. As I drew nearer, it seemed to move, and then I knew what it was.

108"About sundown, I reached the ill-fated handcart camp, and the sight that met my eyes was enough to rouse the emotions of the hardest heart. The starving forms and haggard looks of those poor, dejected creatures can never be blotted from my mind. Flocking around me, one would say, ÂPlease give me some meat for my hungry children.' Shivering urchins with tears streaming down their cheeks would cry out, ÂPlease, mister, give me some,' and so it went. In less than ten minutes the meat was all gone, and in a short time everybody was eating bison with a relish that did one's eyes good to behold.

108"During the evening, a woman passed by the fire where I was sitting and seemed to be in great trouble. Out of curiosity I followed her to Daniel Tyler's tent, some distance away. She asked him if he would please come and administer to her sick husband. Brother Tyler accompanied her, and when he looked at the man he said, ÂI cannot administer to a dead man,' and returned to his tent, as he was almost sick himself. I went over to the campfire where Captain Grant and Heber P. Kimball were sitting, and asked them if they would assist me for a few moments, which they consented to do. We washed the man from head to foot with warm water, and then administered to him. During the administration I commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to breathe and live. The effect was almost instantaneous, and he immediately sat up in bed and sang a song. His wife was so overjoyed that she ran through the camp crying, ÂMy husband was dead, but the man who has brought the meat has healed him.'

108"This event caused general sensation throughout the camp, and many drooping spirits took fresh courage from that very moment. After that the most of my time was spent in looking after the sick and afflicted. Some days I anointed and administered to as many as one or two hundred and in scores of instances they were healed almost instantly.

108-109"Notwithstanding these wonderful manifestations of God's power, many of the Saints lost their limbs either whole or in part. Many I washed with warm water and castile soap until the frozen parts would fall off, after which I would sever the shreds of flesh from the remaining portions of their limbs with my scissors. Some lost toes, some fingers, and others whole hands and feet. One woman lost both of her lower limbs to her knees.

109"As the company moved on from day to day, I would leave the road with my pack animals and hunt game. On these trips I killed many buffaloes, and distributed the meat among the hungry Saints. The most remarkable thing about it was that I had traveled that road more than fifty times, and never before saw so many buffaloes in that part of the country. There was not a member of the party but what believed that the Lord had sent them to us in answer to prayer."

109On the 17th, the emigrants were filled with delight when they met William H. Kimball at the head of another relief party. It will be remembered that Elder Kimball took charge of the Willie company, at Rocky Ridge, on the morning of October 22, and remained with it until it reached the Valley on the 9th of November. After remaining in Salt Lake one day, he started back with several light wagons loaded with provisions, clothing, and medicines. . . .

109The company reached South Pass on the 18th, after facing a terrible snow storm all day. There was considerable wailing among those of the emigrants who were compelled to walk, as their feet, by this time, were in dreadful condition. From there on, they met teams almost every day and soon had wagons enough to carry them all.

109-110On November 30, the four hundred and thirteen survivors of the Martin company reached Salt Lake, and the emigrants that belonged to the Hunt and Hodgett wagon trains came straggling along until the middle of the next month. Nearly all the cattle that were taken from Devil's Gate perished before they reached Fort Bridger.

110Probably no greater act of heroism was ever recorded in the annals of history than that performed by the twenty-seven young men who, on the morning of October 7, 1856, went from the city of the Great Salt Lake to the relief of the 1,550 belated emigrants, who were caught in the early snows of a severe winter, hundreds of miles from human habitation, without food and without shelter. By their indefatigable labors these brave mountain boys were instruments in the hands of the Lord in saving 1,300 of that number. Had it not been for their heroic efforts, not enough emigrants would have been left to tell the dreadful tale.

110Improvement Era 17:112-17, 201-10, 287-99.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
