Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

PioneersWhitney, Orson F.Holy Ghost, Gifts ofWhitney, Orson F.120"Cheaper Than in New York"

120Orson F. Whitney

120It was during this time of famine, when the half-starved, half-clad settlers scarcely knew where to look for the next crust of bread or for rags to hide their nakedness—for clothing had become almost as scarce with them as bread-stuffs—that Heber C. Kimball, filled with the spirit of prophecy, in a public meeting declared to the astonished congregation that, within a short time, "States goods" would be sold in the streets of Great Salt Lake City cheaper than in New York and that the people should be abundantly supplied with food and clothing.

120"I don't believe a word of it," said Charles C. Rich; and he but voiced the sentiment of nine-tenths of those who had heard the astounding declaration.

120-121Heber himself was startled at his own words, as soon as the Spirit's force had abated and the "natural man" had reasserted itself. On resuming his seat, he remarked to the brethren that he was afraid he "had missed it this time." But they were not his own words, and He who had inspired them knew how to fulfill.

121The occasion for the fulfillment of this remarkable prediction was the unexpected advent of the gold-hunters, on their way to California. The discovery of gold in that land had set on fire, as it were, the civilized world, and hundreds of richly laden trains now began pouring across the continent on their way to the new El Dorado. Salt Lake Valley became the resting place, or "half-way house" of the nation, and before the Saints had had time to recover from their surprise at Heber's temerity in making such a prophecy, the still more wonderful fulfillment was brought to their very doors.

121The gold-hunters were actuated by but one desire; to reach the Pacific Coast. . . . Impatient at their slow progress, in order to lighten their loads, they threw away or "sold for a song" the valuable merchandise with which they had stored their wagons to cross the Plains. Their choice, blooded, though now jaded stock, they eagerly exchanged for the fresh mules and horses of the pioneers, and bartered off, at almost any sacrifice, dry goods, groceries, provisions, tools, clothing, etc., for the most primitive outfits, with barely enough provisions to enable them to reach their journey's end.

121Thus, as . . . Heber had predicted, "States goods" were actually sold in the streets of Great Salt Lake City cheaper than they could have been purchased in the City of New York.

121Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Stevens & Wallis, 1945), pp. 389-91.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
