Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

GenerosityCrosby, Caroline134"A Present for His Faithfulness"

134Caroline Crosby

134Times became very hard in[Kirt[land]. It seemed that our enemies were determined to drive us away if they could possibly, by starving us. None of the business men would employ a Mormon scarcely, on any conditions. And our prophet was continually harassed with vexatious lawsuits. Besides, the great apostacy in the church added a double portion of distress and suffering to those who wished to abide in the faith, and keep the commandments.

134-135We became very short of provisions, several times ate the last we had and knew not where the next meal was coming from. We then had an opportunity to try the charity of the brethren, who were many of them in the same predicament as ourselves. I recollect that Wm Cahoon called in to see us one night, as he was going home with a few quarts of corn meal, and inquired if we had any breadstuff on hand, we told him we had not. He said he would divide what he had with us, and if my husband would go home with him, he would also divide his potatoes and meat which bore the same proportion to his meal. Joseph Young also divided with us several times in the same way, and we with him. We had numerous opportunities of dividing almost our last loaf with the brethren.

135Mr C worked on br Joseph's house, as he was building tolerably large, but frequently got so straitened that he had nothing to give the workmen when Saturday night came, and they were obliged to borrow or do without. They all left at one time, except Mr C, he worked on for several days alone. Sister Emma observing that he was laboring there alone, came in one day, and inquired of him whether or where he got his provision. He told her he was entirely without, and knew not where to look, as he had no money and the boss who employed him had no means in his hands. She then went into her chamber, and brought him a nice ham [weighing] 20 lbs., telling him that it was a present for his faithfulness, and that he should bring a sack, and get as much flour as he could to take home. Accordingly he came home rejoicing, considering it a perfect Godsend. It was a beautiful white flour, and the ham was very sweet. I thought nothing ever tasted half as good.

135Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 55-56.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
