Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

FaithCornaby, Hannah137-138"What a Dinner We Had That Day"

138-139Hannah Cornaby

139One morning having, as usual, attended to family prayer, in which, with greater significance than is often used, we asked, "give us this day our daily bread;" and having eaten a rather scanty breakfast—every morsel we had in the house—Edith was wondering what we should have for dinner, and why Pa had not sent us some fish. I, too, was anxious, not having heard from Provo for some days; so, telling my darlings I would go and see if Sister Ellen Jackson, (whose husband was also one of the fishing party), had heard any news, I started off. Sister Jackson had not heard from the fishery, but was quite cheerful; and telling me how well her garden was growing, added that the radishes were fit for use, and insisted that I must have some. It was good to see something to eat; and, quite pleased, I bade her good morning. I passed on my way the house of Brother Charles Gray, and Sister Gray asked me where I had got such fine radishes. I told her, and offered to divide them with her, to which she agreed, providing I would take in exchange some lettuce and cress, of which she had plenty. She filled a pan with these; and I hurried away thinking how pleased my children would be, if only we had bread to eat with them.

139As I was passing Brother Simon Baker's house, Sister Baker saw me, and invited me in. I told her I had left my children and could not stop long. She then asked me where I had got such nice green stuff, and when I told her, and offered her some, she replied, "If I could exchange some for butter, I would be glad." She then gave me a piece of nice fresh butter, which had just come from their dairy on the Jordan; and also a large slice of cheese. If I only had bread, I thought, how good these would be! Just then my eyes rested upon a large vessel full of broken bread. Sister Baker, seeing I had noticed it, told me its history. It had been sent the day before, in a sack, to the canyon where her husband had a number of men working. On the way it had fallen from the wagon and been crushed under the wheel. She did not know what to do with it, remarking that she would offer me some of it but feared I would feel insulted, although she assured me it was perfectly clean. I accepted her offer, and, after filling a large pan, she sent her daughter home with me to carry it.

140The children were watching for my return; and when they saw the bread, they clapped their hands with delight. Bread, butter, cheese, radishes, lettuce, and cress! What a dinner we had that day! Elijah never enjoyed the dinner the ravens brought him more than I did that meal; nor did he more fully understand that a kind Providence had furnished it.

140Hannah Cornaby, Autobiography and Poems (Salt Lake City: J. C. Graham Co., 1881), pp. 41-42.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
