Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

165"If We Only Live Right"

165LeGrand Richards

165A few weeks ago, a young lady phoned me for an appointment; and when she came to the office, she sat there and cried for a little while, and then she said: "I guess I'm jittery."

166"Well," I said, "that's all right." Then when she had composed herself, she said, "Bishop, what is there for the young people today? We have war. They are taking all the boys; it looks like another great war is ahead of us. What do we young people have to live for?"

166I looked at her for a few minutes and said, "Have you ever thought of the other side of the story?"

166She said, "What side?"

166"Well," I said, "you remember the story of the two buckets that went down in the well; as the one came up, it said, ÂThis is surely a cold and dreary world. No matter how many times I come up full, I always have to go down empty.' Then the other bucket laughed and said, ÂWith me it is different. No matter how many times I go down empty, I always come up full.'"

166I said, "Have you ever stopped to realize that of all the millions of our Father's children, you are one of the most favored? You are privileged to live in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times that the prophets of old have looked forward to, when there is more revealed truth upon the earth than there has ever been in any other dispensation of the world's history, and where we enjoy blessings and comforts of life that kings did not enjoy a few years ago. Have you ever stopped to think of that side of the story?"

166And before she left, she decided that probably it wasn't as cold and dreary a world, after all, as it might be.

167I said, "You just go on, and live right, and don't you lose your courage, and don't think that life isn't worthwhile and isn't worth living. Whether you live or whether you die or whether you are permitted to live a long life or a short life isn't going to be the thing that is going to determine the success or failure of your life; it's how you live. And if we only live right, it will not matter whether the time is short or long; we won't have to worry much about it."

167Conference Report, April 1951, pp. 39-40.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
