Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Word of WisdomHinckley, Bryant S.167"Were Your Prayers Answered?"

167Bryant S. Hinckley

167-168In 1903 at one of the meetings of a stake conference of the Utah Stake of Zion, held at Provo, sat a mother and her eight-year-old son [Creed Haymond]. Reed Smoot, as an apostle, promised the boys who were there that if they would do certain things, referring to the Word of Wisdom, they would be blessed accordingly. After the meeting, on their way home to Springville (this was in the horse and buggy days), this fond mother stopped the horses and said to her boy, "Will you promise me that you will never use tobacco or liquor?" He promised her, and she kissed him on his forehead. . . .

168[Years later, Dr. Creed Haymond related a wonderful experience associated with that promise:] "It was in 1903, when I was only eight years of age, that I gave the promise. Then a period of sixteen years passed, and I found myself in Boston, representing the University of Pennsylvania, running in the I.C.A.A.A. track meet. The night before the finals, Lawson Robertson, coach of the University of Pennsylvania track team and coach of five Olympic teams, came to me and said: ÂCreed, you are captain of this track team, and on your shoulders rests the responsibility of winning this championship tomorrow. You have been training faithfully since Christmas. (It was then June.) I want you to take this glass of sherry wine, because I fear that by tomorrow you may go stale.' I had a great shock. A deep emotion went through my soul. I said, ÂRobbie, ask me anything but that, and I will do it. But that I cannot do.' He replied, ÂI ought to know what is best for you. I have been in this business for a long time, and I know that men overtrain and go stale. I am not trying to corrupt your morals or your ideals. I am doing this for your benefit.' I said, ÂI can't do it, Robbie, and I won't do it.' He said, ÂAll right, but if we lose, you must shoulder the responsibility.'

168"I felt very badly. This was one of the crucial events of my life. I had won the championship the previous year in the sprints and wished to repeat, as it never had been repeated two years in succession. I went to my room, undressed and kneeled beside the bed to pray, having decided to take the problem to the Lord. I prayed: ÂHeavenly Father, I have been taught all my life that the Word of Wisdom was divinely given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and was meant for the benefit of Thy children of the Covenant. Will Thou manifest to me if this principle is true in its portents, that I might know for myself of its divine authenticity, and whether or not I have acted wisely in this matter. If Thou will bless me with a witness—a testimony of this principle—I will pledge my life in Thy service wherever I may be called. This I will do if Thou will bless me with a witness.'

168-169"I jumped into bed and for the only time in my life, on the night preceding a track meet, I slept soundly for nine hours without waking. The next morning at seven o'clock, hearing a knock on my door, I jumped up and opened the door, and there stood my coach. He was pale and concerned. He inquired, ÂHow are you?' I told him that I felt fine. He informed me that all the men were ill and were vomiting. I asked the cause of their illness, and if it could have been the wine. He answered that he did not know the cause.

169"This was event number two of a series of startling events. We went out to the field, and these things happened: Carl Johnson, sprinter of the University of Michigan, was six feet one inch tall. When you start in a race, you dig holes in the ground so that you can get a fast start. In the semi-finals, he had picked lane number two, and the spread between his feet was long. In the finals of the one hundred, I had picked the same lane. Being short-legged, the spread between my feet was shorter than his. I dug my holes in front of the place where his holes had been dug, which place was filled with soft dirt. There were six men in the final event, having won through the elimination of fifty-four starters the day before. Every man was keyed for the one-hundred-yard sprint championship of America. We got on our mark; the starter pulled the gun, and we went. I made a terrific surge and my hold broke, and I slipped and fell on my knee. I didn't stay there, but in desperation I got up and was after the other men, the leading man being four yards ahead of me. It seemed an impossible task; I gave everything that I had. When I got to eighty-five yards, I still was in third place; at ninety-five yards I was in second place. It seemed that I was literally picked off my feet as I hit the tape, winner of the one-hundred-yard dash championship. I know I shouldn't have won the race, and couldn't have done so under any conditions dependent upon myself alone.

169"Then another startling thing happened. It was the only time of my life of eleven years of running that I have ever seen a condition exist where the field events were completed before the finals of the track events. The semi-final of the two hundred twenty was held after all other events were finished. I was in the last semifinal. Just before I got on my marks, it was announced to the crowd that Haymond of Pennsylvania was going to try for a world's record in the two hundred twenty straight-away, as I already had broken the record on a curved track in the two hundred twenty in 1915. In desperation to break a record, I gave everything I had. Instead of running out easy and free, I was bound up and ran straight up and down and ran the two hundred twenty in twenty-one and three-fifths of a second, which missed the world's record by two-fifths of a second. As I finished the race, the clerk of the course came over and said, ÂGo right back to the start; the day is late and they are going to run the two hundred twenty finals.'

169"I was out of breath and said, ÂI cannot run in this condition!'

169-170"He stated, ÂBut you have to!'

170"So, as I went to the start of the two hundred twenty, Billy Moore, captain of the Harvard team, who had run just previous to me, came up and said: ÂHaymond, they are going to make us run now. You are in no condition to run and you have a right to demand a rest.' So I went over to the starter and said, ÂMr. Reynolds, you can see that I am in no condition to run. I demand a rest before the finals.' He said, ÂAll right, Haymond, I will give you ten minutes.' Just as he said that, the telephone rang and the referee said: ÂRun the race immediately.' The clerk of the course said, ÂGentlemen, I am sorry, but come to your marks.'

170"I was exhausted. As trained, the runner should take a deep breath. As I took a deep breath, it seemed that a draft went through me and cleared my whole system of exhaustion. I was as rested and as free of exhaustion as I was in the early morning. When the gun went off, we were gone. In place of running tied up, I ran free and easy and won the race. I was thrilled, having won under these conditions, and started off the field without inquiring as to the time. Halfway to the gymnasium, I felt someone pick me up in his arms. It was my coach. He weighed two hundred twenty pounds and I weighed one hundred thirty-five. As he took me in his arms and squeezed me, he said: ÂI wanted to be the first to tell you that you just ran the fastest two hundred twenty of any human who ever ran. You just ran twenty-one seconds flat.'

170-171"Of course I was thrilled. I dressed, went back to the hotel, and being very tired, I went to bed early. I suppose this was the first time in my life that I had ever gone to bed without saying my prayers, but I am human. I had broken a record; I had received congratulations from men of all stations; I was somewhat of a hero. When I went to bed, I wasn't thinking of prayer. I was thinking of the thrills of the day. I was just about to drop off to sleep when I heard within my mind these words, ÂWere your prayers answered?'

171"I woke up with a start. Then, as I thought of the conditions that existed, having slept all the previous night without waking; the other men having taken the wine were sick; and although we had five intercollegiate champions, not one of the other four placed better than third place in times that were slower than their try-out times the previous week; having won the one hundred when I shouldn't have won it—I know I wouldn't have won it and God knows I would not have won it alone; having won the two hundred and twenty and broken the record under conditions which normally would have made it impossible for me to win; as I meditated and reflected upon this series of events, I decided that my prayers had been answered. Now I hoped that I would be able to fulfill my part of the pledge, and that in the great future following 1919 I would be able to live and give service according to the promises I made with my Father in Heaven."

171Bryant S. Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers (Salt Lake City, Deseret Book Co., 1965), pp. 195-201.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
