Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Tithes and OfferingsKnowles, Eleanor171"I Would Henceforth Be a Full Tithe Payer"

171-172Eleanor Knowles

172Early spring in 1931, Claire and Howard [W. Hunter] were talking seriously about marriage. In his history he wrote: "I had not given up the hope of going on a mission and I had saved some money with that in mind. Claire offered to help support me and wait for me until I returned. Even though I appreciated the offer, I could not accept the proposal of having her work and support me. We finally decided that it would be better for us to get married and at a later time, as soon as conditions might permit, we would go on a mission together.

172"One beautiful spring evening, we drove to Palos Verdes and parked on the cliffs where we could watch the waves roll in from the Pacific and break over the rocks in the light of a full moon. We talked about our plans and I put a diamond ring on her finger. We made many decisions that night and some strong resolutions regarding our lives. The moon was setting in the west and dawn was just commencing to break when we got home."

172The couple decided to be married in the Salt Lake Temple in June. Howard went to his bishop, told him of his plans, and asked for a temple recommend. He was stunned when Bishop Brigham J. Peacock said he couldn't understand how Howard could support a wife on his small income.

172"When I told him how much I was making," Howard wrote, "he said the reason for his doubt as to my ability to support a wife was based on the amount of tithing I had paid. Suddenly I became conscious of the seriousness of not being a full tithe payer.

172"Because my father had not been a member of the Church during my years at home, tithing had never been discussed in our family and I had never considered its importance. As we talked, I realized that the bishop did not intend to give me a temple recommendation. In his kindly way he taught me the importance of the law and when I told him I would henceforth be a full tithe payer, he continued the interview and relieved my anxiety by filling out and signing a recommendation form."

173Howard related his experience to Claire, who had always been a full tithe payer. As a result, he said, "we resolved that we would live this law throughout our marriage and tithing would come first."

173Eleanor Knowles, Howard W. Hunter (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994), pp. 80-81.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
