Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

Tithes and OfferingsNibley, Preston173A Testimony of Tithing

173Preston Nibley

173While visiting in Providence, Rhode Island, on April 25, 1926, I remarked to the president of the branch that he must have an outstanding testimony of the law of tithing, since I had noted that he paid a large tithing and paid it so regularly. He replied that he had, and I asked him if he would mind relating the same to me, which he did in about the following manner.

173He said that his wife and children joined the Church in England some years before, and when he indicated the name of the Elder who preached the gospel to them, I found that he was one of my early M.I.A. teachers. He said that the reason he didn't join the Church was because he did not have faith to pay his tithing and he did not want to be a hypocrite. Some time later when one of the young missionaries was being released to return home he came to this brother and told him he wanted to baptize him before returning home, to which the brother replied: "You cannot because I haven't the faith to pay my tithing, and I do not want to be a hypocrite."

173-174The spirit of the Lord seemed to rest upon the young missionary, and he replied in words something like this, "Brother ________, if you will let me baptize you before I return home, I promise you that within a year from now you will be in America with your family, and will be earning three times as much as you are at the present."

174The brother said he could not resist availing himself of such a promise, and so he was baptized. He said he could not feel that the promise could come true, as he at the time was under contract to work for the company he was with for an additional two years. It was during the time of the world war when we had such a difficult time to get cloth in this country that would hold its color, and the dye workers of America sent representatives to England to induce some of the dye workers there to come to America and teach them how to make dyes. Representatives of the American firms called on this man's father, and he indicated that he was not interested, but his son might be. So they approached the son. He said that he could not accept their offer because he was bound to work for his company for an additional two years. They asked if he would be willing to go if they would buy [his contract] so the company would release him from his contract, and he indicated that he would.

175"Now," he said, "the Lord just threw in a little for good measure. Within a year's time according to the promise of the Elder, I was in America with my wife and children, and was earning four times as much as I was when he made me that promise." The genuineness of this experience is attested by the faithfulness of this brother in the payment of his tithing, following his baptism into the Church.

175Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942), pp. 310-11.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
