Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

CourageSmith, Lucy Mack181"I Should Not Like to Be Murdered by Inches"

181Lucy Mack Smith

181-182A few days subsequent to [a mob attack], Joseph was at our house writing a letter. While he was thus engaged, I stepped to the door, and looking towards the prairie, I beheld a large company of armed men advancing towards the city, but, as I supposed it to be training day, said nothing about it.

182Presently the main body came to a halt. The officers dismounting, eight of them came into the house. Thinking they had come for some refreshment, I offered them chairs, but they refused to be seated, and, placing themselves in a line across the floor, continued standing. I again requested them to sit, but they replied, "We do not choose to sit down; we have come here to kill Joe Smith and all the ÂMormons.'"

182"Ah," said I, "what has Joseph Smith done, that you should want to kill him?"

182"He has killed seven men in Daviess county," replied the foremost, "and we have come to kill him, and all his Church."

182"He has not been in Daviess county," I answered, "consequently the report must be false. Furthermore, if you should see him, you would not want to kill him."

182"There is no doubt that the report is perfectly correct," rejoined the officer; "it came straight to us, and I believe it; and we were sent to kill the Prophet and all who believe in him, and I'll be d——- if I don't execute my orders."

182"I suppose," said I, "you intend to kill me, with the rest?"

182"Yes, we do," returned the officer.

182"Very well," I continued, "I want you to act the gentleman about it, and do the job quick. Just shoot me down at once, then I shall be at rest; but I should not like to be murdered by inches."

182"There it is again," said he. "You tell a ÂMormon' that you will kill him, and they will always tell you, Âthat is nothing—if you kill us, we shall be happy.'"

182-183Joseph, just at this moment finished his letter, and, seeing that he was at liberty, I said, "Gentlemen, suffer me to make you acquainted with Joseph Smith, the Prophet." They stared at him as if he were a spectre. He smiled, and stepping towards them, gave each of them his hand, in a manner which convinced them that he was neither a guilty criminal nor yet a hypocrite.

183Joseph then sat down and explained to them the views, feelings, etc., of the Church, and what their course had been; besides the treatment which they had received from their enemies since the first. He also argued, that if any of the brethren had broken the law, they ought to be tried by the law, before anyone else was molested. After talking with them some time in this way, he said, "Mother, I believe I will go home now—Emma will be expecting me." At this two of the men sprang to their feet, and declared that he should not go alone, as it would be unsafe that they would go with him, in order to protect him. Accordingly the three left together. . . .

183The men who went home with my son promised to disband the militia under them and go home, which they accordingly did, and we supposed that peace was again restored.

183Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, edited by Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), pp. 254-56.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
