Jack M. Lyon, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jay A. Parry, Best-Loved Stories of the LDS People, Vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997)

186"Sentenced to Be Shot"

186-187From Millennial Star

187In October, 1838, after learning that Far West was surrounded by a mob, [Lyman Wight] raised fifty-three volunteers in Adam-ondi-Ahman (25 miles distant) and repaired immediately to Far West to aid in its defence, where with Joseph and Hyrum Smith and others, he was betrayed into the hands of his enemies, by Colonel George M. Hinkle, on the 31st; and was sentenced by a court-martial to be shot the next morning (November 1st) [1838] at 8 o'clock. During the evening, General Moses Wilson took him out by himself, and tried to induce him to betray Joseph Smith, and swear falsely against him; at which time the following conversation took place.

187General Wilson said, "Colonel Wight, we have nothing against you, only that you are associated with[J[oseph] Smith. He is our enemy and a d——- rascal, and would take any plan he could to kill us. You are a d——- fine fellow; and if you will come out and swear against him, we will spare your life, and give you any office you want; and if you don't do it, you will be shot tomorrow at 8 o'clock."

187Colonel Wight replied, "General Wilson, you are entirely mistaken in your man, both in regard to myself and Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith is not an enemy to mankind, he is not your enemy; but is as good a friend as you have got. Had it not been for him, you would have been in hell long ago, for I should have sent you there [myself], and no other man but Joseph Smith could have prevented me and you may thank him for your life. And, now, if you will give me the boys I brought from [Adam-ondi-Ahman] yesterday, I will whip your whole army."

187Wilson said, "Wight, you are a strange man; but if you will not accept my proposal, you will be shot tomorrow morning at 8."

188Colonel Wight replied, "Shoot and be damned."

188Millennial Star 27:457.

1997 Deseret Book Co.
