In the October 2022 general conference, President Russell M. Nelson spoke of the power of Jesus Christ to bring peace, hope, and rest into our lives: “You can overcome the spiritually and emotionally exhausting plagues of the world, including arrogance, pride, anger, immorality, hatred, greed, jealousy, and fear. Despite the distractions and distortions that swirl around us, you can find true rest—meaning relief and peace—even amid your most vexing problems.”

Members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles have spoken in general conference about how Jesus Christ can bring us peace, comfort, and rest. They have also shared messages about these topics on social media, including the following:

“Because so many of us are struggling with the challenges of the past year and more, it can be difficult to know where we can turn for peace.

“… I invite you to share the light of the Savior Jesus Christ with those around you. It is His light and His love that will heal our hearts ... during all of life’s challenges.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Dec. 16, 2021, facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“We have all been dealing with dramatic and unexpected events.

“Amid such uncertainty, there is only one way to feel at peace—the real peace that passes all understanding. That peace is found in faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

“On this Palm Sunday, I invite you to make this coming week truly holy by remembering—not just the palms that were waved to honor the entrance of Jesus into Jerusalem—but by remembering the palms of His hands.

“After all that Jesus Christ did for you, I invite you to do something this week to follow His teachings. You might make your prayers more earnest. You could forgive someone or help a friend in need. You can start today on a new spiritual quest.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Mar. 28, 2021, facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“We live in challenging times: wars and rumors of wars, earthquakes, tornadoes, tsunamis, and the prospects of financial disasters. More important, values and standards honored for thousands of years are now being denied or cast aside. Selfishness is replacing service. Evil is being called good, and good is being called evil.

“Though men’s hearts are failing them, you should take heart. There have always been challenging times. We, the generations of your predecessors, have survived serious challenges, and so will you. The answer to all of these challenges is the same as it has always been. We have a Savior, and He has taught us what we should do.

“‘These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world’ (John 16:33).

“The Book of Mormon teaches that the children of God exist that they might have joy (2 Nephi 2:25). That great truth is fundamental to our philosophy of life. The kind of joy referred to in the scriptures is not the happiness we experience in temporary rushes of pleasure. The joy we were created for is enduring.

“I believe that our greatest joy is found through the gospel of Jesus Christ, which explains our origin as spirits, the creation of the world, our purpose in mortality, and our destiny in eternity.

“Treasure and enlarge your family connections. Cherish and use your opportunities for creation in eternal marriage. And value your friendships and opportunities for learning and service, for those efforts can also lead to the joy that is eternal.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, Facebook, Feb. 8, 2022, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“I wish to share a message with those of you who are young. I love you. I want to help you. These are times when we all need love and its accompanying concern for others. How are you and your peers handling the many challenges you face?

“The personal threats and educational and economic effects of COVID-19 surely heighten everyone’s anxiety, and, as you know, anxiety on other subjects is also comparatively high among young people.

“Whatever the causes of large increases in anxiety and associated mental health diagnoses, our first line of defense is always our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. We trust in His promises of peace and in the cleansing that His Atonement makes possible. Instead of being swept along in the anxiety and fear that is characteristic of your generation, rely on the assurances of a loving Heavenly Father. Professional counseling also should accompany this process when appropriate.

“I encourage you to rely on the counsel of His loving Son, a Savior who has assured us that ‘if ye are prepared ye shall not fear’ (Doctrine and Covenants 38:30).”

President Dallin H. Oaks, Facebook, Nov. 10, 2020, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“Even in this difficult time, the principles we as leaders of the Church hope you will understand are the same fundamentals of faith in Jesus Christ and obedience to His gospel that we have always taught.

“As we are obedient to the commandments, the Lord has promised us, “My peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid” (John 14:27).

“Peace and exaltation are the promised effects of keeping commandments and trusting in the Lord.

“The way forward is clear: ‘Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths’ (Proverbs 3:5–6).”

President Dallin H. Oaks, Facebook, Sept. 10, 2020, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“We live in a world of uncertainty, complexity, and confusion. The demands of everyday life can wear us down. I believe there is one simple but profound principle that can help us free ourselves from this tangled web of challenges to find peace of mind and happiness: service to one another.

“There are many small and simple ways and circumstances in which we can serve and love others at home, at church, and in our communities.

“Great things are wrought through simple and small acts of kindness and service. They will accumulate into a life filled with love for Heavenly Father, devotion to the work of Jesus Christ, and a sense of peace and joy each time we reach out to one another.”

President M. Russell Ballard, Facebook, Sept. 1, 2022, facebook.com/mrussell.ballard.

“The Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ gives me and all who believe in His name eternal hope despite the challenges we face in life. Like on that first Easter morning, we can awake to a new life in Christ, with new and marvelous possibilities and new realities as we turn to the Lord for belonging.”

President M. Russell Ballard, Facebook, Apr. 17, 2022, facebook.com/mrussell.ballard.

“When things are in commotion, such as they are in our time today, the Lord wants us to turn to Him in prayer.

“I think often of those of you who are suffering, worried, afraid, or feeling alone. I assure each one of you that the Lord knows you, that He is aware of your concern and anguish, and that He loves you—intimately, personally, deeply, and forever. Please pray often and let your Father in Heaven know the feelings of your heart.

“Each night when I pray, I ask the Lord to bless all who are burdened with grief, pain, loneliness, and sadness. I know that other Church leaders echo that same prayer. Our hearts, individually and collectively, go out to you, and our prayers go to God in your behalf.

“Just as I extended a call for prayer at the October 2020 general conference, I again echo that invitation today. No matter how you pray or to whom you pray, please exercise your faith—whatever your faith may be—and pray for your country and for your national leaders. There is nothing more important right now than the people of all nations praying for divine inspiration and guidance.”

President M. Russell Ballard, Facebook, May 6, 2021, facebook.com/mrussell.ballard.

“Above all else, I am grateful for the Lord Jesus Christ and His example to me. As we strive to follow Him and become His faithful disciples, we can find peace, joy, and happiness despite the worldly troubles that swirl around us.”

President M. Russell Ballard, Facebook, Nov. 27, 2020, facebook.com/mrussell.ballard.

“I know the power of prayer by my own experience. Recently I was alone in my office. I had just gone through a medical procedure on my hand. It was black and blue, swollen, and it was painful. As I sat at my desk, I could not focus on important and critical matters because I was distracted by this pain.

“I knelt in prayer and asked the Lord to help me focus so I could accomplish my work. I stood and returned to the pile of papers on my desk. Almost immediately, clarity and focus came to my mind, and I was able to complete the pressing matters before me.

“The world’s current chaotic situation may seem daunting as we consider the multitude of issues and challenges. But it is my fervent testimony that if we will pray and ask Heavenly Father for needed blessings and guidance, we will come to know how we can bless our families, neighbors, communities, and even the countries in which we live.”

President M. Russell Ballard, Facebook, Oct. 26, 2020, facebook.com/mrussell.ballard.

“Life can be challenging … but as we support one another and as we rely on Jesus Christ, He will help us through life’s trials.”

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, Twitter, Sept. 14, 2022, twitter.com/HollandJeffreyR.

“Studying the life of our Savior brings us closer to Him. ... I invite you to take the time to know the Prince of Peace—His birth, life, message, and resurrection. The more we learn of Him and follow His example, the more peace we can feel in tumultuous times.”

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, Facebook, Dec. 20, 2021, facebook.com/jeffreyr.holland.

“Since general conference, I have continued to ponder about how we can find Godly comfort while we are in this mortal world. We see too much conflict, anger, and general incivility around us. Fortunately, the current generation has not had a Third World War to fight, nor have we experienced a global economic crash like the one in 1929 leading to a Great Depression.

“We are, however, facing a kind of Third World War that is not a fight to crush our enemies but a conscription marshaling the children of God to care more about each other and to help heal the wounds we find in a conflicted world. The Great Depression we now face has less to do with the external loss of our savings and more to do with the internal loss of our self-confidence, with real deficits of faith and hope and charity all around us.

“But the instruments we need to create a brighter day and grow an economy of genuine goodness in society are abundantly provided for in the gospel of Jesus Christ. So in a world ‘tossed with tempest, and not comforted,’ as Jehovah said it would be, how do we find what He called ‘the covenant of … peace’? We find it by turning to Him who said He would have mercy on us and ‘with everlasting kindness’ would grant peace to our children (see Isaiah 54:8, 10–11, 13).”

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, Facebook, Aug. 10, 2021, facebook.com/jeffreyr.holland.

“In spite of frightful prophecies and unsettling scriptures declaring that peace would be taken from the earth generally, our own beloved Russell M. Nelson has taught that does not mean it has to be taken from us individually!

“So, ... let’s try to practice peace in a personal way, applying the grace and healing balm of the Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ to ourselves and our families and all those we can reach around us.

“In the midst of us are many who struggle with any number of challenges—physical or emotional, social or financial, or a dozen other kinds of trouble. But many of these we are not strong enough to address in and of ourselves, for the peace we need is not the kind ‘the world giveth’ (John 14:27). No, for the truly difficult problems we need what the scriptures call ‘the powers of heaven’ (Doctrine and Covenants 121:36).

“In spite of betrayal and pain, mistreatment and cruelty, and bearing all the accumulated sins and sorrows of the human family, the Son of the living God looked down the long path of mortality, saw us this weekend, and said: ‘Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid’ (John 14:27).”

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, Facebook, Apr. 3, 2021, facebook.com/jeffreyr.holland.

“My heart grieves for the painful loneliness and wearisome fears you may be experiencing at this time. However, because of the sacrifice of our beloved Redeemer, death has no sting, the grave has no victory, wrongs will be made right, and Satan has no lasting power.

“‘Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning’ (Psalm 30:5).

“Christ’s perfect, deep, and everlasting love gives us the confidence to press through our fears. Because of His glorious Resurrection, we can place our complete trust in Him, even through the most trying times.

“‘God is our refuge and strength’ (Psalm 46:1).

“‘Be still, and know that I am God’ (Psalm 46:10).”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Apr. 17, 2022, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Some of you may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God and that He offered an infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice. But you also may believe that His Atonement works for everybody else—but not you. You exercise faith in the Savior but may not believe that all of His promised blessings are available to you or can operate in your life. I invite you to not only know about the Lord but also come to know Him.

“The Savior has admonished us to become as He is. We come to know the Lord as we seek through the power of His Atonement to become like Him. We come to know the Lord as we serve Him and labor in His kingdom. We more fully come to know the Lord as we not only believe in Him but also believe Him and His assurances.

“Believing Him—accepting as true His power and promises—invites perspective, peace, and joy into our lives. His Atonement is individual; it is personal. And it is for each of us.”

Elder David A. Bednar, Facebook, Mar. 14, 2021, facebook.com/davida.bednar.

“On this beautiful Easter day, we reflect and rejoice in all the Savior has done for us. He gave His life as a vicarious Atonement, overcoming death and providing redemption for all mankind. I promise that following His light and example will bring us more joy, happiness, and peace in this life than anything else.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Apr. 17, 2022, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“Rosana and I were honored to speak recently with students at BYU–Idaho. We spent some time discussing the concerns many young people have expressed about how you can feel confidence and peace about the future when the conditions of the world do not look that promising.

“I assure you that our confidence in our Savior Jesus Christ will strengthen us to continue moving forward in life, despite the challenges we go through.

“Coming unto Him does not tie us down or limit our freedom! Rather, it gives us reason for firm hope and provides a solid anchor to our souls, giving us a lasting inner peace that we need to live in these days and find rest in Him.

“If we don’t turn away from the light we receive from the Savior, we won’t have a hollow feeling of emptiness in our lives but a fulness that occupies the innermost chambers of our souls.

“It is through the Savior Jesus Christ and His healing atoning sacrifice that we are enabled to stand tall and strong, even in the face of adversity. The Savior’s healing power fills our souls with peace, light, understanding, joy, and love.”

Elder Ulisses Soares, Facebook, May 20, 2021, facebook.com/soares.u.
