Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

Foreword

In the formative years of gospel restoration, the Lord admonished the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brethren associated with him to "say nothing but repentance unto this generation." [^1] This theme is repeated frequently throughout the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. In harmony with this counsel, President Joseph Fielding Smith has been raising the warning voice as a General Authority for more than fifty-six years.

"I want to raise the warning voice, and I am doing it among the stakes of Zion," President Smith once said. "I want to tell you the judgments have gone forth and they are going forth. . . . Will we escape? When I see, even among the Latter-day Saints the violation of the laws of the Lord, I fear and I tremble. I have been crying repentance among the stakes of Zion, . . . calling upon the people to turn to the Lord, keep his commandments, observe the Sabbath day, pay their honest tithing, do everything the Lord has commanded them to do, to live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. . . . So I cry repentance to the Latter-day Saints, and I cry repentance to the people of the United States as well as to the people of all the earth." [^2]

Many years ago, as a young boy, I recall an occasion when I attended a sacrament meeting with my father. I remember vividly some of the remarks he made on that occasion. "Who is your friend, or who loves you the most?" he asked the congregation. "The person who tells you all is well in Zion, that prosperity is around the corner or the person who warns you of the calamities and difficulties that are promised unless the principles of the gospel are lived? I want you to know that I love the members of the Church, and I do not want one of them to point an accusing finger at me when we pass beyond the veil of mortal existence and say, 'If you had only warned me I would not be in this predicament.' And so I raise the warning voice in hopes that my brothers and sisters may be prepared for a kingdom of glory."

For President Smith's many years of service to the Church, it seemed only appropriate that a selection of his sermons, warning and pleading with the people, should be published in book form. For this purpose, "Take Heed to Yourselves!" has been compiled for the benefit of members of the Church and others.

Material for this volume has been compiled from the various sources denoted at the end of each discourse. Appreciation is expressed for the use of this material, and also to the Deseret Book Company for making publication of this volume possible.

July 1966 Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr.

Footnotes

I want to tell you, my brothers and sisters, the greatest need in the Church of Jesus Christ today is repentance and more respect for divine authority; more willingness to keep the commandments of the Lord. Who do you think is going to be saved in the kingdom of God? Well, according to the revelation of the Lord—not over half the members of the Church. When I think of the parable of the ten virgins—and that has reference to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the kingdom of God, speaking of the last days, the time of his coming—the Lord indicates that about half of them will be ready. When I see the activities of some of the members of the Church, I wonder if even half of them will be ready when the Lord comes.

The commandments of the Lord to the members of the Church constitute the standards of the Church which in every respect should be obeyed faithfully.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 84:43-45.
[^2] John 10:34-36; Rom. 8:13-18; Rev. 2:7; D&C 132:19-23.
