Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

1

The Standards of the Church

The commandments of the Lord to the members of the Church constitute the standards of the Church which in every respect should be obeyed faithfully. In order to obtain the reward of exaltation in the celestial kingdom, every soul must strive to put himself in harmony with and be obedient to every law and ordinance pertaining to that kingdom. In a revelation given September 22 and 23, 1832, the Lord said:

And I now give unto you a commandment to beware concerning yourselves, to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life.

For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God.

For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ. [^1]

Perfect Laws Govern in Celestial Kingdom

James in his epistle said: "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." This has appeared to many as a hard saying, yet it is true. The laws which govern in the celestial kingdom are perfect and before we can enter there we must place ourselves in harmony with them all. A person who is in rebellion against any one eternal commandment cannot be justified and cannot enter the celestial kingdom. If he were permitted to do so he would take into that kingdom confusion, and such a condition cannot be justified. The words of the Lord in the Sermon on the Mount are not idle words, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." He knew well enough that it is impossible for any man to obtain perfection in this mortal life; but he also knew that it is here that we lay the foundation on which perfection rests. His remark was not limited to this world in its application. Likewise when he said, "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness," he had a broader view than to apply it merely to this temporal existence. However, it is here that we are expected to lay the foundation which will be strong and deep by virtue of our observance of his commandments.

This Life Is a Probationary State

We are taught that this life is a "probationary state," one in which we are tested to see if we will be worthy of salvation through obedience to the divine commandments. We are informed that at one time in the eternity past, we lived in the presence of our Eternal Father. There we were taught correct principles, and the fact that we are here is evidence that we kept those commandments. This earth life is the reward of obedience in that life. Mortality is an advanced step in the path of eternal existence. If we can remain true here, under all the vicissitudes which we find in mortality, then the great reward of eternal life in the celestial kingdom is assured us. It is the way by which we shall become the children of God, his sons and daughters, joint heirs with Jesus Christ, and the fulness, exaltation, will be the reward. [^2]

The Prophet Joseph Smith, commenting on the standards governing in the kingdom of God, has said:

We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients arrives at the point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with him. But we consider that this is a station to which no man ever arrived in a moment: he must have been instructed in the government and laws of that kingdom by proper degrees, until his mind is capable in some measure of comprehending the propriety, justice, equality, and consistency of the same. [^3]

Without Knowledge We Cannot Be Saved

Again the Prophet said:

As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good. Is not God good? Then you be good; if he is faithful, then you be faithful. Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and seek for every good thing. [^4]

We are only capable of comprehending that certain things exist, which we may acquire by certain fixed principles. If men would acquire salvation, they have got to be subject, before they leave this world, to certain rules and principles, which were fixed by an unalterable decree before the world was.

The disappointment of hopes and expectations would be indescribably dreadful. [^5]

We must be familiar with the standards before we can obey them. They embrace far more than the principles which are usually described as ethics: A man may know that it is wrong to steal and that honesty is a just principle without having faith in God or being obedient to his commandments to be baptized for the remission of his sins. Yet honesty in its strictest sense is a fundamental standard of the Church.

The experience gained in life, even among those who do not understand the plan of salvation, may teach a man to be truthful, for he learns that any other course is unsafe and leads to trouble and loss of friends. Truthfulness however, is a fundamental principle of the gospel. There have been peoples in the past, and may be even now, who observe the law of chastity who have no clear conception of the divine command. Chastity is a vital doctrine of the Church and is a standard which we are taught cannot be violated without dire consequences following, which may mean a loss of eternal salvation in the kingdom of God. The Lord has made this principle very plain, and every member of the Church should know that the violation of this law, in the sight of the Lord is second only in its heinous nature to the shedding of innocent blood. The justice of this doctrine is very apparent, for the Lord has centered in the properly organized marriage the right to the sexual relationship, for the family is sacred in his eyes. Therefore, for any person to violate this divine law the punishment must be extremely severe. Those who are guilty of such a sin may think they can hide it; but eventually, if it is not discovered in this life, it will be revealed after, and those who are morally unclean have no place in the kingdom of God.

The Law of Tithing

The law of tithing is a fundamental principle of the gospel and must remain so until the time comes when the Lord will give the law of consecration. Those who cannot keep this law will have no place in the kingdom when it is perfected, for there only the just, the honest, and obedient will dwell. It is written:

Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming.

For after today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon.

Wherefore, if ye believe me, ye will labor while it is called today. [^6]

The Word of Wisdom is also one of the fundamental standards of the Church. It is plain enough to be understood by all members of the Church, and there is in it the promise that those who observe it shall have wisdom given to them so that they will know just what the Lord means in relation to its observance. It is the basic law and a standard to guide us and keep us physically, morally, and spiritually clean. Our mortal bodies were given as eternal tabernacles for our spirits. We will never lose them although they may be laid away in the grave for a season. They will then come forth in the resurrection to inherit such degree of glory as we have merited through our deeds performed in mortality.

Laws of Decalogue Are Eternal in Nature

For some reason that is far from clear, there are living persons who maintain that the Decalogue was done away with the law of Moses. This is not so. These laws existed from the beginning and are eternal in their application. Moreover, in this present dispensation the Lord reiterated them. They are standards that must be observed if we expect to receive the blessings of the kingdom. The religious world in the main has rejected some of these commandments, particularly the observance of the Sabbath day. It is a regrettable thing that many members of the Church have followed in their footsteps. Because the peoples of other faiths and those of no faith have shown their contempt for this great commandment is not a reason why members of the Church should follow them. Nor will the Lord hold them guiltless of this sin any more readily than he would had they violated the law of honesty, truthfulness, or chastity.

Peter has given us excellent advice in these words, which will insure our salvation if they are strictly followed:

Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises; that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.

And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;

And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness;

And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.

For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if you do these things, ye shall never fall. [^7]—(The Improvement Era, July, 1957.)

Footnotes

I know of nothing that is more important or necessary at this time than to cry repentance, even among the Latter-day Saints, and I call upon them as well as upon those who are not members of the Church, to heed these words of our Redeemer. He has stated definitely that no unclean thing can enter his presence. Only those who prove themselves faithful and have washed their garments in his blood through their faith and their repentance—none other shall find the kingdom of God.

---
Notas:
[^1] 3 Nephi 27:14-20.
[^2] John 10:34-36; Rom. 8:13-18; Rev. 2:7; D&C 132:19-23.
[^3] 3. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 51.
[^4] 4. Ibid., p. 217.
[^5] 5. Ibid., pp. 324-325.
[^6] 6. D&C 64:23-25.
[^7] 7. 2 Peter 1:4-10.
