Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

3

The Time Is Short

Years ago when I was a boy and used to read the New Testament about the Savior and the Twelve who traveled with him from place to place and he advised, instructed and counseled them, I thought what a wonderful gift and opportunity it was which was bestowed upon them. Then I also wondered a little about what appeared to be their lack of comprehension. He talked to them plainly, he spoke of his mission, told them the purpose of his earth life, why he was here, of his death and resurrection and yet they seemingly failed to comprehend it. While the accounts of it are very abbreviated yet the Lord spoke to them about his coming, why he was here and the manner of his leaving so far as mortality was concerned, that he was to lay down his life and take it up again and yet they evidently could not comprehend it, except of course on certain occasions, I suppose, when they received inspiration from the Lord as Peter did when he said, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God."

At the Last Supper he told them he was going to his death, that he would send a Comforter to be with them and to bring to their memory things he had taught them, things that were past. In reading that I would think, "Well, what was the matter with them?" He said these things plainly and yet on the morning of the resurrection they all seemed to be dumbfounded and astonished when the report came to them that he had arisen.

We are into the habit—when I say "we" I will exclude myself, and perhaps I can do the same for you—but our people are in the habit of speaking of Thomas as "doubting Thomas" as though Thomas was standing aloof in his doubt, not comprehending and failing to accept the joint testimonies of the other brethren. I have wondered if it had been Matthew, if it had been Andrew or even Peter or any of the other Apostles who had been absent and the remaining ten would have said, "We have seen the Lord. He has arisen," who perhaps would not have raised the question and said, "Unless I can see, I cannot believe." They did not seem to comprehend the resurrection of the dead and that Christ was to be the first fruits of the resurrection.

Testimony through Guidance of the Spirit

Later when I thought the matter through, that they had not received the inspiration of the Holy Ghost while he was with them, except on one occasion; not understanding the mission of Christ as did Isaiah and the prophets of earlier years who had the Holy Ghost, I felt that I could forgive them for their lack of understanding. They were not dumb men. Here we are, we do not have the experiences that came to them. We do not have the privilege of being with him, of hearing his discourses, seeing him heal the sick and all those wonderful things; but through the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord we can have just as strong a testimony, be just as sure of his mission and resurrection as they had after his resurrection. I am sure there is not a doubt in the minds of the brethren here in regard to any of these things which took place.

I think that throughout the Church those who have been baptized and have been true and faithful have no doubt at all about the resurrection of Jesus Christ, the purpose of his resurrection, what was accomplished by it. We are entitled to the guidance and inspiration that comes through the contacts which we are entitled to have and the guidance of the Holy Ghost so we may understand and comprehend every truth that has been revealed which the Lord intends we should understand, that we may know that just as clearly, just as definitely as we would know it had we stood in his presence.

If there is any member of the Council of the Twelve who does not know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Redeemer of the world then I would be greatly astonished. We have the right, through our faithfulness, to be guided by that Spirit, to be taught, to have our minds enlightened so we can comprehend the sacred principles of the gospel, matters which have been revealed concerning the plan of salvation and feel and know that these things are true as well as we know we are here in this room. There should not be any doubt in the minds of any of us in regard to the mission of Jesus Christ. Nor should we have any doubts in our minds concerning his second coming and that he will come in his glory, that he will come to establish his work upon the face of the world, setting up his own kingdom which shall have full power over all the peoples on the face of the earth. The Lord has never revealed to us when the day will come, but he has given us knowledge enough by which we may know that that day is not far away. When I say "not far away," I am not setting any definite number of years. I was accused of saying he was coming in twenty years and I have heard the statement made that I said he was coming in forty years. People say all kinds of things but no man knows the day of his coming and no man is going to know and I don't think the Twelve will know it. I have my doubts that the Presidency of the Church will know, because the Lord says he will come when no one is expecting it, but he has given us signs and the world is full of them today, signs of his coming as he draws nigh.

Explanation of Words of Matthew

Many years ago when Brother John H. Taylor was presiding in the Northern States Mission he sent me a letter he received from one of the ministers in Chicago who quoted the words of the Savior as found in the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, and other places in which he said, "This generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled." The minister said in his letter if we cannot answer that question we might as well quit and close up shop. He said nearly two thousand years have passed and yet he has not come, and yet he says this generation shall not pass. What is the answer to that? If we have no answer to that we might as well throw our Bibles away. Brother Taylor got one of those letters and did not know what to do with it so he sent it on to me. Of course in the Bible it is not translated correctly but the Lord gives us the correct translation.

And again this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness to all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked. [^1]

That is not in the Bible as we have it and the world, in its understanding, thinks something dreadful is going to happen, which will and that the world is going to go to its destruction. What the Lord means is that this telestial order is going to come to an end. He makes an explanation of what is meant by "destruction of the wicked":

And again shall the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, be fulfilled.

And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

Verily, I say unto you, this generation, in which these things shall be shown forth, shall not pass away until all I have told you shall be fulfilled. [^2]

How Long Is a Generation?

The question is how long is a generation? I don't know and I am not concerned about it. This is the thing that concerns me—the increased calamities, the destruction, the turmoil, the trouble that exists in the world, the fearfulness of nations, their trembling, their hearts failing them. I can remember back in the days of Theodore Roosevelt when one of the powers of Europe intended to enforce some restrictions on a little country in South America. He told them to keep their hands off and keep out "or else," and they kept their hands off. Today we are afraid to say anything. Other nations are afraid. They are preparing for the great final struggle but they do not seem to know it. They have invented or discovered means of making the most terrible weapons of destruction, harnessing the forces, splitting atoms until they have become so fearful that they are all afraid to act. Things have occurred which our country would never have stood for forty or fifty years ago, that other nations would never have stood for.

Now we are having trouble in the Near East, trouble just where the trouble is going to break out according to the revelations. This little nation of Israel is struggling for its existence; they are hemmed in with enemies all around, they are putting up a courageous defense. They have the sympathy of this country and of England and perhaps of France but I don't know about France because they are in bad shape. Russia and her allies on one side are keeping their hands off and we are keeping our hands off. We let the little nation of Egypt, controlled by the followers of Mohammed, step in and we are afraid to do anything. Everyone is afraid and no one will move, their hearts have failed them.

At the last meeting I think I said something about Israel and I want to say a little more. I see things going on in Palestine which are very significant and they have been going on ever since General Allenby went into that country during the war. You brethren, like all the rest, speak of the first and second world wars and look forward to the third world war. I don't. To me it is the same war. I think we have been in the same war since 1914. We speak of the destruction of the Nephites. They and the Lamanites had war with each other for a great period of years before the final destruction. Yet there were years when they were not in conflict, that is in open battle, because they were exhausted and had to go back to their fields, had to prepare themselves, had to make weapons and so forth so they had what could be called, from time to time, armistices, just as we have only we call it a cold war and we have been getting ready all of the time in this country and other countries for the great and final destruction or else I do not understand the scriptures.

Interpretation of Scripture

I do not interpret some things like most people do. I want to read a verse or two.

Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls.

And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place.

For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations. [^3]

The real beginning of the world war was in 1861. If you will read your histories you will find that from that time on the people began to prepare for the final conflict. What did they have in that war?—wooden vessels, old fashioned guns that could not throw a shot more than a few hundred yards. I don't know exactly how far they would throw them, but strong enough, if they were in close enough quarters, to penetrate a wooden vessel. In that war they made their first iron-clads and then guns had to be made to match the armor. Finally they got to building ships out of steel, very thick steel and then guns that would go through that from miles and miles away. The guns got stronger and larger, the ships got bigger and stronger. As the guns got more powerful, the ships got more strength to resist them and so it has gone on until it has now reached a condition such as we find today. So the next war is going to be largely in the air.

The Time Is Getting Short

All of these things point to the fact that time is getting short. All signs the Lord has given us as recorded in the New Testament we can see; the moon has not been turned to blood and the earth has not reeled to and fro yet as that will be one of the final signs. I heard President Wilford Woodruff say in the Salt Lake Temple, and he also said it in Ogden and a number of other times before his death following the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, that the angels who were waiting, as spoken of in the thirteenth chapter of Matthew, have now been loosed and sent on their mission. You can read what their mission is and he has said that they had been loosed and sent on their mission to prepare the earth for the harvest. The wheat and the tares were to grow together until the harvest was ripe. President Woodruff said that time had started, these angels have been sent on their mission.

About 1916 I got a little curious and I spoke to my father. I told him the calamities and the destructions on the face of the earth were increasing year by year and I thought I would go through the current magazines that recorded world events and note these events year by year and to my astonishment they increased each year. The destructions became more frequent. If you will make a record of that you will find it is true. Someone else got the same idea, someone connected with the Smithsonian Institution, and I was surprised but that is a fact. Tornadoes and all the things the Lord has promised are coming, we are in the midst of them, so I think we should raise a warning voice to our people and call upon them to repent and make them understand that the Lord wants them to keep his commandments and prepare themselves for events to come and sever themselves from the foolishness of this world. We are getting pretty much like the rest of the world and it is time we should be crying repentance.—(Quarterly Meeting of the Council of the Twelve, April 10, 1957.)

Footnotes

We should be missionaries of the Church by the manner of our living. Our lives should speak. The testimony of the truth should be borne through our faithfulness, the purity of our lives, the integrity and devotion of our souls.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 88:86.
[^2] Ibid., 88:80-82.
[^3] Ibid., 88:76-78.
