Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

4

"Entangle Not Yourselves in Sin"

The Mutual Improvement organizations were very happy in their choice of a theme for the young people of the Church in adopting this one taken from the eighty-eighth section of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean, until the Lord comes. [^1]

This is taken from a revelation, one of the greatest given to the Church, known as "The Olive Leaf." The Prophet so described it in sending the revelation to the brethren who were dwelling at that time in Zion, as it was called, "'The Olive Leaf,' which we have plucked from the Tree of Paradise." In the main, this revelation was given for the guidance of missionaries. We have heard that we are all missionaries. Every member of the Young Women's and every member of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations is or ought to be a missionary, and we are all set apart, not by the laying on of hands; we have not had a special calling; we have not been singled out to do missionary labor, but as members of the Church, having pledged ourselves to the advancement of the gospel of Jesus Christ we become missionaries. That is part of the responsibility of every member of the Church. That does not mean that we have to go into a foreign field; we can be missionaries at home, nor is it necessary that we be called to be stake missionaries, for in this very revelation the Lord has something to say about it, and I am going to read those verses; in fact, I may want to read a good many of these verses, and then if the Spirit of the Lord directs me, maybe from some other revelations.

A Warning to All

Now, this that I will read was said to those who were called and appointed to go into the mission field, but you will see that the Lord applied it not only to all the members of the Church, but also to everybody else, whether in the Church or out of the Church:

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you.

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor.

Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads. [^2]

So here is a command from our Father in heaven that is so broad that it is not confined to those who are set apart and commissioned and sent forth into the world to teach the world the gospel, but the Lord commands every soul to whom this message comes that it is his responsibility, not only to receive it, but also to carry it to his neighbor; and they who hear it and refuse to carry it, to warn their neighbors, shall be left without excuse before the judgment seat of God. Now as the Lord requires that of those who are not in the Church, then how much more so is it required of us who are members of the Church?

We should be missionaries of the Church by the manner of our living. Our lives should speak. The testimony of the truth should be borne through our faithfulness, the purity of our lives, the integrity and devotion of our souls.

I am happy to know that this work of the Mutual Improvement organizations is going to go on through the whole year. I think it was Brother Stevenson who made the remark that the devil will be busy this summer. Well, did you ever hear of the devil taking a vacation? For six thousand years he has never laid off a day, nor an hour, nor a minute, and in all these years since he was cast out of heaven and placed upon the earth he has been determined to destroy faith, to lead away the innocent, to bind their souls through unrighteousness, teaching them wickedness, and always in the most clever manner. No, he does not rest.

Strengthen Our Minds and Bodies

I do not mean to say that we who are mortals should not take a few days off if we want to, to rest and build up our bodies, strengthen them, give our minds a chance perhaps to repair themselves and be prepared for the energies that will be required of them, but we should not lie down and forget the responsibilities which the Lord has placed upon us.

Whether we are engaged in softball, basketball, or in any other kind of sport, in dancing, or whatever it may be, it should all be done in the spirit of building up and strengthening the kingdom of God.

I am very grateful for the opportunities that come to our young people to engage in these sports under proper direction and to have this recreation. I think it is a part of the gospel plan, but whatever it is that we do should be done in the Spirit of the Lord, and if we cannot do it that way, it should not be done. I think that this is the spirit in which these contests, whatever they may be, are carried on. I commend our good brethren throughout the Church who conduct these exercises, and the sisters, too, in drama, in art, in music, whatever it is, as well as in the athletic field.

This wonderful revelation, I say, was intended mostly, not all of it, but most of it, for missionaries, but there is in it much that is intended for members of the Church at large. There are things in it intended for the brethren holding the priesthood. The Lord has pointed out how they should meet in their solemn assemblies, the spirit in which they should meet, how these meetings should be conducted.

The members of the Church are taught to inform themselves in regard to all principles of truth, and much of this responsibility has been assigned to the Mutual Improvement organizations. I want to read these verses:

Also, I give unto you a commandment that ye shall continue in prayer and fasting from this time forth.

And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom.

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may, be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand. [^3]

Now I emphasize that, because I want to come back to it.

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms. [^4]

I say this is counsel given to missionaries; it is counsel that is good for all the members of the Church. We should make ourselves acquainted with all these things, but I am very glad that the Lord put in this counsel that expression, that in our seeking for knowledge, we seek for those things which are expedient for our understanding.

We Are Living in a Troubled World

We are living in a very troubled world, and I am going to talk plainly: we are living in a world that has discarded God or is rapidly doing so. We are living in a world where the Christian ministers of various denominations have been frightened by the philosophies of men and, therefore, because they lack the Spirit of the Lord, have tried to modify the scriptures, or, the meaning of the scriptures, so that they can make them harmonize with the false theories so prevalent in the world today, theories which are in absolute conflict with divine revelation; and yet these people, afraid, dominated by the influence of false philosophy, are modifying the doctrines to make them conform to these theories and ideas which are godless in their foundation. We cannot afford to do that.

I picked up a book that is being used in a great many high schools throughout the United States, published by three gentlemen of renown, noted in their certain fields of science. This book was one that was in the possession of one of my grandsons who does not live here in Salt Lake City, but it is in his possession, and it is being used in the schools. In it some of these theories, damnable in their nature, are placed before these children in a very enticing form to lead them away from a belief in God.

You cannot see what I have in my hand, but it is showing to these students in the school, where man came from. I wish we had a blackboard here, and I were an artist, but it does not take an artist to do this. I am going to tell you just what there is here.

Details of a False Theory

Here is a V-shaped diagram showing on one side the descent of animals, on the other side the descent of plants, or ascent, whichever way you want to look at it, from a little speck. At one time, according to the theory, this came to life all of itself, spontaneously, and presently it became an amoeba, and then a worm, and then an insect, and here is the amoeba, here is the worm, here is a grasshopper representing the insect, then a reptile, and finally they put a cow. I do not know why they picked a cow, because Mr. Darwin says that we are related to the horse, but that does not matter. That is on one side. Then from this same side of the V and from the same source we get the algae that we find in the water, then the fungi, like the toadstools, then the mosses, then the ferns, and after a while, we get the trees, all coming from the same source.

That is the kind of stuff that that book is filled with. Then it shows on one page the leg of a man and opposite it the leg of a grasshopper, showing how much they are alike. The one thing they overlook is that the grasshopper's leg works just opposite to the way the man's leg works, so far as the joint is concerned.

You can see the effect that has upon the youth, and they add other pictures, scores of them, and all of this is being taught to your sons and your daughters, your children's children when they get old enough to have children in public schools, and you cannot get a textbook, anywhere that I know of, on the "ologies," except theology, and many of these carry you the same way, along this same course of nonsense—that is all it is.

So I think the Lord was wise here in saying that in our studying we must study those things that are expedient, things that are useful, that will not destroy our faith in God.

We Are the Sons and Daughters of God

Now, we believe we are the sons and daughters of God, do we not? The Lord has revealed it. He has taught us that in our own day. You will find it so recorded in Section 76 in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Savior taught his disciples that we are the offspring of God, and he said to Mary, when she met him after his resurrection, ". . . go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God," [^5] and that he would then come and visit with them.

We have just surrendered, I think, and now these silly things are dominating the teaching of the peoples of the world in what are called civilized countries.

Now, a few more things from this revelation which concern us, one and all:

Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him—my voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound.

And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things.

Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will.

Remember the great and last promise which I have made unto you; cast away your idle thoughts and your excess of laughter far from you.

Tarry ye, tarry ye in this place, and call a solemn assembly, even of those who are the first laborers in this last kingdom.

And let those whom they have warned in their traveling call on the Lord, and ponder the warning in their hearts which they have received, for a little season.

Behold, and lo, I will take care of your flocks, and will raise up elders and send unto them.

Behold, I will hasten my work in its time. [^6]

Faithful Will Behold the Lord's Face

Here the Lord promises that if we are faithful and true we will behold his face. There is not anyone here this afternoon who has not seen his face. Every one of you, we all dwelt in his presence, we have all seen him, but for a wise purpose that knowledge was taken away, and the Lord intends that we should walk by faith, not by sight. Here is what the Lord says himself about it in this same revelation:

Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came unto his own was not comprehended.

The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him.

Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound. [^7]

This is a wonderful revelation. It covers so many things of vital importance to every member of the Church. I wonder how many of us have read Section 88? Do not stop by just reading this one section. Take it as your theme, there is none better, but read the whole revelation. No! read the whole book. The Lord commanded in the very first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, which is the preface of this book, the Lord's preface:

Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled. [^8]

"Search these commandments." How much do we love the Lord? What is the greatest of all the commandments? The Lord has told us here in Section 59 of the Doctrine and Covenants what it is, as he applies it to the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in this dispensation of the fulness of times:

Wherefore, I give unto them [the members of the Church] a commandment, saying thus: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind, and strength; and in the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt serve him.

Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Thou shalt not steal; neither commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything like unto it.

Thou shalt thank the Lord thy God in all things. [^9]

First Commandment Is to Love God

So, the first of all the commandments is to love God with all our soul, and in the name of Jesus Christ, serve him, and he has commanded us to make ourselves familiar with these truths which have been revealed to us in the dispensation of the fulness of times.

How many of us have done it? So I say to you, and all the members of the Church, for that matter, do not let your understanding rest upon one verse, which is a very excellent theme, but search the scriptures that you may not be deceived by false theories and practices and doctrines so prevalent in the world today. If you will do this, if you will have in your hearts the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord which every member of the Church has a right to have, the companionship of the Holy Ghost, you will not be led astray by the theories of men because the Spirit of the Lord will tell you they are false, and you will have the spirit of discernment that you may understand.

Now I was going to read two passages from the Bible, because they are so closely connected with this theme. The Savior was speaking to the Jews. They marveled at his doctrine, and

Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. [^10]

"If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine—"

Why, we ought to be able to understand the doctrine of Jesus Christ; we ought to have within us the power, aided by the Spirit of the Lord, to discern between the doctrines that come from our Father in heaven, through his Son, Jesus Christ, and the doctrines of men.

Do Not Believe Theories of Men

When you go to school, and you are told all these theories and have to pass an examination on them, all right, write it down and say, "This is what my teacher says," and "This is what the textbook says." You do not have to say you believe it.

Here is the other passage: He had been preaching to the Jews, and many of them believed on him.

As he spake these words, many believed on him.

Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed;

And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. [^11]

Now if you understand the gospel of Jesus Christ, it will make you free. If your softball, your volleyball, your basketball, your foot racing, your dancing, your other entertainments are devoid of the Spirit of the Lord, they will be of no value to you. Let everything be done in the spirit of prayer and in faith. I think that is the case, maybe it is unnecessary for me to say it, but so let it be. Do everything with an eye single unto the glory of God, and let us teach to build up and strengthen ourselves and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

May the Lord bless all of us and be with you people who are leading and directing in this Mutual Improvement work that you may teach and guide the youth in the truth that will make them free.—(Address delivered at June Conference of Mutual Improvement Associations, June 12, 1953.)

Footnotes

The missionary effort cannot be stopped. It must and will go forth that the inhabitants of the earth may have the opportunity of repenting and receive the remission of their sins and come into the Church and kingdom of God.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith 1:30-31.
[^2] D&C 1:4-7.
[^3] Ibid., 15-23.
[^4] Idem., v. 79.
[^5] John 20:17.
[^6] D&C 88:66-73.
[^7] Ibid., 88:47-50.
[^8] 8. Ibid., 1:37.
[^9] 9. Ibid., 59:5-7.
[^10] 10. John 7:16-17.
[^11] 11. Ibid., 8:30-32.
