Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

7

"Take Heed to Yourselves"

After Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden an angel came to them and gave them commandments stating that they should worship the Lord their God and do all things in the name of the Son. The angel further said Adam should call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. Obedient to this charge Adam and Eve "blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters."

At that time Satan came among Adam's children saying:

. . . I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: "Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual and devilish. [^1]

This is the account as it was revealed to Moses. The Lord confirmed these teachings in a revelation given to the Church in April, 1830, wherein he said:

By these things (the restoration of divine truth) we may know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them;

And that he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them;

And gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worship.

But by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man. [^2]

Noah Called to Cry Repentance

In course of time, so the scriptures say, "God saw that the wickedness of men had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually." [^3]

Noah was called on to cry repentance and to warn the wicked world of its destruction unless mankind repented of their wickedness; but all Noah got for his trouble was abuse and ridicule by the great and the mighty who said, "Behold, we are the sons of God . . . and they hearkened not to the words of Noah." But Noah "found grace in the eyes of the Lord, for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God, as did also his three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth." Now, the record states, "The earth was corrupt before God, and it was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth." And God said unto Noah: "The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth." It should be remembered that the Lord said he would do it! [^4]

So the Lord commanded Noah to build an ark into which he was to take his family and the animals of the earth to preserve seed after the flood, and all flesh that was not in the ark perished according to the Lord's decree. Of course this story is not believed by the wise and the great among the children of men, any more than was Noah's story in his day.

Then after this new start man again became carnal, sensual and devilish upon the earth and drastic punishment had to be meted out to some of the earth's inhabitants once more according to the Lord's decree. In the days of Abraham there were two cities known as Sodom and Gomorrah in which wickedness was without measure and the Lord said to Abraham that he was going to destroy these cities. Abraham plead with the Lord to spare them, which the Lord promised to do, if ten righteous souls could be found therein. Since this could not be done "the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven," and these cities with all their inhabitants were destroyed. And again the Lord said he did it! But the self-righteous and the wise of this present day say this is not a true record, for a merciful God would not do such a thing even if the people were wicked. [^5]

Land Promised to Abraham

About this time the Lord promised to give to Abraham for an everlasting inheritance all of this land where Sodom and Gomorrah were and all of the land from "the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates"; but Abraham was told that his posterity could not possess the land for four hundred years, because "the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full." When the time came, and the wickedness of the Amorites was full, the Lord commanded Israel to take their armies and cleanse the land of the wickedness, and take possession of the inheritance which had been promised their father Abraham.

And thus, down through the ages, we discover, if we are willing to believe what is written in the scriptures, that judgments and destructions had to be poured out upon the wicked because they would not repent. Even the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were destroyed and the people scattered because of the anger of the Lord which was kindled against them for their transgressions. At least this is the case if we are willing to believe the word of the Lord given through his prophets.

Not only were these punishments meted out to the inhabitants of the so-called old world, but destructions awaited the inhabitants of this western world for the same cause. Through their prophets they were constantly reminded that this land is "choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people." And he (the Lord) had "sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them." [^6] When these people refused to worship the true and living God, then his wrath came upon them—if we are willing to believe the record—and they were swept off. Then another people came to possess the land under all the blessings of protection and guidance of the Lord.

Same Promises Made to Others

These same promises and warnings were made to the second group of inhabitants, and the prophets who were raised up among them constantly warned them of these promises the Lord had made. But these people also fell from grace and the wrath of the Almighty came upon them.

So wicked had they become at the time of the crucifixion of our Lord that it became necessary for him to destroy many of their cities by earthquake, flood, fire and other forms of destruction. Yes, it is true, the same meek and lowly Nazarene, who came into the world and offered himself a sacrifice for sin because of the great love his Father and he had for the human family; he "who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God," who loves little children and suffered them to come unto him, found himself under the necessity of meting out punishment to the inhabitants of this choice land and that too in a most drastic fashion. Hearken to his words which he uttered after his resurrection:

Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth except they shall repent; for the devil laugheth, and his angels rejoice, because of the slain of the fair sons and daughters of my people; and it is because of their iniquity and abomination that they are fallen!

Behold that great city Zarahemla have I burned with fire, and the inhabitants thereof.

And behold, that great city Moroni have I caused to be sunk in the depths of the sea, and the inhabitants thereof to be drowned.

And behold, that great city, Moronihah have I covered with earth, and the inhabitants thereof, to hide their iniquities and their abominations from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and the Saints shall not come any more unto me against them. [^7]

Similar expressions did the Lord utter against the cities of Gilgal, Onihah, Mocum, Jerusalem, Gadiandi, Gadiomnah, Jacob, Gimgimno, Jacobugath, Laman, Josh, Kishkumen and others. But, says the self-righteous modernist, such things could not be, for God is "a God of love," and the Savior "a man of peace," and the God I worship does not "decree death upon farmers, factory hands," and "women and children, regardless of who has sinned"!

We Should Take Heed

But we who live in the present day should take heed and profit by the experiences of those who have gone before and not fall into their grievous errors. We should remember that the same warnings have been given to us and "to all the inhabitants of the earth," that destruction awaits this age unless they refrain from wickedness and abominations. Let us not forget that the Lord said that it should be in this day as it was in the days of Noah. We should remember also that he is still a "God of wrath" as well as a "God of love," and that he has promised to pour out his wrath upon the ungodly, and "take vengeance upon the wicked" who will not repent.

Not only did the ancient prophets predict that such should be the case in these latter days, but the Lord has spoken it in our own dispensation. Let us give ear to the following which are a few of the warnings which have been given to the world through the prophets of the present day:

The plain fact is this, the power of God begins to fall upon the nations . . . and the nations of the Gentiles are like the waves of the sea, casting up mire and dirt, are all in commotion, and they are hastily preparing to act the part allotted them, when the Lord rebukes the nations, when he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potter's vessel. The Lord declared to his servants, some eighteen months since, that he was then withdrawing his Spirit from the earth; and we can see that such is the fact, for not only the churches are dwindling away, but there are no conversions, or but a very few; and this is not all, the governments of the earth are thrown into confusion and division; and destruction, to the eye of the spiritual beholder, seems to be written by the finger of an invisible hand, in large capitals, upon almost everything we behold. [^8]

You must make yourselves acquainted with those men who like Daniel pray three times a day toward the House of the Lord. Look to the Presidency and receive instruction. Every man who is afraid, covetous, will be taken in a snare. The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes.

I saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, and brother murdering brother, women killing their own daughters, and daughters seeking the lives of their mothers. I saw armies arrayed against armies. I saw blood, desolation, fires. The Son of Man has said that the mother shall be against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother. These things are at our doors. They will follow the Saints of God from city to city. Satan will rage, and the spirit of the devil is now enraged. I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry peace? No! I will lift up my voice and testify of them. How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know; when the fig tree leaves, know then that summer is nigh at hand. [^9]

Nations to Rise Against Nations

We see nation rising against nation; we hear of the pestilence destroying its thousands in one place and its tens of thousands in another; the plague consuming all before it, and we witness this terror that reigns in the hearts of the wicked, and we are ready to exclaim, The Lord is certainly about bringing the world to an account of its iniquity. Let us reflect, then, in the last days, that there was to be great tribulations; for the Savior says, nation shall rise against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be famine, and pestilence, and earthquake in divers places, and the prophets have declared that the valleys should rise; that the mountains should be laid low; that a great earthquake should be, in which the sun should become black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon turn into blood; yea, the Eternal God hath declared that the great deep shall roll back into the north countries and that the land of Zion and the land of Jerusalem shall be joined together, as they were before they were divided in the days of Peleg. No wonder the mind starts at the sound of the last days. [^10]

Do you think there is calamity abroad now among the people? . . . All we have yet heard and all we have experienced is scarcely a preface to the sermon that is going to be preached. When the testimony of the elders ceases to be given, and the Lord says to them, 'come home; I will now preach my own sermons to the nations of the earth,' all you now know can scarcely be called a preface to the sermon that will be preached with fire and sword, tempests, earthquake, hail, rain, thunders and lightnings, and fearful destruction. What matters the destruction of a few railway cars? You will hear of magnificent cities, now idolized by the people, sinking in the earth, entombing the inhabitants. The sea will heave itself beyond its bounds, engulfing mighty cities. Famine will spread over the nations, and nation will rise up against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and states against states, in our own country and in foreign lands; and they will destroy each other, caring not for the blood and lives of their neighbors, of their families, or for their own lives. They will be like the Jaredites who preceded the Nephites upon this continent, and will destroy each other to the last man, through the anger that the devil will place in their hearts, because they have rejected the words of life and are given over to Satan to do whatever he listeth to do with them. You may think that the little you hear of now is grievous; yet the faithful of God's people will see days that will cause them to close their eyes because of the sorrow that will come upon the wicked nations. The hearts of the faithful will be filled with pain and anguish for them. [^11]

One of the marked signs of the last days is the blindness of the people; we are told they would have eyes and see not, and ears but hear not, and hearts but understand not. If in the days of Jesus this was true of the Jews and surrounding nations, it is doubly so now in relation to the nations with which we are acquainted.

Fulfilment of Words of the Prophets

Though the fulfilment of the words of the prophets is clear and visible to us as the noonday sun in its splendor, yet the people of the world are blinded thereto; they do not comprehend nor discern the hand of the Lord. The Saints who live in the Spirit, walk by the Spirit, and are governed by the counsels of the Almighty, can see the working of the Lord, not only in our midst . . . but we let our minds stretch abroad to creation's utmost extent, and we see the hand of the Lord in all the events of the earth.

We see it in the revolutions of our own continent; we see it in the scattering and scourging of the house of Israel; in the fading away of nations, on the right and on the left. . . . We see it in the preparations of war, and the framing of treaties of peace among strong nations. The world is in commotion and the hearts of men fail them for fear of the impending storm that threatens to enshroud all nations in its black mantle. Treaties of peace may be made, and war will stop for a season, but there are certain decrees of God, and certain bounds fixed, and laws and edicts passed the high courts of heaven beyond which the nations cannot pass; and when the Almighty decrees the wicked shall slay the wicked, strong nations may interfere, peace conventions may become rife in the world and exert their influence to sheath the sword of war, and make treaties of peace to calm the troubled surface of all Europe, to no effect; the war cloud is still booming o'er the heavens, darkening the earth, and threatening the world with desolation.

This is a fact the Saints have known for many years—that the Gods in yonder heavens have something to do with these revolutions; the angels, those holy beings who are sent from the heavens to the earth to minister in the destiny of nations, have something to do in these mighty revolutions and convulsions that shake creation almost to its center.

Consequently, when we see nation stirred up against nation, and on the other hand see other nations exerting a powerful influence to bring about negotiations of peace, shall we say they can bring it about? Do we expect they can stay the onward course of war? The Prophet of God has spoken it all, and we expect to see the work go on—and see all things fulfilled as the prophets have declared by the spirit of prophecy in them.

Three days before the Prophet Joseph started for Carthage, I well remember his telling us we should see the fulfilment of the words of Jesus upon the earth, where he says the father shall be against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against the mother-in-law; and when a man's enemies shall be those of his own household.

The Prophet stood in his own house when he told several of us of the night the visions of heaven were opened to him, in which he saw the American continent drenched in blood, and he saw nation rising against nation. He also saw the father shed the blood of the son, and the son the blood of the father; the mother put to death the daughter, and the daughter the mother; and natural affection forsook the hearts of the wicked; for he saw that the Spirit of God should be withdrawn from the inhabitants of the earth, in consequence of which there should be blood upon the face of the whole earth, except among the people of the Most High. The Prophet gazed upon the scene his vision presented, until his heart sickened and he besought the Lord to close it up again. [^12]

Latter-day Saints Were Warned

Were we surprised when the last terrible war took place here in the United States? No! Good Latter-day Saints were not, for they had been told about it. Joseph Smith had told them where it would start, that it should be a terrible time of bloodshed and that it should start in South Carolina. But I tell you today the end is not yet. You will see worse things than that, for God will lay his hand upon the nations, and they will feel it more terribly than ever they have done before; there will be more bloodshed, more ruin, more devastation than ever they have seen before. Write it down! You will see it come to pass; it is only just starting in. And would you feel to rejoice? No! I would feel sorry. I knew very well myself when this last war was commencing, and could have wept and did weep over this nation; but there is yet to come a sound of war, trouble and distress in which brother will be arrayed against brother, father against son, son against father, a scene of desolation and destruction that will permeate our land until it will be a vexation to hear the report thereof. Would you help to bring it about? No! I would stop it if I could. I would pour in the oil and the wine and balm and try to lead people in the right path that will be governed by it, but they won't! [^13]

I refer to these things because I know not how long I may have the privilege of bearing my testimony of the gospel of Christ on the earth. The revelations that are in the Bible the predictions of the patriarchs and prophets who saw by vision and revelation the last dispensation and fulness of times plainly tell us what is to come to pass. The 49th chapter of Isaiah is having its fulfilment. I have often said in my teachings, if the world want to know what is coming to pass, let them read the revelations of St. John. Read of the judgments of God that are going to overtake the world in the last dispensation. Read the papers and see what is taking place in our own nation and in the nations of the earth, and what does it all mean? It means the commencement of the fulfilment of what the prophets of God have predicted. In the Doctrine and Covenants there are many revelations given through the mouth of the prophet of God; these revelations will all have their fulfilment, as the Lord lives, and no power can hinder it. In one of the revelations the Lord told Joseph Smith: Behold, Verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields. . . .

I want to bear testimony to this congregation, and to the heavens and the earth, that the day is come when those angels are privileged to go forth and commence their work. They are laboring in the United States of America; they are laboring among the nations of the earth; and they will continue. We need not marvel or wonder at anything that is transpiring in the earth. The world do not comprehend the revelations of God. They did not in the days of the Jews; yet all that the prophets had spoken concerning them came to pass. So in our day these things will come to pass. I heard the Prophet Joseph bear his testimony to these events that would transpire in the earth. . . . We cannot draw a veil over the events that await this generation. No man that is inspired by the Spirit and power of God can close his ears, his eyes or his lips to these things. [^14]

Many Other Warnings Given

And thus we might quote indefinitely from the ancient prophets as well as from the prophets of this dispensation and even from the Lord himself, in relation to the troubles, destructions, wars and plagues, which are to come upon the inhabitants of the earth—yes even Zion also—unless the people repent. "The Lord's scourge," so he says, "shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come; for the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works." But the promise has been made to Zion and the pure in heart, that they shall escape if they "observe to do all things whatsoever I (the Lord) have commanded." [^15]

What is here given will suffice as a warning to a "perverse generation" and to remind the members of the Church that the Lord has said:

Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh.

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man.

And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath.

And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke. [^16]

And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.

For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth.

Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. [^17]—(Church Section, The Deseret News, Feb. 10, 1940.)

Footnotes

The matter of teaching is one of greatest importance. We cannot estimate its value when it is properly done; neither do we know the extent of the evil that may result if it is improperly done. The greatest qualification of a teacher is that she have faith in the principles of the gospel; that she believe in the principles of revealed truth as they have come through inspired prophets in our own day as well as in times of old; and that she shall exercise their privilege as a teacher in the spirit of prayer and faith.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 84:43-45.
[^2] D&C 20:17-20.
[^3] Gen. 6:5.
[^4] Read Gen. 6:1-13.
[^5] Read Gen., chapter 18-19.
[^6] Ether 2:8
[^7] 3 Nephi 9:2-5. Read also verses 6-12.
[^8] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 11-12.
[^9] Ibid., p. 161.
[^10] Joseph Smith, February, 1845.
[^11] President Brigham Young, J. of D., 8:123.
[^12] 12. President Jedediah M. Grant, J. of D., 2:146-147.
[^13] 13. President John Taylor, J. of D. 20:318.
[^14] 14. President Wilford Woodruff, M. S. 58:738-739.
[^15] 15. D&C 97:23-24.
[^16] 16. Ibid., 45:38-41.
[^17] 17. Luke 21:34-36.
