Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

10

Knowledge and Pure Intelligence

I have always taken an interest in the Brigham Young University and its wonderful achievements. It has been a great source of pleasure and pride to me to observe the measure of success which has come to its graduates. Many have gone forth from this great university to attain great distinction both in the Church, the nation, and various other fields. I expect many others to go forth from this institution of learning to make equal progress and to achieve equal renown.

I shall take for my theme, or text, tonight, an old but true saying: "Knowledge is power." And now, having given this text, I will straightway lay it aside, at least for the present and consider other things.

It is my hope and prayer that those who have finished the prescribed course of study in the various schools of arts and sciences, will not leave this institution feeling that the greatest accomplishment has been to meet the necessary requirements of this school for graduation. It is to be hoped that they have kept in mind the need of higher and better understanding than they have received in the regular courses of study which entitles them to graduation and a place in the world among their fellow men. It is the case too frequently in our great institutions of learning that the students go forth after graduation having lost sight of the most important things in life and with their minds trained and prepared to make their place among their fellows concerned alone in worldly things.

A few years back it was my privilege to visit Stanford University and there written on the panels in the church were engraved many sayings intended to impress the minds of the students with the importance of life. One of these sayings impressed me beyond the others and I made a copy of it. It is as follows:

There is no narrowing so deadly as the narrowing of man's horizon of spiritual things. No worse evil could befall him in his course on earth than to lose sight of heaven; and it is not civilization that can prevent this; it is not civilization that can compensate for it. No widening of science, no possession of abstract truth, can indemnify for an enfeebled hold on the highest and central truths of humanity.

What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Good Doctrine

This is good sound "Mormon" doctrine. There is no knowledge, no learning that can compensate the individual for the loss of his belief in heaven and in the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. An education that leads a man from these "central truths" cannot compensate him for the great loss of spiritual things. Members of the Church, and especially those who are engaged in the teaching of the youth of the Church, are very fond of quoting the following inspired sayings of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. [^1]

It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance. [^2]

I think these passages have been at times misapplied. It is true that the knowledge we attain to in this life will be beneficial to us in the life to come, no matter what may be the nature of that knowledge. But when giving expression to these thoughts the Prophet Joseph Smith had certain things definitely in mind. I have regretted that the expression: "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance," was not coupled with other sayings of the Prophet which give us a clearer meaning of this statement. What kind of knowledge was he speaking of? It was the knowledge of the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Permit me to quote some of his thoughts on this question:

It is not wisdom that we have all knowledge at once presented before us; but that we should have a little at a time; then we can comprehend it. [^3]

Process of Learning

How true this is! The individual seeking knowledge goes to school for several years. He learns line upon line and precept upon precept. There is no other way. Perhaps he may think it would be an excellent thing could he go to school, say for one year, and accomplish everything, but all knowledge comes in the same way, that is, gradually through study and by faith. In the establishment of the Church, Joseph Smith had to be instructed a little at a time. If the Lord had revealed to him the fulness of the plan of salvation with all its covenants and obligations at one time, he would have been overwhelmed as with a flood and could not have endured. So it is with us in all other matters of learning. We must plod along growing in understanding and power day by day.

Now to continue the quotation:

Add to thy faith knowledge. The principle is the principle of salvation. This principle can be comprehended by the faithful and diligent; and every one that does not obtain knowledge sufficient to be saved will be condemned. The principle of salvation is given us through the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Salvation is nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our enemies and put them under our feet. And when we have power to put all enemies under our feet in this world, and a knowledge to triumph over all evil spirits in the world to come, then we are saved, as in the case of Jesus, who was to reign until he had put all enemies under his feet, and the last enemy was death.

Perhaps there are principles here that few men have thought of. No person can have this salvation except through a tabernacle. . . .

Then knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of God. [^4]

Quotes Brigham Young

The enemies spoken of here are our sins and imperfections and ignorance of eternal truths. These we must overcome if we would attain to salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of God. Permit me to continue my quotations. This is from President Brigham Young.

Every man and woman that has talent and hides it will be called a slothful servant.

Improve day by day upon the capital you have. In proportion as we are capacitated to receive so it is our duty to do. . . . .

I shall not cease learning while I live, nor when I arrive in the spirit world; but shall there learn with greater facility; and when I again receive my body, I shall learn a thousand times more in a thousand times less time; and then I do not mean to cease learning.

All truth is for the salvation of the children of men—for their benefit and learning—for their furtherance in the principles of divine knowledge, and divine knowledge is any matter of fact—truth and all truth pertains to divinity.

But we should all live so that the Spirit of revelation could dictate and write on the heart and tell us what we should do. . . . Jesus says if we do not we cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. . . .

We are all the children of Adam and Eve, and they are the off-spring of him who dwells in the heavens, the highest Intelligence that dwells anywhere that we have any knowledge of. Here we find ourselves, and when infants, the most helpless and needing the most care and attention, of any creatures that come into being on the face of the earth. Here we find in ourselves the germ and the foundation, the embryo of exaltation, glory, immortality and eternal lives. As we grow up we receive strength, knowledge and wisdom, some more, some less; but only by keeping the commands of the Lord Jesus can we have the privilege of knowing the things pertaining to eternity and our relationship to the heavens. [^5]

So we see from these quotations that the truth that saves in the kingdom of God is that which comes in the form of gospel principles and ordinances. As the Prophet says, "Then knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven." This being true, then it is necessary that we do not forget the spiritual things and lose sight of heaven.

True Education

Discoursing on true education, President Joseph F. Smith has also given us this excellent advice.

The knowledge of truth, combined with proper regard for it and its faithful observance, constitutes true education.

The mere stuffing of the mind with a knowledge of facts is not education. The mind must not only possess a knowledge of truth, but the soul must revere it, cherish it, love it as a priceless gem; and this human life must be guided and shaped by it in order to fulfil its destiny. The mind should not only be charged with intelligence, but the soul should be filled with admiration and desire for pure intelligence which comes of a knowledge of the truth. The truth can only make him free who hath it, and will continue in it. And the word of God is truth, and it will endure forever.

Educate yourself not only for time, but also for eternity. The latter of the two is the more important. Therefore, when we shall have completed the studies of time, and enter upon the commencement ceremonies of the great hereafter, we will find our work is not finished, but just begun, we may then say with the poet:

"Lay this aside—say not your work is done. No deed of love or goodness ever dies. But in the lives of others—multiplies. Say it has just begun."

There is no science, nor philosophy, that can supersede God Almighty truth. The Lord has said, "My word is truth," and indeed it is; and I believe that the Latter-day Saints know enough about the word of God to know it is his word when they see it and shun whatever is not; and that they will abide by the word of God, for it is truth. As the Savior said, "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." I believe that the Latter-day Saints, and especially the leading men in Israel, have sufficient knowledge and understanding of the principles of the gospel that they know the truth, and they are made free by its possession—free from sin, free from error, free from darkness, from traditions of men, from vain philosophy, and from untried, unproved theories of scientists, that need demonstration beyond the possibility of a doubt. We have had science and philosophy through all the ages and they have undergone change after change. Scarcely a century has passed but they have introduced new theories of science and philosophy that supersede the old traditions and the old faith and the old doctrines entertained by philosophers and scientists. These things may undergo continuous changes, but the word of God is always true, is always right. I want to say to you that the principles of the gospel are always true—the principle of faith in God, of repentance from sin, of baptism for the remission of sins by authority of God, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost; these principles are always true and are always absolutely necessary for the salvation of the children of men, no matter who they are or where they are. These principles are always true and you cannot get away from them. No other name, under heaven, is given, but that of Jesus Christ, by which you can be saved or exalted in the kingdom of God. . . .

If the Lord has revealed to the world the plan of salvation and redemption from sin, by which men may be exalted again into his presence and partake of eternal life with him, I submit, as a proposition that cannot be controverted, that no man can be exalted in the presence of God and attain to a fulness of glory and happiness in his kingdom and presence, save and except he will obey the plan that God has devised and revealed. [^6]

Intelligence

Since I have been speaking of intelligence, perhaps it would be well to give President Smith's definition of intelligence—no, it is the Lord's definition, as I shall presently show. President Smith once said:

Christ inherited his intelligence from his Father. There is a difference between knowledge and pure intelligence. Satan possesses knowledge, far more than we have, but he has not intelligence or he would render obedience to the principles of truth and right. I know men who have knowledge, who understand the principles of the gospel as well as you do, who are brilliant, but who lack the essential qualification of pure intelligence. They will not accept and render obedience thereto. Pure intelligence comprises not only knowledge, but also the power to properly apply that knowledge. [^7]

It has been a regret to me that our Mutual Improvement Associations, and practically all members of the Church, have quoted the expression: "The glory of God is intelligence," as though this was the complete thought, and we have lost sight of the rest of the expression. What the Lord said was this: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." Then he adds: "Light and truth forsake that evil one." A man with pure intelligence will not follow in paths of evil. Ofttimes men turn their knowledge to the committing of evil, but this could not be if they were possessed of intelligence, for then they would walk in light and truth and forsake that evil one.

Ultimate View

This brings me back to my text: "Knowledge is power." While this is a true saying and we see it on every side made manifest, even where those who revel in wickedness have knowledge they have obtained the power, yet as I desire to discuss it this expression has reference to ultimate knowledge and truth. In Section 50 of the Doctrine and Covenants I find a passage which has impressed me as much as any other passage of scripture. If this saying were the only truth revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, it would be sufficient to stamp him with the power of prophetic vision. It is one of the outstanding truths revealed for the salvation of man. It has been the means of helping me to be humble and to rejoice in the eternal truth of exaltation as that truth has been revealed. It has caused me to rejoice and thank the Lord for his mercy and goodness and for the hope of eternal life which has come to me. Here is what the Lord revealed:

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. [^8]

What a glorious promise is here given unto us! All light, all truth comes from God. That which is not from him does not edify but brings darkness. If we will continue in God, that is, keep his commandments, worship him and love his truth, then the time will come when we shall be bathed in the fulness of truth, which shall grow brighter and brighter unto the perfect day. Here then, we find power, wisdom, advancement, the knowledge which is perfect and which can only be obtained through continuing in God through obedience unto him.

I like to associate with this wonderful passage another equal unto it found in Section 93. Before I quote it, however, let me comment for a moment on another saying in this same revelation. We are informed that the Lord gave to the Church and to the world, if they will receive it, the commandments which are contained in this volume of scripture, that we might know his will, and as he has expressed it:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace.

And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn;

And all those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the same and are the church of the Firstborn. [^9]

Church of the Firstborn

As I understand it, those who become members of the Church of the Firstborn are those who have kept the commandments of the Lord in their fulness. I do not understand that every member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to become a member of the Church of the Firstborn; for there are many who are not willing to walk in the light of truth and continue in God obedient to every ordinance and commandment. These will fall short of this great glory for they have not overcome by faith. Then again you see from this scripture that the promise is made that if we will walk in the light, learn how and what to worship, we become begotten sons and daughters of God and hence are partakers of his glory.

The passage, then, that I had in mind, and which I delight to couple with that in Section 50, is as follows:

The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth.

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. [^10]

Only Way

We have discovered, then, from these glorious revelations, that the only way that a person can learn all things and receive the fulness of the Spirit of truth, is through the Church and obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness. No matter how much a man may learn, no matter how long he may study, should it be through all eternity, he will never come to the fulness of truth and light—that which is pure intelligence and which has no part or lot with that evil one—only by continuing in God and through full and complete obedience to his commandments.

Here, then, we discover the full significance of the saying that "Knowledge is power." The Father has promised through the Son that all that he has shall be given to those who are obedient to his commandments. They shall increase in knowledge, wisdom and power, from grace to grace, until the fulness of the perfect day shall burst upon them. They shall, through the glory and blessing of the Almighty, become creators. All power and dominion and might shall be given to them, and they shall be the only ones upon whom this great blessing shall be bestowed. All others, no matter how much learning, wisdom and power, they may obtain, shall nevertheless be restricted in their several spheres, for they cannot attain to the fulness which is held in reserve for those who are permitted to pass by the angels and the Gods who are set to guard the way to this great exaltation.

"If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." [^11] These are the words of our Master, and it is obedience to him and his word that "unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven." It cannot be unlocked in any other way.—(Synopsis of Baccalaureate sermon given at BYU, Sunday, June 6, 1937.)

Footnotes

Every person baptized into this Church has made a covenant with the Lord to keep his commandments. We are told that we are to serve the Lord with all the heart and all the mind, and with all the strength that we have, and that too in the name of jesus Christ.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 59:5-7.
[^2] Ibid., 46:7-8.
[^3] Handbook of Instructions, Number 16, 1940, p. 131.
[^4] Ibid., p. 130.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 51, 217.
[^6] Gospel Doctrine, p. 269.
[^7] Ibid., p. 58.
[^8] D&C 50:23-24.
[^9] Ibid., 93:19-22.
[^10] Ibid., 93:26-28.
[^11] John 8:31-32.
