Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

12

The Pearl of Great Price

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls:

Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it. [^1]

A great many of the members of the Church evidently do not realize the importance of the blessings we receive in the temples of the Lord. I wish we all loved the gospel to the extent that we would be willing to do anything the Lord asks of us irrespective of what the world thinks or does. Why cannot the Latter-day Saints uphold the standards and the regulations of the Church with united effort notwithstanding what the world might do or think? With some of us it is the custom to do very much as the world does. We dress as the world does. We seek its pleasures; we follow its customs; and there is no question in my mind that these things do bring us somewhat in conflict with things the Lord has taught and commanded us to do.

Blessings Come Through Obedience to Law

The Lord says that when we obtain any blessing it is based upon obedience to the law upon which that blessing is predicated. [^2] We cannot get a blessing from him in any other way and this is according to that which was "decreed in heaven before the foundation of this world." I wonder if we have thought of this seriously?

The Lord, when speaking to some of the elders of the Church in the beginning, said: "And they who remain"—when rewards are given and men are assigned to the place where they belong—"shall be quickened; nevertheless they shall return again to their own place, to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received." [^3]

He has revealed to us things pertaining to the celestial kingdom, the terrestrial kingdom and the telestial kingdom, and how those who inherit these kingdoms will come forth in the resurrection to receive their rewards; then he says, "And they who remain shall also be quickened"—those who do not belong to any of these kingdoms—"to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received. For what doth it profit a man if a gift be bestowed upon him, and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift."

Heirs of the Kingdom

The Lord offers us what? A place in his kingdom, where we can be heirs, in other words sons and daughters, possessing and receiving the fulness of that kingdom, through obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel as we are required to take that obedience upon us in the temple of the Lord. If we will not receive these blessings then we do not rejoice in them, neither in the Giver of this great gift.

In one of the parables by the Savior he likens the kingdom of God to a treasure of great price which a man discovered in a field and, who, when he discovered it, sold all that he had and purchased that field. In other words, he was willing to forsake all for the kingdom of God. So we should be willing to give up everything in this world for the sake of the kingdom of God. This doctrine Jesus taught emphatically, saying that we are not worthy of him if we are not willing to do so for his sake.

He has offered us the fulness of his kingdom and to make us heirs to receive all that the Father has, if we will receive it through obedience to his commandments. The Lord said to John, "He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son." [^4] There are other expressions of similar nature in the Bible, but the people of the world do not understand them. In the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith this promise is enlarged upon, or made more clear. For instance, in that wonderful revelation known as "The Vision" we read:

And again, we bear record, for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the gospel of Christ, concerning them who come forth in the resurrection of the just:

They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory;

And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

Wherefore all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's and Christ is God's.

And they shall overcome all things. [^5]

All Things Are Theirs

These are the promises the Lord makes to all those who come into his Church in the waters of baptism and then, by keeping his commandments, remain washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit of Promise by obedience to the requirements made in the temples of the Lord. "All things are theirs." They become sons and daughters of God and are made heirs in that kingdom. That is what salvation means to us. I am using the term "salvation" in the full sense of exaltation. The world has a very vague idea of salvation. The great majority of men most everywhere believe that you are either saved in heaven or you are in an extremely bad place. If you get into heaven there is nothing much for you to do. You rest from your labors, being saved; no work to perform; no responsibility upon your shoulders, only to sing, or play a harp. If you are damned you are in eternal torment where you are to remain forever. They have very little idea of the exaltation which the Lord has prepared for the faithful in the mansions of the Father. The Lord has revealed it to us, and these are our privileges on conditions of faithfulness according to the law decreed in the heavens upon which these blessings are predicated.

No Exaltation without Fulness of Priesthood

There is no exaltation in the kingdom of God without the fulness of priesthood. How could a man be an heir in that kingdom without priesthood? While the sisters do not hold the priesthood, they share in the fulness of its blessings in the celestial kingdom with their husbands. These blessings are obtained through obedience to the ordinances and covenants of the House of the Lord. The Prophet Joseph Smith once said: "If a man gets a fulness of the priesthood of God, he has to get it . . . by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord." To obtain the fulness of the priesthood does not mean that a man must become president of the Church. Every man who is faithful and will receive these ordinances and blessings obtains a fulness of the priesthood, and the Lord has said that "he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion." Only one man at a time on the earth holds the keys of the priesthood; only one man at a time has the power to receive revelations for the Church; but the Lord has made it possible for every man in this Church, through his obedience, to receive the fulness of the priesthood through the ordinances of the temple of the Lord. This cannot be received anywhere else.

So being ordained an elder, or a high priest, or an apostle, or even president of the Church, is not the thing that brings the exaltation, but obedience to the laws and the ordinances and the covenants required of those who desire to become members of the Church of the Firstborn as these are administered in the House of the Lord. To become a member of the Church of the Firstborn, as I understand it, is to become one of the inner circle. We are all members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by being baptized and confirmed, and there are many who seem to be content to remain such without obtaining the privileges of exaltation. The Lord has made it possible for us to become members of the Church of the Firstborn by receiving the blessings of the House of the Lord, and "overcoming all things." Thus we become heirs, "priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory," who shall "dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever," with full exaltation. Are such blessings worth having?

I have said that only one man at a time on the earth holds the keys of this sealing power of priesthood, but he may, and does, delegate power to others and they officiate under his direction in the temples of the Lord. No man can officiate in these sealing ordinances until he receives the authority to do so by being set apart by the one who holds the keys, notwithstanding he may hold the priesthood. All the authority exercised in the temples, is then, after all, the authority centered in one man. He has the power and calls upon others to officiate and they seal upon us the keys and powers which, through our obedience, entitle us to become sons and daughters, and members of the Church of the Firstborn, receiving all things in the kingdom. This is what we can get in the temple, so that we become members of the family, sons and daughters of God, not servants.

Sons and Daughters of God

You know what it says about servants in the scriptures. Those who become servants are those who are not willing to receive these blessings in the House of the Lord and abide in them. They are not sons, they are not daughters. They are children of God, it is true, for all men are his children. But they do not inherit, and therefore remain servants throughout all eternity because they were not willing to receive that which they might have received, and the gift which was bestowed upon them or offered to them. They not only rejected the gift, but the Giver of the gift. There will be a great many servants, but there will not be many heirs, "Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." [^6]

Having put this matter before you in this way, endeavoring to impress you with the importance of these blessings obtained in the temples, I would like to ask you a question. Are these blessings to be desired? The question answers itself. Now let me ask another. When the Lord offers us these great blessings, are we justified in saying, "It is all right, we want them, but we want to put them off just as long as we can before we receive them, so that we can live as the world lives"? Is there any sincerity in that? Is there any spirit of humility or repentance, or faith in such an attitude? I have known of mothers saying to their daughters, "I do not want you to go to the temple now. Wait a little while. When you get older you may go to the temple, but now have a good time while you are young." Well, of course, if a girl is going to enter into covenants in the temple which she does not intend to keep, it is better for her not to go there. Far better for her to stay out. But is there any blessing the Lord offers us that we are justified in postponing because we feel that it will interfere with our having a good time, or indulging in the customs and fashions of the world? Is it right for us to feel that we are justified in seeking the things of the world until we are along in years and then we will repent and turn unto the Lord? Should we not seek to obtain these important blessings just as soon as we can, consistently and in reason?

The Pearl of Great Price

Children should not go to the temple until they are old enough to understand the purpose of their going. They should be taught the principles of the gospel and to have faith in God and in the mission of Jesus Christ, and should gain a testimony of the truth before they receive the blessings of the temple. I believe that a young man or woman should seek after these blessings in the temple and just as soon as they are old enough to understand the meaning of temple ordinances they should have them. Moreover, they should not go to the temple until they do have a testimony of the truth and a knowledge of the gospel, no matter how old they may be. It is not intended that these sacred covenants should be given to those who do not have faith and who have not proved themselves worthy by obedience to the gospel.

After we have received these covenants we should sacredly observe them even if it should cost us the association and good will of all the world. Why? Because we have found the pearl of great price, the kingdom of God. We are on the road to receive all that the Father has, all that he can give—exaltation. If others are not willing to receive these blessings let them take their course, but for us, let us walk in the light of the truth and forsake the world.

I do not think because girls go through the temple they will necessarily be ostracized socially by friends and companions. I know of mothers, however, who have made their daughters feel that they would be, and that they could not make themselves attractive if they went to the temple and kept the covenants made there, for they would not be able to dress according to the fashion. Such a doctrine may mean the damnation of that precious daughter in whose welfare you have such an interest if you feel that way.

Power from on High

The Lord has not offered us these blessings that we might receive them just before we die or when we are old or crippled. What are these blessings for? Not only for eternity, but to be a guide to us and a protection through the struggle of life. Do you understand why our missionaries go to the temple before they are set apart for their mission fields? This is a requirement made of them whether they are eighteen years of age, or twenty, or older, because the Lord has said it should be done. He called all the missionaries to Kirtland in the early days of the Church to receive endowments in the temple erected there. He said this was so that they could go out with greater power from on high and with greater protection. Zion was not to be redeemed until endowments were given. These are the words of the Lord:

Therefore in consequence of the transgression of my people, it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion—

That they themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands.

And this cannot be brought to pass until mine elders are endowed with power from on high.

For behold, I have prepared a great endowment and blessing to be poured out upon them, inasmuch as they are faithful and continue in humility before me. [^7]

Speaking of the building of the temple at Kirtland the Lord further said:

Yea, verily I say unto you, I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high.

For this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem. [^8]

The endowment received now is greater than that given in Kirtland, for the Lord has revealed additional covenants and obligations for us to keep. If we go into the temple we raise our hands and covenant that we will serve the Lord and observe his commandments and keep ourselves unspotted from the world. If we realize what we are doing then the endowment will be a protection to us all our lives—a protection which a man who does not go to the temple does not have.

I have heard my father say that in the hour of trial, in the hour of temptation, he would think of the promises, the covenants that he made in the House of the Lord, and they were a protection to him. He was but fifteen years of age when he received his endowments and went forth into the mission field. This is exceptional, I know, and I do not recommend that our sons and our daughters go to the temple as young as that, but that they go as soon as they are prepared. This protection is what these ceremonies are for, in part. They save us now and they exalt us hereafter, if we will honor them. I know that this protection is given for I, too, have realized it, as have thousands of others who have remembered their obligations.

The Greatest Blessing of Life

And yet mothers and fathers will say: "Oh, let the children have a good time, let them do as the world does and when their charms are gone, then they can go to the temple." Therefore many procrastinate the day of their repentance, which is a very dangerous thing to do. These blessings insure to us, through our faithfulness, the pearl of great price the Lord has offered us, for these are the greatest blessings we can receive in this life. It is a wonderful thing to come into the Church, but you cannot receive an exaltation until you have made covenants in the House of the Lord and received the keys and authorities that are there bestowed and which cannot be given in any other place on the earth today.

You have read what the Prophet has written in the Pearl of Great Price. He has given us some of the interpretations of the Egyptian characters in the writings of Abraham and we learn that Abraham wrote things and sealed them up that they cannot be read, saying: "They cannot be revealed unto the world but are to be had in the holy temple of God." They are certain keys and blessings that are obtained in the house of the Lord that we must have if we are to obtain exaltation.

The Need of Repentance

What we need in the Church, as well as out of it, is repentance. We need more faith and more determination to serve the Lord. Do not get the impression from what I have said that I feel that we should keep aloof from everybody outside of the Church and not associate with them. I have not said that, but I do want us to be consistent Latter-day Saints, and if the people of the world walk in darkness and sin and contrary to the will of the Lord, there is the place for us to draw the line. Why should we not uphold the standards of our faith? Why should we not walk in strict accord with the regulations of the Church notwithstanding what the world may think? The Lord has revealed the fulness of his gospel. We have been fully informed regarding all of its principles pertaining to salvation. Is it worthwhile for us to maintain our integrity and prove faithful to every trust? Is the pearl of great price—the fulness of the glory, honor and eternal life in the presence of the Father and the Son—worth the sacrifice we may be called upon to make? Are we, as the man spoken of in former times, willing to sell all that we have in order that we may buy this field which will bring to us everlasting joy and exaltation as sons and daughters of God? I pray that we are, in the name of our Redeemer. Amen.—(Remarks at a meeting of the high priests quorum of the Salt Lake Stake, Sunday, October 20, 1920, in the Seventeenth Ward Meetinghouse.)

Footnotes

Baptism is not merely a door into the kingdom, which entitles us to enter, bringing with us a trail of sins unrepented of. It is not that at all. We must not enter that door until our hearts are humble, our spirits contrite, and we give the assurance that we will serve the Lord in faithfulness and righteousness to the end.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 20:37.
[^2] 2 Nephi 9:27.
[^3] Rom. 6:2.
[^4] D&C 20:29.
[^5] Ibid., 20:30.
[^6] Ibid., 20:31.
[^7] Ibid., 20:32-33.
[^8] Ibid., 84:43-46.
