Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

19

"Watch Therefore"

During the past two years the question has constantly arisen and been discussed in priesthood classes, Sunday Schools and in private conversations—"Is this great war which has cast its evil shadow over a large portion of the world, and which threatens to engulf all the rest of mankind, the great last war to precede the second coming of our Lord, as predicted by the prophets?"

We may answer this question by saying we truly hope that it is; but the Lord definitely informed his disciples that not even the angels in heaven knew the day nor the hour when he should make his appearance, but his Father only. Therefore unless the Lord sees fit to reveal to us the information, we do not know when or where this great conflict will end.

Great Day Near

This much we may know, for the Lord has revealed it very explicitly: The distress and perplexity, bloodshed and terror, selfish ambition of despotic rulers, such as the world has never before seen, all indicate that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is very near, even at our doors. We have been warned by the prophets from the beginning of time. They have declared by revelation from the Lord, that in this present day, confusion, bloodshed, misery, plague, famine, earthquake and other calamities, would cover the face of the earth. The Lord told his disciples of these dreadful scenes and said men's hearts would fail them because of these things coming upon the earth:

Ye look and behold the fig trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand.

Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh.

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the sign of the coming of the Son of Man.

And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath;

And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke.

And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven. [^1]

We Were Warned

It is very evident from what we see daily in the papers that we are living in perilous times. The present condition of the world should not, however, cause us any great surprise, for we have been amply informed that these days are at hand. Only the unbelieving and rebellious against the teachings of our Lord and his prophets, have failed to comprehend these momentous events. Enoch saw our day, in fact, the Lord revealed to him the history of mankind from the beginning to the end of time. He was anxious to know when the day would come wherein this earth should be cleansed from all the iniquity upon its face and have rest. The Lord answered him:

. . . as I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah;

And the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulation shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve. [^2]

Our Savior promised that the days preceding his second coming will be typical of the days of the flood. A glance at the sixth chapter of Genesis will reveal the conditions of the world in the days of Noah and the flood and the reason for the cleansing by water. This comparison is not to be taken figuratively, but literally as it is given. The world today is corrupt and filled with violence as it was at that earlier day, for now as then, "All flesh has corrupted his way upon the earth." [^3] The Lord promised that he would never again destroy the entire world with a flood of water, but he did promise to cleanse it the second time with sword and with fire.

Remembers Promise

We may safely say that today the anger of the Lord is kindled against this generation for its wickedness and the earth again groans under the weight of iniquity which is practiced upon its face. The Almighty has not forgotten his promise made to Enoch, and the day is soon at hand when the earth again will be cleansed of all iniquity and shall rest for a thousand years.

It is very displeasing to some self-righteous souls to have any one speak of these things and say that punishment, by war, pestilence, famine and the disturbance of the elements, is coming upon mankind by decree of a just God, because of the transgressions of his holy laws. Nevertheless this happens to be the case, for the Lord has declared it. His anger is kindled against the abominations and sins of the world. Let us consider some of these predictions and warnings given to an unbelieving and rebellious generation.

Before doing so, however, it is in order to call attention to the fact that the Lord restored the fulness of the gospel for the salvation of mankind, if men would only hearken and obey his voice and the voice of his servants. His Church has again been established in the world, and the Master sent forth his servants to all parts of the earth proclaiming the day of repentance and salvation. These servants have gone forth Lord ceying as did the great prophet and forerunner of our Lord in his former coming, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." [^4] They were promised that they should go forth with power and authority, "and the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days, and they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them. . . . Wherefore, fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed in them shall be fulfilled." With this commission the servants of the Lord have gone forth with the message of salvation, and where they could not go they have sent the word, so that it has been proclaimed virtually in all parts of the earth. Moreover, the Lord clothed these servants of his with authority and sent them "unto the inhabitants of the earth, to . . . seal both on earth and in heaven the unbelieving and rebellious." [^5]

Sword Shall Fall

Yea, verily, to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure—

Unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man.

Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear;

Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh;

And the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people. [^6]

On another occasion the Lord said to these servants:

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor.

Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads. [^7]

And yet again, this warning has been given:

Hearken ye, for behold, the great day of the Lord is nigh at hand,

For the day cometh that the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven; the heavens shall shake and the earth shall tremble, and the trump of God shall sound both long and loud, and shall say to the sleeping nations: Ye saints arise and live; ye sinners stay and sleep until I shall call again.

Wherefore gird up your loins lest ye be found among the wicked.

Lift up your voices and spare not. Call upon the nations to repent, both old and young, both bond and free, saying: Prepare yourselves for that great day of the Lord;

For if I, who am a man, do lift up my voice and call upon you to repent, and ye hate me, what will ye say when the day cometh when the thunders shall utter their voices from the ends of the earth, speaking to the ears of all that live, saying—Repent, and prepare for the great day of the Lord?

Yea, and again, when the lightnings shall streak forth from the east unto the west, and shall utter forth their voices unto all that live, and make the ears of all tingle that hear, saying these words—Repent ye, for the great day of the Lord is come?

Hearken to Words

And again, the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven saying: Hearken, O ye nations of the earth, and hear the words of that God who made you.

O ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not!

How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment, and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not!

Behold the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full.

Behold, verily I say unto you, that these are the words of the Lord your God. [^8]

With these instructions, commandments and warnings, these missionaries of the Lord went forth humbly proclaiming this message of everlasting life unto the world. Many of the righteous, those of the scattered sheep of the house of Israel, were gathered out from the nations and have come to Zion with songs of everlasting joy, while the great majority of mankind have rejected these counsels and warnings, refusing to heed the revealed word of the Lord which was declared to them.

Testimony of Earthquakes

Once more the Lord issued a warning saying that after the testimony of his servants to the world—

. . . cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand.

And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people. [^9]

At the very beginning of this dispensation the Lord said he would have all men know, "that the day speedily cometh . . . when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion." [^10] Recent events indicate that the devil now has power over his dominion. In another warning the Lord adds this:

For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it?

The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come.

For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works. [^11]

After saying this he pointed out to his people how they may escape in the following words:

Way to Escape

Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her.

But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire.

Nevertheless, let it be read this once to her ears, that I, the Lord, have accepted of her offering; and if she sin no more none of these things shall come upon her. [^12]

This way of escape, insuring the protection of the Lord, is a very simple one. Unfortunately, many of the people of Zion have refused to take advantage of this promise. What a pity it is that people will pay little heed to sacred counsels, and in their madness and love of the things of the world take the hard road and have to receive punishment when there is a means of escape. When these calamities come, what right have the people of Zion to expect protection? And, if the righteous among them are called upon to suffer, the sin will be at the door of the rebellious who have not hearkened to this counsel.

We were informed that when the testimony of the missionaries should be withdrawn from the world, then should come the testimony of the voice of calamity. The missionaries have been withdrawn from the greater part of the world in fulfilment of the Lord's prediction. Referring to this eventful day, President Brigham Young once said:

Scarcely a Prelude

Do you think there is a calamity abroad now among the people? . . . All we have heard and all we have experienced is scarcely a preface to the sermon that is going to be preached. When the testimony of the Elders ceases to be given, and the Lord says to them, "Come home; I will now preach my own sermons to the nations of the earth," all you now know can scarcely be called a preface to the sermon that will be preached with fire and sword, tempest, earthquake, hail, rain, thunders and lightnings, and fearful destruction. What matters the destruction of a few railway cars? You will hear of magnificent cities, now idolized by the people, sinking in the earth, entombing the inhabitants. The sea will heave itself beyond its bounds, engulfing mighty cities. Famine will spread over the nations, and nation will rise against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and states against states in our own country and in foreign lands; and they will destroy each other, caring not for the blood and lives of their neighbors, of their families, or for their own lives.

They will be like the Jaredites who preceded the Nephites upon this continent and will destroy each other to the last man, through the anger that the devil will place in their hearts, because they have rejected the words of life and are given over to Satan to do whatever he listeth to do with them. You may think that the little you hear of now is grievous; yet the faithful of God's people will see days that will cause them to close their eyes because of the sorrow that will come upon the wicked nations. The hearts of the faithful will be filled with pain and anguish for them. [^13]

The parable the Lord taught of the Wheat and the Tares had reference to the last days. According to the story a sower planted good seed in his field, but while he slept the enemy came and sowed tares in the field. When the blades began to show, the servants desired to go and pluck up the tares but the Lord commanded them to let both the wheat and the tares grow up together until the harvest was ripe, lest they root up the tender wheat while destroying the tares. Then at the end of the harvest, they were to go forth and gather the wheat and bind the tares to be burned. In the explanation of this parable, the Lord said to his disciples that "the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels." [^14]

Cloud of Darkness

President Wilford Woodruff declared in 1896:

I want to bear testimony to this congregation, and to the heavens and the earth, that the day is come when those angels are privileged to go forth and commence their work. They are laboring in the United States of America; they are laboring among the nations of the earth; and they will continue. We need not marvel or wonder at anything that is transpiring in the earth. The people of the world do not comprehend the revelations of God. They did not in the days of the Jews; yet all that the prophets had spoken concerning them came to pass. So in our day these things will come to pass. . . . We cannot draw a veil over the events that await this generation. No man that is inspired by the Spirit and power of God can close his ears, his eyes or his lips to these things. [^15]

Two years earlier he said:

Over the millions of people on this earth, there hangs a cloud of darkness almost entirely upon their shoulders. Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I will tell you. The priesthood of God, who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings, are the only ones who shall have their safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah, and none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury.

God has held the angels of destruction for many years lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares; but I want to tell you now these angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth, waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they will be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. [^16]

Hour is Nigh

It is plain to our vision, if we have the spirit of discernment, that the time spoken of is at hand and the anger of the Lord is now kindled and what he has said is being fulfilled:

Behold the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full. [^17]

I, the Lord am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth.

I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man. [^18]

Again the Lord said:

For the hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts; that wickedness shall not be upon the earth.

For the hour is nigh, and that which was spoken by mine apostles must be fulfilled; for as they spoke so shall it come to pass;

For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on the earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand. [^19]

In regard to the wars now raging on the earth, I am sure the prophets have spoken of them. The Lord told Joseph Smith that the war between the states commencing with the rebellion of South Carolina, was the beginning of the end. At that time peace was taken from the earth, and the prediction was made that beginning at that place, eventually war would be "poured out" upon all nations, bringing misery, death, mourning, famine, plague, earthquake, vivid lightnings, etc., causing the "inhabitants of the earth to be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." [^20] It appears that now this is in course of fulfilment.

Prophets Tell of Wars

Ezekiel has given us in the 38th and 39th chapters much in detail in relation to the great battle which shall precede the coming of the Son of Man to reign. Daniel also prophesied of these great events, which may even now be on the way to complete consummation. One thing we are given by these prophets definitely to understand is that the great last conflict before Christ shall come, will end at the siege of Jerusalem. So said Ezekiel and Daniel, and the Lord declared to Joel:

For behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem. (i.e. the return from captivity.)

I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehosaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations and parted my land. [^21]

At this time, prophesied Joel, will the Lord judge the heathen:

Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great.

Multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. [^22]

So we are given to understand that when the armies gather in Palestine will be the time when the Lord shall come in judgment, and to make the eventful decision which will confound the enemies of his people and establish them in their ancient land forever.

Zechariah is another prophet who has plainly spoken of these great events. According to his predictions the nations will gather and lay siege to Jerusalem. Part of the city will fall with dire consequences to its inhabitants, when a great earthquake will come, the Mount of Olives will cleave in twain and the persecuted people will flee into this valley for safety. At that particular time will the Savior come as their deliverer and show them his hands and his feet. They will look upon him and ask him where he received his wounds, and he will tell them they were received in the house of his friends, he is Jesus Christ, their Redeemer. Then will they fall to the ground and mourn, every family apart, because their ancestors persecuted their King and the children have followed in the footsteps of the fathers.

At that time shall come the redemption of the Jews. Jerusalem shall then be rebuilt and the promises that it shall become a holy city will be fulfilled. The punishment which shall come upon those who lay siege to this land, will be their destruction. The prophets have portrayed this in much detail with all its horrors. These events are confirmed in the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith, as found in the Doctrine and Covenants, particularly Sections 29, 45 and 133. [^23]

Much could be written in detail regarding these conflicts, but what is written will suffice. It is, of course, a gloomy picture; but is it not the duty of the elders of Israel to speak of these things with warning voice? Shall we close our eyes and our ears and seal our understandings simply because some things are unpleasant to the ear and to the eye? Shall we refuse to raise a warning voice when danger approaches? When trouble is near? When destruction is at our door? Such a course would be cowardly if we know the truth. We cannot cry "all is well" when danger lurks on every side. We must not lull the people to sleep in a false security. President Woodruff declared that "no man that is inspired by the Spirit and power of God can close his ears, his eyes, or his lips to these things!"

The cup of indignation is full and the Lord's wrath is being poured out upon the wicked as he said it would be. Yet we are seeing only the beginnings of sorrow. The whole world needs repentance—repentance and the humble acceptance of the gospel as it has been revealed. This is all that will, or can, save the world from the destruction which awaits it.

Time to Repent

It is time for all those who belong to the Church who have been careless, thoughtless, indifferent, to humble themselves and set their houses in order. It is time for all who have broken sacred covenants to turn from their evil ways. Judgments and punishments are promised for the Sabbath-breakers, the immoral, the unclean, those who lie and cheat and are dishonest with their fellow men. It is time for the backbiters and all who bear false witness, to humble themselves in sackcloth and ashes. It is time for all who have not been honest with the Lord with their tithes to repent and seek forgiveness before it is too late. The day is near at hand when the judgments will be executed upon all those who have been gathered into the kingdom of God who have been rebellious, ungodly, unclean and who have practiced deception and fraud, for the word of the Lord will be fulfilled:

For the Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity. [^24]

It is time also for the Gentiles and the Jews in our midst, who have not embraced the gospel and who have not received the testimony of the elders of Israel and the revelations of the Lord, to repent and seek forgiveness and remission of sins in the waters of baptism. The heavens have been opened. The light of truth has been revealed for the last time, and it is vital that men do not procrastinate the day of their repentance to the end. These are the last days, and men will be judged according to their works, and that day of judgment is near at hand.

Pluck Out Wicked

And until that hour there will be foolish virgins among the wise; and at that hour cometh an entire separation of the righteous and the wicked; and in that day will I send mine angels to pluck out the wicked and cast them into unquenchable fire. [^25]

Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.

But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up.

Therefore be ye also ready; for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh. [^26]—(Church Section, The Deseret News, Aug. 2, 1941.)

Footnotes

That which we learn in all the experiences of life should be with the ultimate aim of eternity in view. The man who has the correct understanding of things, if he studies anything, it is with the idea that it will be useful to him not merely in this life but through eternity. We, at least, as members of the Church, should conclude that all we learn has a bearing upon the spiritual welfare of man.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 29:34.
[^2] Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 17.
[^3] D&C 50:11-14.
[^4] Ibid., 50:15-22.
[^5] Ibid., 18:10-16.
[^6] Ibid., 50:22-24.
[^7] Ibid., 93:20-28.
[^8] Ibid., 93:35.
[^9] Ibid., 93:36.
[^10] Ibid., 93:38-40.
[^11] Ibid., 84:19.
[^12] Ibid., 84:19-22.
[^13] Ibid., 130:18-19.
[^14] Ibid., 131:6.
[^15] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 51.
[^16] Ibid., p. 217.
[^17] Ibid., p. 309.
[^18] Alma 12:9-11.
[^19] 19. Ibid., 29:9-11.
[^20] 20. See D&C, Section 87.
[^21] 21. Joel 3:1-2.
[^22] 22. Ibid., 3:13-14.
[^23] 23. Read Zechariah, chapter 14.
[^24] 24. Matt. 13:41.
[^25] 25. D&C 63:54.
[^26] 26. Matt. 24:42-44.
