Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

20

"And the Truth Shall Make You Free"

As you have been listening each day since Monday to discourses on the subject "And the Truth Shall Make You Free," I trust that you will pardon me this afternoon if there shall be some criss-crossing and repetition in what I have to say. President Grant, when he was here, stated, if the report in the paper is correct, that this institution was established for the purpose of teaching eternal truth and of making Latter-day Saints. It seems to me that every institution of learning, no matter where it is or what it is, should be teaching eternal truth, and whatever is taught that does not conform to truth must eventually perish. Further, that which we learn in all the experiences of life, should be with the ultimate aim of eternity in view. The man who has the correct understanding of things, if he studies anything it is with the idea that it will be useful to him not merely in this life but through eternity. We, at least, as members of the Church, should conclude that all we learn has a bearing upon the spiritual and eternal welfare of man.

This thought will be the foundation of my remarks this afternoon. The Lord, in one of the revelations to the Church, said that at no time had he ever given a temporal commandment, and yet he had given commandments to the people on various things that we might call temporal. [^1] The building of houses, printing presses, tanneries and many other things which were for the benefit and upbuilding of the Church, and yet the Lord declares that these, from his point of view, at least, were not temporal but spiritual commandments.

I will read to you a statement by President Brigham Young:

All truth is for the salvation of the children of men, for their benefit and learning, for their furtherance in the principles of divine knowledge, and divine knowledge is any matter of fact—truth; and all truth pertains to divinity. [^2]

Now, I am sure that when President Young uttered that remarkable thought that he was inspired, and I think that is the view we should take of truth whether it is taught in mathematics or in physics or in history or in any department of education. Whatever we learn should have a bearing upon the eternities and not merely upon this mortal life.

In the early days of the Church, the Lord sent the elders out to preach the gospel. Of course, we understand that these brethren who came into the Church in the year 1830 and 1831 had come out of the sectarian world. They had been trained in the traditions of that world, and they had to eliminate much of the teaching that they had received through their traditions and training before they were properly prepared to teach the gospel. And yet, in their enthusiasm, they went out with a testimony of the truth without a doubt, but they had failed to eliminate or to rid themselves of some of the traditions that they had absorbed before they became members of the Church and which had really become part of them. And the Lord had to call them in question.

The Lord's Counsel to Missionaries

I am going to read to you a few verses from this revelation where the Lord very gently but firmly rebukes these missionaries and tries to put them in order so far as the principles of the gospel are concerned:

Let us reason even as a man reasoneth one with another, face to face.

Now, when a man reasoneth he is understood of man, because he reasoneth as a man; even so will I, the Lord, reason with you, that you may understand.

Wherefore I the Lord, ask you this question—unto what were ye ordained?

To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter, which was sent forth to teach the truth. [^3]

And to that they were ordained. Unto that we have been ordained, each one of us. And I am taking this word "ordained" in a broader sense than we usually give to it, for I think that every sister in the Church, every member of the Church—male and female—has been ordained by the power of God—in other words, has been called by commandment—to teach divine truth. I do not mean ordained by the laying on of hands as we ordain elders in the Church. Perhaps that is what the Lord meant in this revelation, but I am using the word in the broader sense, I mean that which has been required of us, which is expected of us as members of this Church by commandment to teach the truth as it has been revealed.

Ordained to Teach Truth

Now, these men were ordained to teach the truth by the Spirit of truth or the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost. And so, the Lord asked them this question, and said:

And then received ye spirits which ye could not understand, and received them to be of God; and in this are ye justified?

Behold, ye shall answer this question yourselves; nevertheless, I will be merciful unto you; he that is weak among you hereafter shall be made strong.

Verily, I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth, or some other way?

And if it be some other way, it is not of God.

And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth, or some other way?

If it be some other way, it is not of God.

Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as preached by the Spirit of truth?

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together. [^4]

We who are called and ordained to the ministry or to teach in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints carry a very grave responsibility. Every man that teaches holds a great responsibility. And he that teaches error and leads men from the path of truth is committing one of the greatest crimes that it is possible for man to commit. If he, through his teachings, is presenting false doctrine, and leading men astray from that which is eternal truth, away from the kingdom of God, he is taking upon himself a grave responsibility for which he will have to answer at the judgment seat of God.

The Lord said in one of the early revelations before the organization of the Church that the worth of souls is great in the sight of God. Then he said if a man should labor all his days and convert but one soul, he should have great joy in the kingdom of our Father, and if he should convert many souls, then much greater would be that joy. [^5] Reversing the picture, he who blinds one soul, he who spreads error, he who destroys, through his teachings, divine truth, truth that would lead a man to the kingdom of God and to its fulness, how great shall be his condemnation and his punishment in eternity. For the destruction of a soul is the destruction of the greatest thing that has ever been created.

The Lord's Instructions Continued

Now, to continue the instructions the Lord gave to these elders. What I am going to read now I consider to be one of the greatest truths that was ever revealed to man. I have marveled to think that a boy, unlearned as the Prophet was in as early a period as 1831 could give the world such a thought as this. It seems to me any rational man must reach the conclusion, that Joseph Smith never could have said this of himself, and he could only say it through the inspiration of the spirit of the Lord.

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another and both are edified and rejoice together. That is, if the truth is taught.

And that which does not edify is not of God and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. [^6]

What a wonderful saying! That is one of the great gems, a diamond truth, that the Lord has given to us and to the world, if they would receive it, through the Prophet Joseph Smith. No matter what you teach, if it is not of God, it is darkness. And eventually, no matter how well it may be received, it must come to an end.

"That which is of God is light, and he that receiveth light and continueth in God . . ." That is the key to the situation. . . . "receiveth more light, and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day."

So we understand from this that the man who seeks God and in the Spirit of truth, guided by the Spirit of truth, or the Comforter, and continues in God, will grow in knowledge, in light, in truth, until eventually there will come to him the perfect day of light and truth.

Now, we will not get all that in this life. It is impossible for a man to reach that goal in the few years of mortal existence. But what we learn here, that which is eternal, that which is inspired by the Spirit of truth, will continue with us beyond the grave and then we shall go on, if still continuing in God, to receive light and truth until eventually we shall come to that perfect day.

Now again, in another revelation given to the Church, the Lord adds something to this thought.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace.

And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn;

And all those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the same, and are the Church of the Firstborn.

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth;

And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come:

And whatsoever is more or less than this is the spirit of that wicked one who was a liar from the beginning.

The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He receiveth the fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth;

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. [^7]

Fulness of Truth

From these passages of scripture which I have read and which we have accepted as the word of the Lord, coming by revelation from him, teach us that a man cannot receive the fulness of truth except in the kingdom of God.—In other words, if you please, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. No man, no matter how great his education, no matter how much he studies in the things of the world, no matter what he does in the eternities to come, will ever reach the goal of perfection in truth or the fulness of light and understanding outside of the kingdom of God. And when I say the kingdom of God I have reference to the celestial kingdom.

Let me read this verse again: "And no man receiveth the fulness unless he keepeth his commandments. He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things." And that is the promise that is made to us as members of the Church if we will walk in the light of the Spirit of truth, or the Comforter, and in the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, keeping the commandments of God. You can't get a fulness anywhere else. Men may search, they may study, they may learn, of course, a great many things; they may lay up a great fund of information, but they will never be able to come to the fulness of truth and the brightness spoken of in this revelation unless they are guided by the Spirit of truth, the Holy Ghost, and keep the commandments of God.

Here is another thought we hear a great deal about. "The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple." [^8] Now, destruction does not mean annihilation. We know that because we are taught in the revelations of the Lord that a soul cannot be destroyed. Every soul born into this world shall receive the resurrection and immortality and shall endure forever. Destruction does not mean, then, annihilation. When the Lord says, "They shall be destroyed . . ." he means that they shall be banished from his presence, that they shall be cut off from the presence of light and truth and shall not have the privilege of gaining this exaltation; and that is destruction.

"The glory of God is intelligence." How many times we have heard that. And how many of us think that this is the complete thought, but that is only half of the sentence. And I have often marveled that we have paid so much attention to this expression just that far and have not continued farther.

"The glory of God is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth." The light and truth which leads us to a full understanding of all things and by which we are glorified in the presence of God the Father. "The glory of God is light and truth." And light and truth are intelligence. [^9]

Intelligence and Knowledge

There is a vast difference between intelligence and knowledge. Men may have a great fund of knowledge and have no intelligence. We have men of that kind in the world, very well educated, with a wonderful knowledge, but lacking absolutely in the intelligence to use that knowledge; as you will see as I further read. "Light and truth (which is the same as intelligence, the Lord declares here), forsake that evil one." Light and truth; the intelligent man, the man who is possessed with intelligence or light and truth, forsakes the evil one.

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning, and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God.

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the traditions of their fathers.

But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. [^10]

We ought to be the most thankful people in the world, to think that the Lord has opened the heavens and made known to us such wonderful things as these that I have been reading to you. I wonder if we have appreciated them. I wonder if we have understood them. I wonder if we have thought that a man may reach the exaltations without the guidance of the Spirit of God. If any man has that idea, he should repent. We cannot reach the exaltations unless we are guided by the Spirit which possesses the truth of the eternal God. The Holy Ghost is given unto us for the very purpose of bringing us to a knowledge of truth. The Lord said it would quicken our understandings; it would show us things to come. He would partake of the things of the Father and reveal them unto us. And the man who is not in possession of the Spirit of truth, the guidance of the Holy Ghost, can never understand and comprehend the things of the kingdom of God. And hence he is barred, no matter what his knowledge may be, from receiving the fulness.

Power of the Priesthood

Here is another revelation I want to call to your attention. The Lord, speaking of the priesthood and the power of the priesthood, and the ordinances of the Church which we receive through the priesthood, had this to say:

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. [^11]

So if there is no priesthood, there is no knowledge of God. And that is why the world is in darkness today, because they have no priesthood. They have lost the knowledge of God. And so they have been teaching all manner of tradition, all manner of false doctrine, all manner of man-made philosophy in relation to God and the principles of truth pertaining to the salvation of men, and that can only be received, if you please, through the power of the priesthood, for it is by that power that the keys of the knowledge of God are obtained. Let me read that again:

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries, of the kingdom, even, the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of Godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof and the authority of the priesthood, the power of Godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this, no man can see the face of God, even the Father and live. [^12]

When we read things of this nature, it ought to make every man among us who holds the priesthood rejoice to think that we have that great authority by which we may know God. Not only the men holding the priesthood know that great truth, but because of that priesthood and the ordinances thereof, every member of the Church, men and women alike, may know God. And when we study these things, then we can comprehend the words of the Savior, which is the slogan for this Leadership Week.

The destiny of the faithful man in this Church and the faithful woman is to become a son and daughter of God. That is the great gift that the Lord holds out to the members of the Church, that through our obedience and our faithfulness to the principles of truth, we shall become the sons and daughters of God. We must enter into the covenants; we must receive the obligations; we must take upon us those necessary requirements which the gospel gives to us. If we will do that and continue in God, we shall rise until we shall know all things and we shall become the sons and daughters of God, even gods ourselves. And that is not blasphemy; this truth has been taught down the ages when the truth has been upon the face of the earth.

Another Statement from the Lord

Now, may I call attention to another statement that comes from the Lord.

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. [^13]

We are not going to lose in the grave the knowledge we gain in this life. We came here to receive knowledge of things we could not get anywhere else, to get experiences here that we could not get anywhere else. The errors that we may have gained through ignorance or whatever cause while sojourning in this life we must discard, for only the truth will remain.

"It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." [^14] We have heard this so many times; I wonder if we have not, very frequently, misapplied this expression, that a man cannot be saved in ignorance. In ignorance of what? Does that mean that a man must come to school and learn everything that can be known in regard to science in all its branches? That he must learn everything that is taught in regard to social matters, in relation to history, to all these teachings that can be obtained in the public schools and universities? No, it does not mean that. It means that he cannot be saved in ignorance of the saving principles of the gospel, things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

I want to read to you a few statements from the discourses of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyment till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin, and like the ancients, arrives at the point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with him. But we consider that this is a station to which no man ever arriveth in a moment: He must have been instructed in the government and laws of that kingdom by proper degrees until his mind is capable in some measure of comprehending the propriety, justice, equality, and consistence of the same. [^15]

Every man who has natural faculties has been created with a mind capable of instruction, the faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light and communication from heaven to his intellect. And I maintain, based upon that which is written in these revelations and these statements coming from the Prophet, which I receive without any reservation, that the man who is guided by the Holy Spirit and who keeps the commandments of God, who abides in God, will have the clearest understanding and the better judgment always, because he is directed by the Spirit of truth. And the man who relies upon himself or the knowledge of other men will not have as clear a vision as will the man who abides in the truth and is directed by the Holy Spirit. I think that is self-evident.

A Statement from the Prophet

Here is another statement from the Prophet:

As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the Devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved. And while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good. Is not God good? Then you be good: if he is faithful, then you be faithful: Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and seek for every good thing. The Church must be cleansed, and I proclaim against all iniquity. A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power than many men who are on earth. Hence, it needs revelation to assist us, and give knowledge of the things of God. [^16]

That is what the Prophet means when he says a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge. And man cannot be saved in ignorance. The man who does not gain the knowledge which comes through the Spirit of God and the keeping of the commandments of the Lord may be led astray by some evil spirits for the very good reason that he will not have the opportunity of entering into the kingdom of God where evil spirits cannot go.

One more statement from the Prophet:

There are a great many wise men and women too in our midst who are too wise to be taught; therefore, they must die in their ignorance, and in the resurrection they will find their mistake. Many seal up the door of heaven by saying, so far God may reveal and I will believe.

All men who become heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, will have to receive the fulness of the ordinances of his kingdom, and those who would not receive all the ordinances will come short of the fulness of that glory if they do not lose the whole. [^17]

These are the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith; I shall not take time to read more concerning them.

There is one other statement that has greatly impressed me all my days; it has been an anchor to my soul. I have reference to the words of Alma to Zeezrom when the latter began to seek for knowledge concerning salvation and knowledge of the kingdom of heaven. Alma explained to him these truths and said:

. . . It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him.

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell. [^18]

Darkness Replaces Truth

The man who receives the light of truth and then turns away loses the light which he had and if he continue in that course eventually he will be bound by the chains of spiritual darkness. Darkness will take the place of truth as the truth becomes gradually dimmed until he has lost knowledge of spiritual things. He who walks in the light of truth receives more truth until he is glorified in divine truth—the truth that saves. I also call your attention to the first sixteen verses of Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants, and humbly ask that the Spirit of the Lord may rest upon you to lead you in divine truth.

I repeat, in all of our teachings, whether in this school or elsewhere, we should teach in the spirit of prayer, of faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ. The successful teacher, as Elder Karl G. Maeser taught, will even teach the arithmetic tables in the spirit of prayer. The successful teacher will weave into his story, whatever he teaches, the fundamental doctrines of the gospel. If we understand the truth, we will make everything conform to that which God has revealed, and therein is the path of safety.—(Address delivered at BYU Leadership Week assembly, Jan. 26, 1940.)

Footnotes

The Lord has placed upon us the responsibility to preach the gospel, but there is another great responsibility. . . . It is just as necessary that we warn the world as it is to declare the way of eternal life. Every missionary who goes out should see to it that he leaves his testimony so that he will be free, . . . and every man should be warned and left without excuse, and thus the blood of every man may be upon his own head.

---
Notas:
[^1] Moses 5:12-13.
[^2] 2 Nephi 27:1-2.
[^3] D&C 33:2-3.
[^4] Ibid., 38:11-12.
[^5] 2 Nephi 28:15-23.
[^6] D&C 33:3-5.
[^7] Ibid., 5:18.
[^8] Ibid., 5:19-20.
[^9] Ibid., 88:80-82.
[^10] Ibid., 93:38-40.
[^11] Ibid., 84:19.
[^12] Ibid., 84:19-22.
[^13] Ibid., 130:18-19.
[^14] Ibid., 131:6.
[^15] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 51.
[^16] Ibid., p. 217.
[^17] Ibid., p. 309.
[^18] Alma 12:9-11.
