Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

23

First Duty of Parents Belongs in the Home

The first duty pertaining to the training of the children of the Church belongs in the home. It is the responsibility of the parents to bring up their children in light and truth, and the Lord has declared that wherein they fail to do it, they will stand before the judgment seat to give answer. Nevertheless, we are all grateful for the auxiliary organizations, the Sunday School, the Primary, the Mutual Improvement organizations, for they have a place in the Church given to them by revelation, and their duty is to assist the parents in the home and the priesthood, too, to train our children to walk in the light and understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

They are doing an excellent job. The Lord is blessing them for it.

I have been asked to make some remarks and I pray that I may have the guidance of the spirit of the Lord that I may say those things which will be edifying, which would tend to build up and strengthen you teachers and you officers who belong to the Mutual Improvement organization and the members of the organization throughout the Church.

Your Work Is Important

We cannot get along without you. Your work is extremely important. It must be continued and must have the support of all of the Authorities of the Church.

If this life were all and death the end, then injustice would rule, justice would be defeated, righteousness would be overcome, mercy would have failed, and wickedness would triumph. But that was never intended.

There are crimes, many of them, committed in this world, unjust acts committed that go unpunished, so far as this world is concerned. But this is not the end. Retributive justice demands reparation for every wrong and every misdeed, and, if not remedied in this life, they will be remedied in the life to come.

Now, I, in keeping with your program, wish to refer to one or two things.

First, the statement from the Prophet Joseph Smith:

If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses, for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going from him and drawing towards the devil. Yes, I am standing in the midst of all kinds of people.

Search your hearts, and see if you are like God. I have searched mine, and feel to repent of all my sins. . . .

As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good. Is not God good? Then you be good; if He is faithful, then you be faithful. Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and seek for every good thing. [^1]

Prophet's Declaration

Again, this is from the Prophet:

A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power than many men who are on the earth. Hence it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God.

Here are one or two other quotations; this one from Emerson, from his essay on Compensation:

The world looks like a multiplication-table or a mathematical equation, which, turn it how you will, balances itself. Take what figure you will, its exact value, nor more nor less, still returns to you. Every secret is told, every crime is punished, every virtue rewarded, every wrong redressed, in silence and certainty. What we call retribution is the universal necessity by which the whole appears wherever a part appears.

One more quotation, that I have taken from the writings of Frederick Paulsen, written nearly a century ago, he being the teacher of philosophy at the University of Berlin at the beginning of this century:

Whoever disregards the laws of medicinal dietetics will pay the penalty with indisposition and disease, whether he believes in the validity of these laws or not. Similarly, whoever violates the laws of morality will pay for it with his own life's happiness, regardless of what he may think of them. Whoever disregards the duties which he owes himself, whoever abandons himself to intemperance and dissipation, destroys the fundamental conditions of his own welfare.

Law of Human Nature

Whoever surrenders himself to idleness and love of pleasure, expecting in this way to find his happiness, will ultimately perish in satiety and disgust; that is a biological law of human nature as well as the other law that successful activity is followed by pleasure, and that capacities grow through exercise. Finally, whoever disobeys the commands of social morality disturbs the life of others, and suffers for it himself as a social being. Whoever treats his surroundings inconsiderately, haughtily, and meanly, arouses aversion and hatred and the behavior corresponding to those feelings, his views concerning the nature of moral laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

No one exists, however, to whom these things are altogether indifferent. There is not a man in the world who can do without the love and confidence of his fellows, to whom distrust and hatred are not painful in themselves and destructive in their consequences. And even if any one should succeed in perpetrating wrong and baseness undiscovered and with impunity, he could not escape the reaction.

The fear of discovery would remain, for it is a strange fact that the man who has something to conceal always believes himself to be watched and seen by others. Consciousness of guilt makes a man lonely and should anyone succeed in shaking off all relations with others, he would not be secure against one—the judge in his own heart. Blinded by passion, he may momentarily delude himself into the belief that he has torn out his conscience by the roots; but it will come again someday and audibly speak to him.

"Be not deceived," said Paul. "God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." [^2]

Now, Professor Paulsen was speaking from the human standpoint. We speak from the standpoint of our Eternal Father. Justice must and will triumph. Truth is eternal. Falsehood must eventually come to an end.

The Lord has said in one of the revelations, that which remains is of him. All other things will perish.

Retributive Justice Sure

Retributive justice is just as sure as life. It cannot be avoided. What an awful world it would be if there were in it no hope of justice. All down through the ages, in lands of tyranny people have suffered unrighteously even to the death, but the time will come when there will be recompense, justice meted out, and everything levelled.

Alma, in speaking to his son Corianton, has given us some wonderful advice, and that by the inspiration of the Almighty, in regard to this principle of eternal justice, and the restoration of that which is right:

I say unto thee, my son, that the plan of restoration is requisite with the justice of God; for it is requisite that all things should be restored to their proper order. Behold, it is requisite and just, according to the power and resurrection of Christ, that the soul of man should be restored to its body, and that every part of the body should be restored to itself.

And it is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good.

And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their proper order, everything to its natural frame—mortality raised to immortality, corruption to incorruption—raised to endless happiness to inherit the kingdom of God, or to endless misery to inherit the kingdom of the devil, the one on one hand, the other on the other. . . .

Now the decrees of God are unalterable; therefore, the way is prepared that whosoever will may walk therein and be saved. [^3]

He was talking to his son who had been somewhat wayward and who had wondered about the justice of the Almighty. And when his father was talking to him about restoration, he wondered about it, and the father said to him:

And now behold, is the meaning of the word restoration to take a thing of a natural state and place it in an unnatural state, or to place it in a state opposite to its nature?

O, my son, this is not the case; but the meaning of the word restoration is to bring back again evil for evil, or carnal for carnal, or devilish for devilish—good for that which is good; righteous for that which is righteous; just for that which is just; merciful for that which is merciful.

Therefore, my son, see that you are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually; and if ye do all these things then shall ye receive your reward; yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored unto you again; and ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again.

For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all. [^4]

From my early youth I have remembered one statement in the discourse that Alma gave to his son Corianton. It has stayed with me all through the years, and it has been an anchor to my soul. I think of it frequently. And it is just four little words. I would like to impress it upon your hearts, and I think it would be a protection against all manner of sins. These four little words are just simply these: "Wickedness never was happiness."

Wickedness Never Happiness

That is the tenth verse of the forty-first chapter of Alma. . . . "Wickedness never was happiness."

How many there are in the world who try to find happiness in wickedness, in the violation of the commandments of God. We have all had temptations, haven't we? I should more properly say, each of us. And sometimes we think that it is just a little sin, it will not matter very much if we do this or that.

The Lord will forgive us, and besides it is so small that we will not be punished very severely, and so we step aside and we do something that we know we ought not to do. Oh, not too serious, no, but still contrary to the commandments that the Lord has given. We have turned aside and how we felt later when we took time to think and realize in our hearts that the pleasure we got out of it was not worth the price, and then we were troubled.

One little thing wherein we step aside and do something that is contrary to the commandments of the Lord, and we do not repent, how much easier it is to repeat it, and every time we repeat it, what are we doing? We are drawing farther away from God, nearer to the devil. And every little act, no matter how insignificant we may consider it to be, that is contrary to that which we have been taught, is just one step in the wrong direction and makes it easier to make the second step and then the third, until we find ourselves in dire difficulty and beyond the power of the guidance of the Holy Ghost.

Every member of this Church has been baptized for the remission of his sins. I wonder if we realize fully what that means? It means that we come into the Church and kingdom of God free from sin. Then we have hands laid upon our heads by someone who has the authority and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. What does that mean? It means that if we will walk in the light of truth, if we will observe the commandments the Lord has given us, remembering all things that he has commanded, that we will have the guidance of his Holy Spirit to direct us. And goodness knows, we cannot do without that guidance.

Time for Reflection

Are there any who have not felt the influence of the Spirit of the Lord? Who have not had the whisperings come to him or to her in regard to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ? In regard to the truth of the gospel or the organization of the Church? Have we lived without receiving that manifestation coming from the Spirit of the Lord bearing witness to our souls that these things are true? If so, then we should take inventory. We would do some reflecting.

We should find out what is the matter with us, that we have not had the assurance which we were entitled through our righteousness to receive, that this work is true, that Joseph Smith was really called to be a Prophet of God, that the Father and the Son really appeared to him, not in a dream, not in any imaginary thinking, but in the light of the day, when his eyes were open and when he knelt in earnest prayer to know the truth, when he asked for light earnestly and humbly and it was given to him.

Do we remember our prayers? Do we go to the Lord? Do we thank him for these blessings that we have received, and we have received so many of them? Or do we forget? Are we grateful to him for the many blessings that we have received?

Now, all good things come from him. Nothing comes from him that is not good. He sends his Spirit to those who are just and true and directs them, and each member of this Church is entitled to have that revelation given to him by which he may know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; and that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God; that the Father and the Son actually, in person, appeared to him; that Moroni came and revealed the Book of Mormon; that John the Baptist came and restored the Aaronic Priesthood; Peter, James and John came and restored the Melchizedek Priesthood, because it was not here, and by that restoration the Church of Jesus Christ was restored.

This Church is not a new Church. Many people think it is. It did not have its beginning on the 6th day of April, 1830. It was organized in the days of Adam, and it has been on the earth every time the Lord has had servants who would do his will, and there have been occasions when there have been apostasies, when men have turned away from the truth and ways of righteousness.

When even those who were chosen to bear his name and hold the priesthood in the authority of the living God have turned away into paths of darkness there has come an apostasy. That has occurred more than once, and it was because of that condition prevailing in the year 1830 that the Lord sent his messengers to restore again to the earth his gospel and establish his truth and send forth his word into all parts of the earth that all who will might repent and come into the Church and receive salvation in the kingdom of God.—(MIA Conference, June, 1957.)

Footnotes

The tendency of the times is towards evil. I deplore, and I know my brethren do, the tendency in the world which Latter-day Saints imitate and copy. . . . We are the people of the Lord. Why should we follow the world, why can we not be modest, why can't we do the things the Lord would have us do?

---
Notas:
[^1] Isa. 3:12-14.
[^2] Ibid., 3:16-21.
[^3] Ibid., 3:22-24.
[^4] Ibid., 41:12-15.
