Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

29

"He That Loveth Me Shall Be Loved of My Father"

For a theme I thought I would take the text of your sacrament gem, the words of Jesus:

He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father. [^1]

Two more days and we will be celebrating the day quite universally accepted as the birthday of our Savior Jesus Christ. Therefore, throughout the entire country today I think people are listening to discourses, or have listened to them, in regard to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But many of those discourses will be by men who don't know him, by some who do not receive him as the Son of God. But throughout The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in all the discourses that have and will be delivered, mention will be made of the fact that he is in very deed our Redeemer, the literal begotten Son of God, our Eternal Father. Of course I would be entirely out of place if I do not speak of him and of his mission.

Moreover, since this is the anniversary of the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, I feel inclined to say a word about him, about his mission. As one of the greatest of all the prophets, he presides over the last dispensation and no prophet has been given a greater mission, save perhaps it could have been Adam; and no prophet in the past has done more for the salvation of the human family, in my judgment, than did Joseph Smith the Prophet. As the Lord revealed to Lehi, in the record that was kept by Joseph who was sold into Egypt, the Prophet Joseph Smith was named, his mission was pointed out by that great ancestor of most of us, who became the ruler in Egypt and one of the great prophets, too, of God. Joseph Smith came into this world to perform a work in the greatest of all the dispensations since the world began, to bring salvation again to a fallen world, a world that had gone astray, a world that in large measure professed to worship the Son of God but that knew not how to worship him—because they had been taught so many traditions, had received so many terms regarding the Christ and regarding the gospel which he brought to mankind—that the world has been in constant error throughout the ages of time.

Joseph Smith Sent to Restore

Joseph Smith was sent to the world to restore what had been taken away, that which men had rejected because, as our Savior says, we loved darkness rather than light. So I had to mention the Prophet tonight. Much can be said about him and his mission that would be very profitable, but I must forego that and speak of the mission of our Savior Jesus Christ.

I am going to read to you a few words of Paul the Apostle, who spoke to the Corinthian Saints. Now, the people out in the world have a strange idea about these epistles of Paul and of the men who have written the epistles we have and the Bible. They read these epistles and apply them unto themselves and they look upon them as being declared as messages to all the world. But that isn't so. Definitely, each of these epistles were written to members of the Church—not to denominations—but to those who heard the words of the apostles of old, had received them and had been baptized and confirmed members of the Church of Jesus Christ in that dispensation.

Therefore, we should have the understanding when we read these scriptures that the things said by the apostles are not things that apply to those who have not made covenants through the gospel of Jesus Christ and did not in that day. I am going to read a most definite statement, an emphatic statement to members of the Church, some of them who had been drifting a little—like we do today—some who are not fully converted, some who had forgotten the messages that the brethren taught to them and which they received when they came into the Church—just like members of the Church are today.

So Paul instructing these members of the Church calls attention to certain conditions which are peculiar to those who have made covenants with Jesus Christ. And Paul is not speaking to this generation. He is speaking of the generation in which he lived. And so to these Corinthian members he said,

Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble;

Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is.

If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.

If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? [^2]

Paul couldn't say that to those who hadn't been baptized and confirmed, for the Lord has said definitely that those who are not members of the Church can't receive the Holy Ghost, and so Paul has said,

If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.

Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness. [^3]

We Can Not Build on Any Other Foundation

So we should take notice of this. We can not build on any other foundation. I think that there are members of the Church who have pride, who have placed gold, silver, precious things—because the world considers these—as their great goal. And they have neglected their duties and responsibilities which their membership in the Church requires of them.

Now, let me read another passage spoken to these same members of the Church, many of whom had sadly departed from the true teachings that they had received from Paul and others who had been sent to teach them:

What? Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own?

For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's. [^4]

Paul couldn't say that to those who had not made covenants. He could have told anybody anywhere that he was bought with a price, but he could not tell them that the Holy Ghost had been given to them, because it was not given except to members of the Church. But the fact remains that every soul upon the face of the earth was bought with a price—Jew and Gentile, the heathen, the atheist. No matter where a man lives or what he believes or the circumstances under which he lives, he was bought and paid for with a price, a price that was paid by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and he was the only one who could pay it. No one else was ever born into this world who could pay this price.

And from what were we bought? Before I answer that question, I want to say something else. I have heard people say, and members of the Church, "I have a right to do as I please." No, you don't. You haven't any right at all to do as you please. There is only one right that you have, and that is to do just what I read to you. Keep the commandments of Jesus Christ. He has a perfect right to tell us so. We have no right to refuse. I don't care who the man is. I don't care where he lives, don't care what he is; when the gospel of Jesus Christ is presented to him, he has no right to refuse to receive it. He has the privilege. He wasn't compelled to receive it, because our Father in heaven has given to everyone of us in the Church and out, the gift of free agency. That free agency gives us the privilege to accept and be loyal to our Lord's commandments, but it has never given us the right to reject them. Every man who rejects the commandments of our Father in heaven is rebellious.

Thousands Have Never Heard the Gospel

Of course I realize, that there are thousands of people who have never heard the gospel. They are not going to be punished for that. We can't expect a person to observe a commandment he never heard. But all those who never had the privilege of hearing it, at some time will have that privilege. If it isn't in this life, it will be in the spirit world. And every soul will have the opportunity to accept the mission of our Savior Jesus Christ or to reject it. When the Lord commands us, if we love him we will keep the commandments. This is the law to members of the Church, this little paragraph: "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." Again, the Savior said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments."

There are a lot of rebellious people in the world. We have rebellious people in the Church. We have members of the Church who set aside the commandments the Lord has given us, who fail to strictly observe them. That isn't your right. It is just your privilege, the privilege the Lord has given you to act for yourself. You are agents with the power within you to obey or to disobey. If it were not so, no one could be tried for disobedience. We read in the scriptures that every man will be tried according to his works. Well, if we are not under obligation, who can try us? Did you ever think of that? If there was no obligation for me to keep the commandments of the Lord, if I broke them, I couldn't be punished.

We don't punish men for doing something that is not contrary to the law, do we? But the Lord has given us these laws, the gospel of Jesus Christ not because it is pleasing to him, not because he is going to get anything out of it. He has given us these laws that we might get something out of them. And of course every person who keeps his commandments add that much to his glory. There is no question about that—because when we sustain him and are true and faithful to him, he is the benefactor. But are we not benefited and are not the benefits greater to us by far than they would be to him? Our Lord never gave a commandment in this world to any man or community that was not intended to be to his eternal benefit. I think sometimes we overlook that.

I get some letters from time to time. I get quite a number of letters from people who don't want to observe the Sabbath day, and they are trying to find excuses and loopholes so they won't have to keep the commandment. It isn't a grievous commandment to keep. The Lord never gave us a commandment which was hard to keep. I have heard people say it is hard to keep the commandments of the Lord. I don't want to confess a thing like that. I don't want to say his commandments are hard to keep. They are not hard for anyone to keep if they make up their minds to keep them. And in keeping them, they get great joy and satisfaction. And the pleasure and happiness that comes from the keeping of those commandments is far greater than the little pleasure they get out of breaking them. Breaking the commandments always results in remorse. It may not all come in this life, but if we go into the next life unrepentant and have not made right the violations of the law when we have broken it, we will have to pay the price.

A Misunderstanding

Let us not get the idea in our heads that we are masters of our souls. There is a little poem that some think very, very beautiful by Mr. Henley which says I am master of my soul. Many of you know it. We are only masters of our souls when we put them in perfect harmony and agreement with the commandments of God. When a man rises up and says, "I am the master. My head is bloody but unbowed," he needs repentance. No, I am ready to bow my head.

I hope the Lord will help me to keep his commandments. As I said, his commandments are not hard to keep. He said that himself. Some people say that his commandments are hard to keep. That's an admission, isn't it, that we are not keeping them?

I was talking to a man a few days ago who came into the Church not very long ago—just a short time. He said, "I never knew there was so much happiness in all this world as I get out of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Why didn't I discover these things earlier? Some of the members of the Church who have been baptized for the remission of their sins haven't discovered how wonderful the gospel is. If we had, we would study it. We would want to make ourselves familiar with it and know all about it. We would be seeking for knowledge. We would be praying for wisdom. If we spent more time doing that, we would spend less time going to picture shows and we wouldn't have time to violate the Sabbath day. Perhaps I have said enough along that line.

Now let us talk about the mission of Jesus Christ. He bought us. Let's go back to that now. He bought us with a price. No one else could pay the price. Let me read his own words to you:

For behold, I God have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men.

Wherefore, I command you again to repent. . . . [^5]

We don't fully realize the price. I don't. I am quite sure you don't. I don't think anybody does. I don't think it is within our power to comprehend the extent of the price of our redemption which caused the blood to ooze from every pore of his body before he went to the cross. Some people believe that the crucifiers drove nails in his hands and feet and left him there until he died. And goodness knows that would be terrific in and of itself. But others have suffered that. As terrible as that was, the Savior suffered far beyond that, and how it is done, I don't know. All I know is that it was done. I am fully convinced of that. His great suffering was done before he ever went to the cross.

All Have Committed Some Error

Let me ask you a question. Is there anybody here who hasn't committed some sin? If so, please raise your hand. I don't see any hands up. I can't raise mine. Well, you have done something wrong then. You admit it. Did you ever, after you had committed some wrong, feel sorry and get the spirit of repentance and wish you hadn't done it? If you haven't felt that way, you better see your bishop. I have done things I shouldn't have done and I have felt sorry. I know how I have felt. I want to tell you that being sorry after doing wrong is something that is awful. I never committed murder; I have kept my body clean; I haven't been stealing from people. When I was a kid I may have taken something that didn't belong to me like the neighbor's apples. But when I have done some wrong, I have been troubled. And I have had big, strong men, men who would face anything almost, not afraid of anything on the face of the earth, come trembling, weeping, and wondering what they could do to get cleansed from their sins.

I remember a man who was tormented almost beyond his endurance, trembling—a big, powerful fellow, who said, "Can you help me? I am afraid I have committed an unpardonable sin. I want relief. I want to know if I can get relief." And he wept and trembled. I felt sorry for him. That is just one instance.

The Savior never committed any sin nor carried any troubled conscience. He hadn't been under the necessity of repenting as you and I have; but in some way that I can not understand, he carried the weight of my transgressions and yours and the transgressions of every soul who comes into this Church from the days of Adam to our present time. He came and offered himself as a sacrifice to pay the debt for the things I have done that are wrong and that each of you individually have done that are wrong, and each other person who has been willing to repent of his sins and return to Jesus Christ and keep his commandments. He paid the price. Think of it if you can. Think of what one man can suffer for his wrongdoing. The Savior carried that burden in some way beyond our comprehension. But he carried it. I know that because I accept his word. And the great weight of the torment he went through to save us from the torment was so great that he plead with his Father that if it were possible he may not drink the bitter cup and shrink—"but nevertheless thy will be done." The answer he got from his Father was, "You have to drink it."

Can I help loving him? No, I can't. Do you love him? Then keep his commandments. If you don't, you will have to answer for them yourselves. "If ye love me, keep my commandments."

How often we think, "Oh, this is such a little thing. Surely the Lord will forgive us. We will only do it this once, just this once." When we do it once, it is rather easy to do it again. When we do it the second time, it is easy to do the third time, and so it goes.

Nephi Speaks of Our Day

I will turn to this passage:

But, behold, in the last days, or in the days of the Gentiles [that is our day] behold all the nations of the Gentiles and also the Jews, both those who shall come upon this land and those who shall be upon other lands, yea, even upon all the lands of the earth, behold, they will be drunken with iniquity and all manner of abominations.

And when that day shall come they shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with thunder and with earthquake, and with a great noise, and with storm, and with tempest, and with the flame of devouring fire. [^6]

Now, remember Nephi is talking of us. When I read these words, he means us today, people living now:

Behold, hearken ye unto my precept; if they shall say there is a miracle wrought by the hand of the Lord, believe it not; for this day he is not a God of miracles; he hath done his work.

Yea, and there shall be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die; and it shall be well with us.

And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God. [^7]

Do you think that isn't the philosophy today? I say it is. You hear this sort of philosophy right among members of the Church.

Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark.

And the blood of the saints shall cry from the ground against them. [^8]

When Adam and Eve were placed in the Garden of Eden, they didn't have to die. They could be here today. They could have continued on for countless ages. There was no death then. But it would have been a terrific calamity if they hadn't broken the law under which they lived. If they had stayed in the Garden of Eden, we wouldn't be here; nobody would be here, only Adam and Eve. So the breaking of that commandment was not a sin. I don't like to hear it spoken of as a sin. It was part of the great plan, but it brought death upon Adam. Eating of that forbidden fruit subdued the power of the spirit and created blood in his body. No blood was in his body before the fall. The blood became the life thereof. And the blood was not only the life thereof, but it had in it the seeds of death. And so we grow old and we die. But that would have been a dreadful thing if Adam and his posterity had been forced because of the fall to die and remain dead; and there would have been no redemption.

That is what Satan wanted, so he worked on them. I think he had the idea: "Now, I have destroyed the Lord's plan. I have caused Adam and Eve to become mortal and they are going to die, and everyone will have to die, and they will become subject to me." And he laughed about it.

Only One Way of Redemption

There was only one way of redemption, one way in which reparation could be made and the body restored again to the spirit and that was by an infinite atonement, and it had to be made by an infinite Being—someone not subject to death and yet had the power to die. And so, our Father in heaven sent us his Son, Jesus Christ, into the world with life in himself. And yet, because he had a mother who had blood in her veins, he had the power to die. He could yield up his body to death and then take it again. Let me read his own words:

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.

No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father. [^9]

So he had power to lay down his life, and on the cross he paid the price for our sins, and at the same time for Adam's transgression. So his infinite atonement resulted in two things, (1) restoration of the body to the spirit, and (2) the redemption of those who accept the gospel of Jesus Christ and who will be loyal in the keeping of his commandments—freedom from their own sins.

Now in conclusion, what are we going to do? Tuesday is the day we celebrate his birthday. Are we going to love him? Are we going to realize the great work he did for us and are we going to be grateful, or are we going to violate his commandments? I am thinking right now of what we are doing in the world. Sister Smith and I passed the liquor store. It was night. The lights were on inside and we could see through the windows, here in our community; and it was so crowded inside that it would be hard for someone else to get in. They were buying liquor so they could celebrate Christmas. What were they doing? They were showing their contempt for their Lord and Master whose day was to be celebrated. Is that a crime? Yes. Isn't it a crime to show contempt for the Son of God? And throughout the world today there will be millions of people carousing, drinking, doing all manner of evil, and to them it is not what it should be to us—a Holy Day.

When we go home tonight let's get on our knees and thank the Lord for his many blessings and our Lord Jesus Christ for his mercy and his greatness and goodness for making it possible for us through the keeping of his commandments to go back into the presence of God our Father and dwell with him.—(Christmas message, South Eighteenth Ward, December 23, 1956.)

Footnotes

I tell you, my good brothers and sisters, it will not be every member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who gets into the celestial kingdom because many who have been baptized and become members of this Church will not prepare themselves to receive those blessings, and they have to come on merit just the same.

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^2] Moses 5:11.
[^3] Ibid., 3:17-19.
[^4] Ibid., 6:19-20.
[^5] D&C 19:16-20.
[^6] 2 Nephi 27:1-2.
[^7] Ibid., 28:6-8.
[^8] Ibid., 28:9-10.
[^9] John 10:17-18.
