Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

30

Whom Shall We Love and Obey?

It is good to look into the faces of you people. You have assembled here tonight to partake of the sacrament, to renew your covenants, take upon yourselves the name of Jesus Christ, by which we are known.

Throughout the Christian world at this time people are preparing to celebrate the birth of the Son of God, but they don't know him. He is a perfect stranger to most of the people who will celebrate. They don't understand his mission. They are getting farther and farther away from the fundamental truth that he is in very deed the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. During the past century the Christian world has departed farther and farther from the fundamental truth that he came into this world to be a sacrifice, to redeem man from the fall, and to restore them again to everlasting life.

Many of the teachers today in the Christian world are denying the resurrection of the dead. Had I thought of it when I was home I would have brought a little clipping from one of the largest magazines which shows that to be a fact, that they are now discarding the resurrection of the body and confining the resurrection merely to the continuation of the soul, as they call it, or the spirit of man. We, the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ought to know fully why Jesus Christ came into the world, what his mission was while here, how he accomplished it, and what it means to us individually as well as collectively.

Now I know it is customary on occasions like this to talk about the birth of the Son of God, sing about his birth, to talk about the nativity; but how many of the people in the world are going to celebrate in that spirit of faith and love which we ought to give to the Redeemer of the world? Very few of them. With the great majority it has become—the Christmas day—a day of feasting and drunkenness, revelry and the committing of sin. It is a time when we ought to be humble and when our minds ought to be turned to contemplate the great mission which he came here to accomplish and which he fully accomplished for the benefit of mankind of the world.

Celebrate in a Spirit of Prayer

I hope that when we celebrate during this coming week we will do it in a spirit of prayer, humility, and thanksgiving and that we will remember he came here to fulfill a mission which he was given and voluntarily received, to redeem all mankind from death and restore their bodies to them again, whether they believe in him or whether they do not; and that he came also to redeem all who are willing to obey him and keep his commandments, from their sins. The world—that is, some of the Christians throughout the world—have a very strange idea why he came and they teach he came to save sinners and all the sinners had to do was confess the Son of God by their lips and they were saved.

No, he did not. He came to save the repentant and those who are willing to abide in his truth. His mission was to redeem every creature from death because one man was responsible for death and we inherited it. Now we didn't bring death into the world. We inherited it. Our fathers did before us and clear back to the beginning; and only one man was responsible for bringing death into the world. I can get on my knees and thank my Heavenly Father that he did it.

Now, I can open the Bible, almost any Bible—maybe I can this one—and find written here that Adam, not the words of the scriptures but man's interpretation, that he committed a dreadful sin. No, he didn't. Adam did not commit a sin. He came to do the thing that he was called upon to do, that he was assigned to do before he ever came here. He had to "transgress," in quotation marks, but he came and had to violate a law in order to keep another one which was far greater.

Necessary for Adam to Choose

We overlook, I think, the statement that occurs as we have it clearly stated in the version of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price when the Lord told Adam he could partake of all the fruit of the garden except one. He said to him in substance, "If you partake of that fruit, you will die and if you want to stay here then I forbid you to eat the fruit. Nevertheless you may choose for yourself." I could turn to that and read it to you: "Nevertheless you may choose for yourself. If you want to eat it, there it is." He had to.

I think I have said in this room before that I am very, very grateful for Mother Eve. If I ever get to see her, I want to thank her for what she did and she did the most wonderful thing that ever happened in this world and that was to place herself where Adam had to do the same thing that she did or they would have been separated forever. And I think of the words of Lehi, "Adam fell that man might be and men are that they might have joy." [^1] The world has an idea that Adam just destroyed everything—he and Eve, because if he had kept the commandment the Lord gave him not to eat the fruit, this world would have gone on in peace and happiness, without sickness or death, no misery; and here they foolishly did this thing and brought death upon their posterity, disease, trouble of every kind.

Nothing could be more foolish than that. They had to partake of that fruit or you wouldn't be here. I wouldn't be here. No one would have been here except Adam and Eve; and they would have stayed there and been there today and been there forever. That is, they could have stayed there just as long as they wanted to in that condition if they had never partaken of that fruit; and they could have been there now and all along and would have had no children. We wouldn't be here.

So Father Lehi said, "Adam fell that man might be and men are that they might have joy." Adam and Eve did the very thing they had to. I tell you, I take my hat off to Mother Eve and I rejoice and I want to read what she said. When Eve learned what the full condition was, the result of that fall, she preached this discourse. It is the first discourse ever recorded—that is, that we have.

Our First Recorded Discourse

"And Eve, his wife, heard all these things," all the angel had revealed—"and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." [^2]

"Never would have known it." She learned what it meant. She was not sorry. Adam was not sorry and he did not commit a sin. Now transgression does not necessarily mean a sin. I have an explanation for that. I don't want any of you scientists to contradict me. I just want to present to you a scientific proposition. Now I have never performed this and I take the word of our good brethren who know. I take what they say, that water is composed of two elements, two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen—hydrogen and oxygen—and they make water when they are brought together and form water we drink, and our bodies have to have it. They might criticize, but I am sure they will agree that you transgress a law, just like Adam transgressed a law, if you take two elements and bring them together and make something else. In that combination then you have changed the nature of it. That is all they did, and they made it possible for children to come into the world. They made it possible to die.

Now Adam had no blood in his body before the fall. He could have lived forever, and there was no blood. But when they partook of that forbidden fruit, their bodies changed and blood became the life of the body, the life-giving fluid. It was not before and they had a spiritual life or activity in some way which I don't understand, but after the fall they became mortal and blood is the life of the mortal body.

They became mortal and subject to death and blood became the life of the body, but it made it possible for mankind to be born into this world and that is what we came here for. We read in the scriptures that we rejoiced over the council held in heaven and the privilege of coming here and partaking of bodies of flesh and bone and pass through all the vicissitudes of life and coming in contact with evil, with sin. It was necessary that all the conditions which we find should be here in this world, but it wasn't necessary that we should partake of evil.

This Life Is a Probationary State

Again I go back to Father Lehi. He called this life a probationary state. We are on probation. We are here to be proved. When we were in the presence of our Father, we walked by sight. In this life we have to walk by faith, and it was necessary that we be tempted, to be tried to see whether or not we will keep the commandments of God under all the vicissitudes of mortality. The Lord couldn't shut temptation out of our lives. It had to be here because we are here to be proved, to see whether or not we will keep the commandments of God. No, the Lord isn't going to save everybody in the celestial kingdom, and we are being tried, tested to see whether under all these conditions we can remain faithful and true. And if we can't, then we don't receive the rewards of faithfulness.

That is all preliminary to what I want to say about the mission of our Savior. This leads up to it. Adam brought death into the world. He brought a condition where if something hadn't been done, some infinite action hadn't been done, we would die because we would grow old. There is death in blood as well as life and we grow old and die, and without the atonement of Jesus Christ we would remain dead and our bodies would go back to the dust to remain. We would have been taken captive by Satan and subject to his will and that would have been our finish. That is what Satan hoped for.

But this was all prepared before we ever came here, before the earth was made and Jesus Christ was chosen and called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. The mission was given to him and he voluntarily received it, that he would come down here and through the shedding of his blood and death, he would make it possible for every soul to get his body back again. Everyone who believes on him and keeps his commandments will receive celestial exaltation. That was his mission.

It is nice for us to sing about the birth of the Son of God, the coming of the angels, the singing of the hosts of heaven, the new star appearing as a sign. Those are beautiful things. They stir your soul when you read them. But why did the heavens rejoice? Why was there all of this manifestation of happiness when the Savior came into the world and they knew that he came here to die the most terrible death that came upon any individual? They knew that. He knew it. And I want to tell you this—that nobody in this world ever suffered the excruciating punishment that came to Jesus Christ. No one else. No mortal man could do it.

The Savior's Great Suffering

And what was so terrible about it? Hanging on a cross with nails in his hands and feet and left to die must be something terrifically excruciating, but thousands died that way. Not only were some hung on the cross, nailed to them, but fire set under them, being scorched to death. That was terrible. But the punishment the Savior took upon himself was not only that torture, but one more terrific. It was the punishment of the spirit and soul. It was the carrying of a burden that is so great and so dreadful that I can not comprehend it.

What was that burden? The wrongs that I have done, that you have done and every other man and woman, every person who has repented of his sins and is willing now to keep the commandments of God and honor the Son of God. Jesus paid our debt. That punishment caused the blood to ooze from every pore. He had a terrific punishment, punishment of mind, of soul, before he ever got to the cross. And he was paying the debt that I owe and that you owe. Or I should put that in the past—the debt we owed because he paid it for us and he did that on one condition and that is that we keep his commandments. And, brothers and sisters, how many of us forget?

Now we have partaken of the sacrament tonight. Most of us have partaken of the sacrament time and time again. What did we do? We renewed again our covenants. What covenants? Three of them: That we take upon us the name of Jesus Christ, that we would always remember him, and that we would always keep his commandments. And each time we eat that bread and drink that water we covenant with our Father in the name of his Son that we will do these things, and then we go out and violate the Sabbath day and break the commandments in other ways and forget. Many of us do the things we promise we will not do because we don't comprehend the nature of the covenants which we take. But it is the most serious thing in all the world. And when we eat that bread and drink that water we covenant that we will take upon us the name of Jesus Christ—we are called by his name, that we will keep his commandments, that we remember what he did for us. And then we go out and don't do these things. We go out and violate immediately, sometimes, the Sabbath day and don't keep it holy. He has given us commandments and sometimes we set them aside because we have inclinations to do something else.

Whom Should We Love?

When we stop to think about it, who in this world should we love above everything else? Or who should we love above everything else in the world? Let me put it that way. The Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Love him more than we do our own lives, or our own fathers and mothers or children; more than we love ourselves, because without his blessings we would have nothing. We owe all of that to him and he did that voluntarily. He wept over us when he was here. More particularly did he weep over those who did not keep any of his commandments and who were rebellious against him. We are not rebellious. We do these things thoughtlessly and without understanding and don't have in our minds the clear understanding of what it means to be true to him. Well, we ought to get it in our minds what being true to him and his Father means.

I read here in Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants that he is going to save somewhere, to some degree all of the children of men except those who have known the light, have had the knowledge and understanding of the knowledge and then turned away and become a son of perdition. All else he is going to do something for them, no matter how we transgress his commandments, but they have to pay the price of their own sinning and the Lord will then make them as happy as possible. He has made kingdoms for them. He can't bring all of them back into the celestial kingdom and the kingdom where his Father is. They have to be willing to keep the commandments to go there. And if they want exaltation, to become sons and daughters of God and receive the glory of godhood, then they have to keep every law and commandment and every covenant that has been offered to us and be true and faithful to them.

What Is the Reward?

And then what is the reward? We become joint heirs with Jesus Christ and the Father gives us the fulness of his kingdom. That is the reward of faithfulness and we shut all that out—or many of us—because we love this world more than we love him. We should love his Father, and that is the first great commandment. It has been given to us in our own day and repeated in our own day. It is our duty and responsibility to love him.

I tell you, my good brothers and sisters, it will not be every member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who gets into the celestial kingdom because many who have been baptized and become members of this Church will not prepare themselves to receive those blessings, and they have to come on merit just the same. They are based on our faithfulness and our integrity and our love of the truth, and if we don't keep them, we can't have them. We will go to one of the other kingdoms and the Lord will make us as happy as can be according to the law. And there are laws, eternal laws just as definite as the ones of nature, as of gravity. You suspend something and cut it loose and it will drop every time. You can't cut something loose and make it stay, because it will drop back to the earth. Well, if we are so attached to the earth, then we seal upon ourselves a place in one of the inferior kingdoms, not the kingdom of God, not the celestial kingdom. That requires our absolute faithfulness.—(Christmas message, Eighteenth Ward, December 20, 1959.)

Footnotes

A wise man is the man who puts first things first. And what are the first things? To know why we are here, where we came from, and where we are going, and to discover the truths while we are here that will take us to the right place after we are gone. Anything short of that is folly.

---
Notas:
[^1] Moses 5:12.
[^2] Ibid., 6:58-59.
