Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

31

"Seek Ye Earnestly the Best Gifts"

I have been thinking of quite a number of things while listening to the brethren and sister.

First of all, what is an education? I suppose it is going to school, taking several courses, being trained by men in all the philosophies of the world and getting a diploma, a degree. Then we are educated. I have been thinking of this great professor that Brother McConkie spoke about, a man who is renowned without question because of his great learning; but in my opinion, he will have to forget about everything he has learned and start over again. One simple truth pertaining to our salvation is worth all of the philosophies of men existing in the world without the knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

A wise man is the man who puts first things first. And what are the first things? To know why we are here, where we came from, and where we are going, and to discover the truths while we are here that will take us to the right place after we are gone. Anything short of that is folly.

Brethren and sisters, do you ever take time out from your busy days to reflect upon where you came from, why you are here, what you are expected to do while here, and what the end is going to be? If you don't, you are missing some great opportunities to help you to carry on correctly in your journey through this mortal life. I would rather know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God who came into this world to redeem us from death and give us life again, eternal life, immortality, and that he came to cleanse us from our sins upon conditions of our repentance and our obedience to his commandments, than to know all other things that the world can teach. For the one truth that Jesus Christ is the Son of God is worth more than all of the philosophies the world has produced.

All Knowledge and Wisdom Is Centered in God

The Lord has revealed to us from whence we came, and that was his presence. He has revealed to us why we are here—that is, all who are willing to be taught. He has pointed out to us the road we should travel and has pointed out clearly where we will end if we are faithful and true. These things are worth more than all the world can give you. Now, I don't want to leave the impression that the world can give us nothing that is worth having, but whatever they do give that is worth having does not come from them. It comes from God. It is knowledge that he has imparted, given to men, for all knowledge and wisdom are centered in God, and all that we receive comes from him, no matter from what source it comes.

It would be a wonderful thing to be a great scientist, a great mathematician, a great philosopher, a great poet—any one of these things—but what good would it be to you or to me to have given unto us all of the knowledge that the world can impart in any branch of science or all of the branches of science that the world can give, and yet we never learned the purpose of baptism is for the remission of sins; if we never discovered that it is essential to our exaltation to have faith in God; that we haven't learned the great principle of repentance? What good would all the other be to us?

I suppose this great teacher has a very vague idea of God or he has no idea at all, because I think he has never set before himself the task to find the way that leads to our Eternal Father. He has never learned the purpose of the mission of Christ in this world. If he had, he would have accepted Joseph Smith as a Prophet of God. So, as I say, putting first things first—a knowledge of God and the plan of salvation, and then to live in accordance with those principles of eternal truth is worth more than all the world can give without it.

Human Nature Hasn't Changed

You know, human nature hasn't changed in 6,000 years. We are not a bit different from what they were in the first century following the fall of Adam. Men have discovered a great many things. The Lord has revealed to them a great many things, but they have the same appetites, same desires, the same aspirations, the same greed, selfishness, seeking for advantages and power, the same as they had in the beginning.

In this book [Pearl of Great Price] I want to read this:

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and unto their daughters. [^1]

Now, the Lord commanded Adam to do that and to teach them the eternal truths that were revealed to him after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden. And in another place the Lord told Adam to teach these things to his children. Perhaps I ought to read that verse. After explaining to Adam the purpose of his fall, the results of it, how to come back into his presence, the Lord said,

Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying:

That by reason of transgression cameth the fall which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood and by the spirit which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so must ye be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of my Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory. [^2]

And so Adam told that to his children, and I will repeat,

. . . Adam and Eve blessed the name of God and they made all things known to their sons and daughters.

And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God, and he commanded them saying: Believe it not, and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. [^3]

Revelations Tell Much About History

We read in the revelations the Lord has given us many things about the history of this world and its inhabitants and what the end will be. The Lord gave a revelation to John on the Isle of Patmos and pointed out to him the conditions that prevailed and would prevail upon the face of the earth down through the ages, and how eventually would come the great last battle. The Lord has said much to us in the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith about these things and how Michael will fight our battle. And by the way, that is one war I want to get into—on the right side.

We [my good brethren] were discussing a few days ago the power of Satan. We were discussing about our Savior—and somebody asked the question: Does Satan really know that in the end he is going to lose? Then someone raised another question: Well, if he is sure he is going to lose, he would give up the struggle. We had quite a discussion. Then one of our brethren said, "He already has 90 per cent of the people who have lived on the face of the earth." We have all been on his side, or nearly, at times. You stood out and opposed him in the spirit world. He has captured most of the inhabitants of the world and perhaps he thinks that when the final war comes he will be strong enough to win the battle. I wonder if he does!

I think he is here this afternoon, so I am going to tell him that he is going to lose the battle. He is usually with us, he is right in the way. That's one thing we ought to learn—that his forces are organized and he would rather destroy a member of this Church than anyone else on the face of the earth, and he has a force big enough to send a legion after any one of us if he thought it took that many. Don't think he is sleeping and has lost any of his energy, whether he knows he is going to lose eventually or not. That matters little. But it does matter much whether we are going to be on his side or on the side of Jesus Christ.

You have read in the scriptures—I don't need to turn to them—where the Lord says, "Narrow is the way that leads to eternal life and few there are that enter in thereat, but broad is the way and wide is the gate that leads to destruction and many there are that go in thereat." [^4] You have read it. It's been that way down through all the ages. And I have heard members of this Church say it is awful hard to keep the commandments of the Lord. Why? Are you listening to the whisperings of Satan? Do you follow the impressions that come from him? You get them. You don't realize it, but you get them. And is it difficult to follow the impressions that we are entitled to receive from the Holy Ghost?

Commandments Are Not Difficult

You know, I would be ashamed as a member of this Church to say that it is hard to keep the commandments of the Lord. I wouldn't want to confess it. I think I would keep it quiet even if I thought it true. It isn't hard if we would live as the Lord would have us live. If we have a contrite spirit, repentant, a pure heart of determination to keep his commandments, you are not going to find any commandment that the Lord has given that is going to be difficult. They won't be difficult. Satan will make you think they are, and don't think he hasn't power.

Does he have power to heal the sick? Yes. He also has power to make them sick. He has power over the elements and power to do great things. We read in Chapter 24 of Matthew—I am not going to read it to you but just for emphasis open the book. In Chapter 24 of Matthew the Lord tells us he will have power even to deceive the very elect. You people listening to the radio on Sundays—I mean TV—and that is left closed up on Sunday at my house. Nobody looks at it. You who do have seen this man who goes around healing people before the public. Do you think the Lord is with him? Do you think it is the Spirit of the Lord that is directing him? If you do, you have two more thinks coming. The Lord doesn't advertise his healings. He doesn't send men out with a blare of trumpets to invite people to come and get healed. And when someone comes in the name of the Lord to heal, he will also preach his gospel. These are to be keys to you so you can understand. Read what the Lord says in Section 46 of the Doctrine and Covenants. I am going to take just time to refer to a passage here that we all ought to be familiar with:

But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be deceived by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men and others of devils.

Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given. [^5]—(Ensign Stake Conference, July 1, 1956.)

Footnotes

The living of a clean life and faithful performance of duty in the building up and maintenance of the kingdom of God on the earth are essential to salvation. For the male members of the Church a faithful performance of duty in the priesthood and for women also to be true to every covenant pertaining to the exaltation. Without the sincere observance of all these laws and covenants, salvation cannot come in the celestial kingdom.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 132:8-14.
[^2] Matt. 5:48.
[^3] James 2:10.
[^4] Matt. 11:29-30.
[^5] 3 Nephi 27:16-19.
