Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

32

The Saving Ordinances of the Gospel

In a revelation given to the Church in 1843, the Lord made this emphatic declaration:

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord.

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of man, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God. [^1]

This statement should be beyond dispute on the part of every soul who truly believes in the authority of the Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ. In the kingdom of God there should be obedience to every law and deep gratitude for every blessing. We are instructed that the kingdom of God is a kingdom of order and obedience. Naturally we should accept the fact that in such a kingdom all things would be perfect. The kingdom must be one absolutely free from contention or variance of views. In this mortal world it is natural for men to have difference in their views on many things, but they should not be at variance in relation to any of the divine laws leading to eternal salvation. These eternal principles have, no doubt, been practiced and obeyed on millions of earths which have gone on to their glory according to the revelations given to Moses and others of the ancient prophets. So we reach the conclusion that the laws and ordinances which govern in the kingdom of God have reached the stage of eternal perfection. Therefore when Jesus said to his disciples, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect," [^2] it has a very significant and definite meaning.

Important to Keep the Whole Law

James, in his epistle said: "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all." [^3] This statement has caused arguments and disputations; yet when it is understood it is plain to see that it is true. Surely no person could inherit eternal life who was not willing to abide in the whole law by which the kingdom is governed. Therefore if they kept all but one of the commandments on which salvation is based, and rebelled against that one, the blessing of salvation would be denied them. Yet the Savior has said:

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly of heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. [^4]

Surely if we love the Lord we will not find any heavy burdens in observance of his divine laws.

Let us consider briefly what some of these essential principles and ordinances are on which salvation and exaltation are based.

First we have the principle of faith, which we are informed is the foundation of revealed religion. Faith in God the Eternal Father and in his Son Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world, and in the Holy Ghost, who form the presiding authority in the universe.

Second: The principle of true repentance. On this subject the Savior has said:

And it shall come to pass, that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world.

And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father.

And this is the word which he hath given unto the children of men. And for this cause he fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words.

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. [^5]

Third: Baptism for the remission of sins. This is by immersion in water by one who is duly commissioned to administer in this ordinance of the gospel. Paul has made this principle very plain in his epistle to the Roman members of the Church, wherein he said:

What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?

God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?

Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.

Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. [^6]

A Definite Statement

Here is a very definite statement that through baptism we have been transplanted from the life of sin to the life of faith and obedience to the kingdom of God. In other words obtained a spiritual resurrection, or transfer from the life of sin to the kingdom of God, where sin should no longer abound.

Fourth: The laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. This is a great gift promised to every faithful member of the Church, by which they become, through their sincere faithfulness, a companion with the Holy Ghost, which the Savior said the "world cannot receive," [^7] and which gift is bestowed by the laying on of hands of one who holds divine authority.

Fifth: Obedience to all the other ordinances and covenants belonging to the kingdom of God. The living of a clean life and faithful performance of duty in the building up and maintenance of the kingdom of God on the earth are essential to salvation. For the male members of the Church a faithful performance of duty in the priesthood and for women also to be true to every covenant pertaining to the exaltation. Without the sincere observance of all these laws and covenants, salvation cannot come in the celestial kingdom.

Among these covenants which we are commanded to keep is that of marriage. Contrary to the prevailing doctrines in the world, marriage was decreed in the beginning to be an eternal union of husband and wife. The Lord never intended that marriage should be merely a civil or temporary contract between a man and a woman to endure only during their mortal lives, and then to come to an end. The first marriage ever performed was assuredly intended to be forever, for death had not come into the world. Nor is there any divine commandment which declares that when a marriage is performed according to the law of the Lord, it was to come to an end at death.

Perhaps the most misunderstood passage of scripture in the Bible is that recorded about the discussion which the Sadducees held with the Savior when they came to him and presented, evidently a fictitious story of the woman who had seven husbands. After telling their story they expected to trap the Savior and he would be unable to give them an answer, but he read their hearts and answered them according to their own folly. Be it remembered that these Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection of the dead, and this was but a catch question presented for the purpose of placing the Lord in an awkward situation, but he read their hearts and answered them according to their folly. He could not have given them any other answer than the one that he did, and that was to the effect, that this woman would have none of these husbands, but that those who held views like the Sadducees, if ever worthy to go to heaven would go there separately and singly, for they could have no marriage in eternity. The Lord has said the same thing by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, of which I shall speak later.

Divorce and Marriage

When, however, the Pharisees came to the Savior in relation to divorce and marriage, the Lord gave them a very different answer. Let it be remembered that these Pharisees, although apostates at heart who had rejected the Savior, yet they believed in the resurrection of the dead, and while it is true that they also endeavored to trap the Lord into making some statement that could be criticized and perhaps confuse him, they did agree with him in the doctrine of the resurrection. To them the Savior gave the correct answer which I quote:

And he answered them and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female,

And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder. [^8]

Here is a definite statement by our Savior that marriage was intended, when it was performed by the Lord's plan to endure forever. Now in the dispensation of the fulness of times, the Lord has revealed to Joseph and for the Church, the correct order of marriage which is to endure forever. The commandment given to the Church in relation to marriage is as follows:

Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world: therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world.

Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven; which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory.

For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever. [^9]

A Foolish Error

Now think of what these foolish young people do when they marry out of the Church or out of the temple and remain satisfied with such a union? They cut themselves off from the exaltation in the kingdom of God. They deny to themselves the glorious privilege of being members of the family of God which is spoken of by Paul. For said he the whole family of God are blessed by his name, and they deny to themselves the privilege of belonging to our Father's family. [^10]

Moreover they place themselves where they cannot receive the blessings of eternal increase, but must remain forever alone, evidently miserable in the thought that they have willfully denied themselves the glorious privileges of eternal exaltation. If they accept the blessings coming from the eternal union granted to husbands and wives who accept the divine law the Lord has promised them the fulness of his kingdom, for the Lord has said:

And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom. Therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him. [^11]

Paul taught this doctrine clearly to the Saints in his day, as this will indicate:

For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God;

And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. [^12]

Privileges and Blessings of Heirs

As heirs what will be our privileges and blessings in the kingdom of God? We shall be crowned with eternal lives, which means eternal increase forever, and we will be blessed with the inheritance of kingdoms, principalities and it is written:

Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject to them. . . . [^13]

Now the Lord has given us this caution:

Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory.

For strait is the gate and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me.

But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye may be also. [^14]—(Fireside talk, August, 1961.)

Footnotes

There is a blindness far more serious than to lose the sight of the eyes. It is not a blindness that comes without our help. It isn't forced upon us. You could call it a disease, but it is one that is acquired; and the majority of men upon the face of the earth are plagued with it.

---
Notas:
[^1] Kings 3:8-13.
[^2] Ecc. 2:17-23.
[^3] Ibid., 3:1-7.
[^4] Ibid., 3:8-17.
[^5] Ibid., 3:18-20.
[^6] Ibid., 7:29.
[^7] Ibid., 12:13-14.
[^8] Matt. 19:4-6.
[^9] D&C 132:15-17.
[^10] Eph. 3:14-15.
[^11] D&C 84:37-38.
[^12] Rom. 8:15-17.
[^13] D&C 132:20.
[^14] Ibid., 132:21-23.
