Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

33

Spiritual Blindness

There is a blindness far more serious than to lose the sight of the eyes. It is not a blindness that comes without our help. It isn't forced upon us. You could call it a disease, but it is one that is acquired; and the majority of men upon the face of the earth are plagued with it. In fact, a large percentage of the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are troubled with it. I say it is acquired. It is easily obtained. It doesn't pain us now.

I am speaking of spiritual blindness. What I am going to say tonight has something to do with that. I am going to do something I have never done before that I recall. I am going to pay a little attention to the sermon that was preached by the man who is considered the wisest man in the world except the Son of God—the king of Israel—and that sermon is in the Bible. It is a discourse by Solomon. But I would like to say a few words about Solomon.

When he became king the Lord appeared to him. Therefore, Solomon without doubt had the priesthood. And he prayed to the Lord that he would receive blessings to guide him, that he would do the right things as king of Israel. He prayed as follows:

And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.

Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?

And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.

And God said unto him, because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment;

Behold, I have done according to thy words; lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and honour; so that there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all thy days. [^1]

Solomon Did Not Remain True

Now unfortunately Solomon didn't remain true. He served the Lord and had wisdom. But the time came when he fell into transgression and was led astray by the wives he had taken contrary to the commandments of the Lord. Therefore he lost his standing before the Lord. But nevertheless, before this he had shown his wisdom and had received the blessings the Lord had promised to him.

And it was while he was under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord that he, as the preacher in Israel, gave this discourse. Now I am only going to refer to certain things in it, but there are a few things in it of the words of the son of David, king of Israel. I say I am only going to refer to a few things in it, but I am going to refer to them with a plea to you, my good brothers and sisters, that you pay a little more attention to the things the Lord has written in his scriptures. I am not going to ask you if you have read the Book of Ecclesiastes, but if I do, I am sure I would not get too many hands. When Solomon wrote these things he was seeking for wisdom, and according to this story he tried to find it in many ways, to find peace and happiness, and he found it wasn't in sin. It wasn't found in the praise of men. It wasn't found in the pursuit of this world's goods.

This discourse is one that you may properly be inclined to say is a discourse on vanity. Solomon discovered that nearly everything in this life you can trace back to vanity and the desire for people to excel, to gain prominence or to seek for those things which bring recognition rather than happiness. If that can stimulate you enough to have you read the Book of Ecclesiastes, I will be doing something:

Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under the sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.

And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity.

Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labour which I took under the sun.

For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.

For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?

For all his days are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanity. [^2]

Who Would Succeed?

Now he is talking about who would succeed, whether it be a wise man or a fool. When a child is born into this world, what do we know about what he is going to be? And as you look over the world and read the history of nations, you will discover that vanity has been the stimulating principle in the lives of most people. It has been the thing that has ruled kings and princes, men, rulers and magistrates; and it even gets into the hearts of the humblest of us. Therefore it would be well to see what Solomon has to say, to see if we could check ourselves from falling into the temptations that come through pride and through the feeling of desiring to be superior, to excel, instead of being humble and faithful before the Lord. I am going to read a few of these verses found in the third chapter:

To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:

A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;

A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down and a time to build up;

A time to weep and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;

A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;

A time to get, and a time to lose; and a time to keep, and a time to cast away;

A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak. [^3]

I wish I could learn to do that.

A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.

What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?

I have seen the travail which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised in it.

He hath made every thing beautiful in his time; also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.

I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice, and to do good in his life.

And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour, it is the gift of God.

I know that whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever; nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it; and God doeth it, that men should fear before him.

That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already been; and God requireth that which is past.

And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there.

I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked; for there is a time there for every purpose and for every work. [^4]

Philosophy of Solomon

Occasionally a little of the philosophy of this great man—and he was a great man, and when he was writing this he had the inspiration of the Almighty. I think when you go home you should get your Bible and read it. It is not very long and you will study a little of the philosophy that is given by this king unto whom the Lord gave this wisdom and had to take it away again, before he fell into his own trap and violated the very things that he counseled others to do:

I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are beasts.

For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast; for all is vanity.

All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. [^5]

That reminds me of what the Lord has written in the revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, Section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants. It is a great truth. Every soul born into this world came into it innocently, that is, so far as this life is concerned. There is no taint that can be laid to his charge. That is what Solomon is saying here. You know that the majority of men confessing to be Christians, don't believe it? That the Christian churches which call themselves orthodox in the Protestant world and the great church which the Lord has named and which I shall not name, has damned all little infants that come into the world, and the only way they can escape damnation is for someone to sprinkle them with a little water. And they say that every soul born into the world is tainted. How grateful we should be that the Lord has revealed to the Church of Jesus Christ the truth—that all children were innocent when they came into this world. There is no sin that can be laid to their charge and this is according to the decree of Almighty God before the foundation of this earth was laid. So, I will repeat the words of Solomon:

Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions. [^6]

The Lord didn't send wickedness into the world. It came from another source. Little children are born into this world just as innocent and as free from sin as is possible for anyone to be. They are not tainted. They don't have to be sprinkled with a little water to cleanse them from original sin because the Lord Jesus Christ came here and redeemed every soul in the world from original sin and I don't care who he is or what he believes. He paid the debt for original sin. Original sin is Adam's fall. Christ atoned for it by the shedding of his blood. It is the most wicked thing in all the world to teach that little children are damned and cannot go into the presence of God nor behold the face of Jesus Christ if someone has not been kind enough to dip his finger in water and touch them, the children, on the head.

I will read one more verse from the sayings of this once wise man:

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. [^7]—(Message, South Eighteenth Ward, July 13, 1958.)

Footnotes

We are here on probation, but we are not left to walk in darkness. We have been given divine assistance if we are willing to receive it, so that the judgments which shall be meted out will be just and every man judged according to his works.

---
Notas:
[^1] Matt. 6:9.
[^2] John 20:17.
[^3] Heb. 12:9.
[^4] D&C 76:22-24.
[^5] Ibid., 88:14-16.
[^6] 2 Nephi 2:19-22.
[^7] 1 Cor. 3:11-21.
