Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

34

The Purpose of Mortal Life

It is a fundamental doctrine of the Church that man is the offspring of God, that he is literally the Father of our spirits. Our Savior taught his disciples to pray, "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name." [^1] Moreover he constantly taught them that his Father was their Father, and to Mary, after his resurrection he said: ". . . go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." [^2]

In the Book of Hebrews it is written:

Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? [^3]

Again of the vision given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon they have written:

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. [^4]

A Fundamental Doctrine of the Church

It is a fundamental doctrine of the Church, based on divine revelation, that we are dual personalities. That is to say we are combined spirits and bodies of flesh and bones, and as spirit children of God we dwelt in his presence before the foundation of the earth was laid. However, in the spirit existence it was impossible for us to receive a fulness of joy and obtain the ultimate destiny which our Father had prepared for us. To reach this goal it was necessary that we have bodies as tabernacles in which our spirit bodies could dwell, and thus we become perfect souls. [^5] To bring to pass and give us needed experience that could not be obtained in the world of spirits, preparation was made for us to come to this earth where we obtain bodies of flesh and bones and pass through a short period of mortality where we are tried and proved to see if we will be true to all divine commandments in this mortal state; walking by faith and not by sight. In the spirit existence we walked by sight in the divine presence of our Eternal Father. In mortal life which was prepared for us, we are walking by faith through the guidance of divine revelation coming through chosen prophets who receive commandments from the Lord by which we are to be governed.

This mortal life is a probationary state where we are tested and tried under conditions of temptation from evil sources, and encouragement and guidance by divine assistance and revelation.

Lehi when instructing his son Jacob said:

And after Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit they were driven out of the garden of Eden, to till the earth.

And they have brought forth children; yea, even the family of all the earth.

And the days of the children of men were prolonged, according to the will of God, that they might repent while in the flesh; wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their time was lengthened, according to the commandments which the Lord God gave unto the children of men. For he gave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parents.

And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end. [^6]

Paul, also writing to the Corinthian Saints said:

For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble;

Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is.

If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.

If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?

If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.

Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.

And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.

Therefore let no man glory in man. For all things are yours. [^7]

The Lord's Words to Joseph Smith

The Lord also taught us in this generation the nature of this probationary state, and that we are here to be tried and through obedience to the gospel we shall receive the eternal reward of exaltation in his presence. Speaking of Adam's transgression which brought death and banishment from the presence of the Father, the Lord said through the Prophet Joseph Smith, to the members of the Church:

But, behold, I say unto you that I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son.

And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation—that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe;

And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not;

For they love darkness rather than light, and their deeds are evil, and they receive their wages of whom they list to obey. [^8]

From these passages we learn that we are here on probation, but we are not left to walk in darkness. We have been given divine assistance if we are willing to receive it, so that the judgments which shall be meted out will be just and every man judged according to his works.

One glorious doctrine of the gospel is that every soul shall have a chance. The thousands upon thousands who have died without any opportunity to hear the gospel ad without the privilege of accepting its ordinances are not to be overlooked. Here is where the work of salvation of the dead comes in. In the justice of God every soul is to have the opportunity of repentance and acceptance of the gospel truth. Otherwise there could be no justice in the plan of salvation, and our Eternal Father would be unjust. But he is not unjust, and the mercies of the atonement of Jesus Christ reaches out to embrace all and restore them to immortal life and gives to all who will repent and receive the truth, the privileges of eternal life.

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph the Lord said:

All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts. [^9]

This Life Is a Proving Ground

We learn, then, that this life is a proving ground; and while its period is very short, it is the most vital one in our entire existence, pre-mortal, mortal, or the eternal life to come.

We see that those who will not repent and who reject the plan of salvation cannot be redeemed from their banishment, or "spiritual fall." In a moment of temptation or rebellion against divine commandments, one may lose all or a great part of divine approbation and righteous reward. A man may cut himself off from ever obtaining the blessing of eternal life. It should be remembered that those who enter the next life are divided into two classes (1) those who obtain immortality, which is the power to live forever, but banished from the presence of the Eternal Father, and (2) those who obtain eternal life, which will take them back into the presence of the Father and the Son to dwell in immortal glory. [^10]

Every soul will receive a reward based on merit. All who obey the gospel, receiving all of its covenants will eventually receive the fulness of joy in the celestial kingdom. In mortal life, spirit and body are not inseparably connected, and there will come the separation in death, but in the resurrection they will be inseparable never to be divided, and the righteous will go on to become creators, for the Father has promised all who are faithful and true that they shall become his sons and his daughters receiving the fulness of glory in his kingdom.

Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them. [^11]

John the beloved apostle, writing to members of the Church in his day said:

Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.

Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression of the law.

And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in him is no sin. [^12]—(Delivered May 1, 1956 at Brigham Young University.)

Footnotes

Every baptized member of the Church receives the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. This, however, will not save them unless they continue in the spirit of light and truth. Therefore it is a commandment from the Lord that members of the Church should be diligent in their activities and study of the fundamental truths of the gospel as it has been revealed.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 1:1-5.
[^2] Joseph Smith 1:31, 33-34.
[^3] Jeremiah 31:31-34.
[^4] DHC 2:23-24.
[^5] Ibid., 4:588.
[^6] 2 Nephi 2:19-22.
[^7] 1 Cor. 3:11-21.
[^8] D&C 29:42-45.
[^9] DHC, Vol. 3:380.
[^10] Moses 6:43-60; 2 Nephi 2:15-21; Alma 42:26; D&C 29:42-44.
[^11] D&C 132:20.
[^12] I John 3:1-5.
