Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

36

Be True and Faithful to Every Covenant

It is a pleasure to me to have the opportunity of being here with you and meeting with you in this tabernacle. My first visit here was half a century ago. I have been here many times since, but I did not come to talk about how many times I have been here. I am glad to have the opportunity of meeting with you, and it has been very pleasing to me to have some of these simple truths of the gospel presented before us.

We, as Latter-day Saints, have a great many duties to perform. I wonder if we do not sometimes get a little careless, a little thoughtless, a little neglectful, and we do not pay as much attention to the simple things that belong to the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Theme Is in Relation to Prayer

The theme this morning has been in relation to prayer. I wonder if we ever stop to think why the Lord has asked us to pray? Did he ask us to pray because he wants us to bow down and worship him? Is that the main reason? I don't think it is. He is our Heavenly Father, and we have been commanded to worship him and pray to him in the name of his beloved Son Jesus Christ. But the Lord can get along without our prayers. His work will go on just the same whether we pray or whether we do not. He knows the end from the beginning. There are many worlds that have passed through the same experiences that we are going through. He has had sons and daughters on other earths where they have had the same privileges and the same opportunities to serve him and the same commandments that we have had given to us. Prayer is something that we need, not that the Lord needs it. He knows just how to conduct his affairs and how to take care of them without any help from us. Our prayers are not for the purpose of telling him how to run his business. If we have any such idea as that, then of course we have the wrong idea. Our prayers are uttered more for our sake, and to build us up and give us strength, and courage, to increase our faith in him.

Prayer Humbles the Soul

These principles of the gospel will bring us back again into his presence if we are true and faithful. Prayer is something that humbles the soul. It broadens our comprehension; it quickens the mind. It draws us nearer to our Father in heaven. And any way you look at it, it is a benefit to us, not to him. We need his help, there is no question about that. We need the guidance of his Holy Spirit. We need to know what principles have been given to us by which we may come back into his presence. We need to have our minds quickened by the inspiration that comes from him, and for these reasons we pray to him, that he may help us to live so that we will know his truth and be able to walk in its light, thus, keeping the many commandments that have been given unto us that we may, through our faithfulness and our obedience, come back again into his presence.

Our missionary brother, speaking of the words of the Lord to Job, drew attention to the fact that at one time we were in the presence of our Eternal Father. There is not a soul in this room, not one, that has not seen him. You do not remember it, I do not remember it, but nevertheless there was a time before we ever came into this world when we dwelt in his presence. We knew what kind of a being he is. One thing we saw was how glorious he is. Another thing, how great was his wisdom, his understanding, how wonderful was his power and his inspiration. And we wanted to be like him. And because we wanted to be like him, we are here. We could not be like him and stay in his presence, because we did not have glorious bodies of flesh and bones. We were just spirits, and the spirit does not have flesh and bones. But we saw him in his glory and it was made known to us that by keeping his commandments and observing every covenant that would be given to us on this earth, we could come back again into his presence, receiving our bodies in the resurrection from the dead—our spirits and bodies being united again, inseparably, never again to be divided.

Be True and Faithful to Every Covenant

If we will just be true and faithful to every covenant, to every principle of truth that he has given us, then after the resurrection we would come back into his presence and we would be just like he is. We would have the same kind of bodies—bodies that would shine like the sun. Moreover, if we are faithful and true while we are here, we would be his sons and his daughters.

We are all his children. All the people on the face of the earth are his children. And they will always be his children. But the Lord is going to make a great segregation after the resurrection of mankind, and many, in fact the greater part of the inhabitants of this earth, will no longer be called the sons and daughters of God, but they will go into the next world to be servants. You know the Lord said in that wonderful sermon we call the Sermon on the Mount:

Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat:

Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. [^1]

Eternal life is the great gift held in reserve for all those who are willing to keep the commandments of the Lord here.

All Will Receive the Resurrection

All will receive the resurrection of the dead. Their spirits and bodies will be united again, never to die. Is not that eternal life? No, not in the words of our Father in heaven. It is true that all of the people upon the earth, all who have been on the face of the earth, all who will yet be, will get a resurrection. Their bodies and spirits will be united again after they have sojourned here upon the earth, and they will come forth from the grave never to die again. We call that immortality; the right to live forever. But the Lord has put his own interpretation upon eternal life. Eternal life is not only immortality, the right to live forever, but eternal life is to have the same kind of life that our Father in heaven has and to be crowned with the same blessings and glories and privileges that he possesses. In other words, that we might become on the other side of the veil sons and daughters of God, or as Paul states it, members of his household; members of the family of God. Now those who do not receive the gospel of Jesus Christ, no matter how good they may be when they return or come forth from the dead and receive immortality, will not be classed as members of the household of God because they have not kept the covenants that would make them sons and daughters of God. To become sons and daughters of God we have to keep all of the covenants that belong to the gospel of Jesus Christ and be true in them to the end of our lives. Then we will inherit; we will be called heirs.

Paul speaks of our being joint heirs with Jesus Christ. And as heirs of God we will be entitled to inherit. To inherit what? Not that he is going to step down from his throne that we may ascend. Not that, but we will inherit the same blessings and privileges, opportunities of advancement that he possesses, so that in course, I was going to say of time, but I will say of eternity, we may become like him, having ourselves kingdoms and thrones. If any of you who are here present prefer, when you get on the other side, to be a servant and perhaps go into the terrestrial kingdom, you will have that privilege. You do not have to keep other commandments. You do not need to pay your tithing if you want to go into those other kingdoms. You do not need to pray to your Father in heaven, and you can go into one of those other kingdoms. You do not even have to be baptized for the remission of your sins to go into those other kingdoms. And as you have been baptized and are members of the Church, you do not have to keep all the commandments the Lord has given—you will have to keep some of them, but you will not have to keep them all—and you can go into the telestial kingdom or into the terrestrial kingdom. But if you want to go into the presence of God and dwell in the celestial kingdom and see the glories of exaltation, then you must live by every word that proceeds forth from the mouth of God. We must pray to keep us humble; to draw us out and nearer to our Father in heaven that we might be in closer communication with him. So we must learn to pray.

Learn to Be Truthful and Obedient

We must learn to be truthful, obedient, sincere, having the willingness to walk by every commandment the Lord has given. Now I have heard people say sometimes that it is awful hard to keep the commandments of the Lord. I am not going to make such a confession, and I do not believe it. I do not want it to be hard for me to keep the commandments of the Lord. I do not want it to be hard for you. I hope it is not. It ought to be an easy matter for the Lord says, "My yoke is easy and my burden is light," and when a man or a woman says, "Well, it's awful hard to keep the commandments of the Lord," then I wonder what ails them. Which one of the commandments is hard to keep? Which one are they breaking?

If we love the Lord as we should there is no commandment that he can give us that will be hard for us to keep. The paying of tithing seems to be a hard commandment for some people. Well, what ails them? Selfishness? Lack of the love of God? What is the first commandment given to us? To love the Lord our God with all our heart, might, mind, and strength, and in the name of Jesus Christ to serve him. That is the great commandment. If we do that we are keeping all of the commandments, every one of them. A man that cannot pay his tithing is not going to have the privilege of sitting down in the councils with the just. Why should he? He is not going to be classed among those who are entitled to be heirs in the kingdom of God. The man who never prays will not have the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. He cannot. It is through prayer that the Spirit is drawn to us and we to that Spirit. And thus our hearts are made tender, our spirits become contrite, and through the keeping of this commandment we learn to love the Lord our God with all our heart and the Lord Jesus Christ. If we do not love our Savior with all our heart, then we do certainly need repentance. There is not time for me to tell you why. But we ought to love him above all things on the face of this earth, because he has done more for us than anyone else that ever lived in this world.—(Uintah Stake Conference, May 17, 1958.)

Footnotes

I want the missionaries to remember their obligations in the priesthood quorums to which they belong, to their bishops, to the presidencies of stakes; and then when something is offered them to do in some Church capacity, to accept it—not find themselves so busy in the things that pertain to this world that they haven't time for the things of the kingdom of God.

---
Notas:
[^1] Matt. 7:13-14.
