Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

37

Advice to Returned Missionaries

I have listened with a great deal of interest to the remarks of each of those who have spoken, and I want to give a little advice to these returned missionaries that will be profitable to them, I believe, if they will only hearken to it. For two years and perhaps more with some of them they have been off in the mission field among people who have no faith, or what faith they have is misplaced. They have been spending their time exclusively in the study and the preaching of the gospel. Now they have returned home.

I believe this is a critical period for them, because now they will be called upon to spend their time preparing for the needs of the mortal life. They will be perhaps building homes. If they are not married, and I suppose they are not, that will be one thing they will be expected to do and looking forward to. They are going to take upon themselves many responsibilities that mortal life will demand of them. They are going to come in contact with the world in a little different light from the one which they were in as missionaries for the Church. There, their whole time and attention was centered upon study and preaching and trying to convert people to a knowledge of the truth as has been revealed. And they testify that this has been a very profitable experience, which no doubt it is.

Matters Pertaining to Mortal Life

But now they are home. Some others perhaps will continue their courses in school, I suppose. There they will run into danger according to the times and the nature of education as I view it today—godless education for many. At any rate, their time is going to be very largely related to matters pertaining to the mortal life, and I do not want them to forget that they have been missionaries, nor lose the spirit of missionary labor, nor their integrity to the Church, and their necessity of obedience to the priesthood.

A great many of our missionaries that come home bear witness of the truth. They say they have a testimony. Then they go out into business, enter employment which requires a great part of their time. And so they come in contact with the world in a very different life from the one which they were in, in the mission field. I want to impress upon them the need of continuing in their exercises, and in their obedience to the duties and responsibilities which the Church places upon them. If they will do that, all will be well. Many of our missionaries return, and then their thoughts are centered upon the things of this life, the making of a living. They had certain ambitions and they find themselves perhaps forgetting the obligations which they owe to their priesthood and to their Church. As time goes on the danger is, as it has been proved by so many, that their ardor decreases and their thoughts and attentions are given more and more to the things of this life—perhaps the making of money which is one of the most dangerous things in all the world.

I want them to remember their prayers, and when I say that I just do not mean these returned missionaries. That is something we all should remember. I want them to remember their obligations in the priesthood quorums to which they belong, to their bishops, to the presidencies of stakes; and then when something is offered them to do in some Church capacity, to accept it—not find themselves so busy in the things that pertain to this world that they haven't time for the things of the kingdom of God.

Many Returned Missionaries Forget

A great many of our missionaries return, then they forget. I find them—missionaries who went into the field when I went into the field; many who have gone into the field since then—they come home, then they have been so busy and their minds have been centered so much on the things of this world that they have neglected their obligations in the Church and to their Heavenly Father. Under those conditions they find themselves drifting, getting farther and farther away from light and truth.

I want them to know and I want you all to know that Satan today is busier than he has ever been in the history of this world. He is filled with more hate and rage and determination, in my judgment, than ever before. Now John saw this and spoke of it. It is recorded in the Book of Revelation that this would be the case, and that he would put forth his efforts with greater vigor because he knows he has but a short time. What I say to these missionaries is just as true and needful to all members of the Church—those who have not been in the mission field and particularly to our young people.

We have reached a stage in our history, according to my understanding—and I have had some experience through the years—that the fashions of the world and the things and the pleasures of the world find more place in the hearts of members of the Church than ever before. I would like to have somebody point out to me that I was wrong, but I don't think they can. Many of our young people are growing up with the love of the world in their hearts, and the fashions of the world and following of the world.

Need for More Teaching in the Home

During this year we have been trying to impress upon parents the need of paying more attention to their children, having a little more of the spirit of the gospel in their homes, a little more unity and a little more faith; a little more responsibility religiously, spiritually on the part of the fathers; also, of the mothers; more of the teaching of the gospel in the home. The Lord had to condemn some of our brethren in the very early days, and he did it very severely because they were neglecting their children in the home.

From my observation I believe it is true the children of today in many of the homes of the Latter-day Saints are lacking in the discipline that ought to be given to them. They have too much freedom. I am not opposed to their having freedom. I do not want anybody to be slaves or unable to exercise their freedom and reason. But the children of the Latter-day Saints today are becoming rebellious and disobedient, and I think it is largely due to the fact that there is neglect of the responsibility the Lord has placed upon us to be exercised in the home.

We do not have family prayer as we ought to have it. I learned that some of these very missionaries—I do not mean those who have spoken here, but the young men and young women that I interview in the mission field—when I ask them if they have family prayer—not every time—they say, "No, we don't." That is a lost art. "Do you pray?" Then they hesitate, "Yes, occasionally." "Once in a while," they say, "when I feel the need." Are we only going to pray when we feel the need? The Lord said, "Seek me early that ye may find me." Are there times when we cannot find him? Yes, it is very possible.

So I call these things to your attention, you fathers and you mothers. In the early days of the Church here, President Brigham Young and others used to say, "It is the kingdom of God or nothing." We are not seeking the kingdom of God and nothing. There is no joy or peace nor salvation outside of it.—(Ensign Stake Conference, Sunday, August 14, 1960.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith stated that if we are not drawing nearer unto God, we are approaching nearer to the devil, a balanced education in which the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ are emphasized is the only correct kind of education.
