Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

38

Fundamental Gospel Truths Balance Education

This is a wonderful sight. I doubt if it could be duplicated anywhere, in any school, in any country. But most, if not all, of you who are here assembled are here because you have advantages that you could not obtain in any other university—at least that I know of—on the face of the earth. You have the privilege here of receiving a balanced education. By that I mean an education where you obtain training and knowledge of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God—where the fundamental truths of the gospel are taught, and these are of more importance than any other subjects that may be presented to you here, no matter how important other subjects may be.

The Prophet Joseph Smith stated that if we are not drawing nearer unto God, we are approaching nearer to the devil. A balanced education in which the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ are emphasized is the only correct kind of education. This great university was established for that purpose—that the students might come and be trained in the fundamental truths pertaining to their salvation and in the kingdom of God. That sort of an education is the most important; all other things are secondary. A school without the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ is deficient. And that, of course, would apply to nearly every school everywhere, where they do not have the opportunities and the privileges which are given to you.

Fundamental Truths

In all your learning you should get understanding of the fundamental truths pertaining to your salvation and the kingdom of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith said a man could not be saved in ignorance. Ignorance of what? Of the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

We came into this world having all former knowledge removed. There is not a soul in this building who has not been in the presence of God our Eternal Father. At one time we were acquainted with him. We came here into this world for two very important reasons that I would like to mention: First and foremost, to get tabernacles of flesh and bones for our eternal spirits, that we might go on to full perfection eventually in the kingdom of God. The other great purpose was to gain experience—to learn something that could be learned only through mortality. Now there were other important reasons. I could not name them all. Time would not permit it if I could. But we came here to be tried, tested, to see if we could walk in the light and understanding of eternal truth, shut out from the presence of God our Eternal Father.

We are in school. I do not mean in school in the Brigham Young University. We are in the school of mortal life, partaking of all the activities that come, which are given unto us—the trials, the temptations, the suffering; the physical suffering, the coming in contact with evil as well as with good. I have had the question come to me many times: Why, when Satan was cast out of heaven, was he privileged to come here to this world to tempt the sons and the daughters of God? He was permitted to come down here to tempt us, to try us. We are on probation to see whether, when we are shut out of the presence of our Eternal Father, we will be true and faithful to him. The Lord never left man helpless, to grope and find his way, without any guidance.

One Man's Opinion

I remember reading what one man, who was considered to be a very great character, said, speaking of this life, "The only guide we have is our reason." What a sad world this would be if the Lord had placed us here, had then withdrawn, left us alone to work out our temporal salvation without any guidance, any inspiration, any knowledge coming from the other side to help us, to direct us in the course we should take. What a dreadful world that would be, if men were groping in spiritual darkness, trying to find their way with nothing to guide them but what they, themselves, might figure to be right and wrong.

Mortality is just one step in our eternal advancement. It is a very short period. I do not know how long we lived in the spirit world. We may have been there a very long time, the way we would consider time. Considering eternity, we are here only for a moment. What is a hundred years, should a man live that long, in comparison to eternal life? And yet this life is the most important period, in my judgment, in our existence. It is the period of testing (on probation, as Father Lehi put it) to prove ourselves—guided of course, by the revelations of the Lord as he has sent his revelations to us by the presence of angels, the coming of is own Son, by the inspiration that he gives through his servants the prophets.

Reason for Mortality

The Lord has not left us just to grope, to find our way. After Adam's transgression an angel came to him and to Eve and gave them instructions as to why they were here and what the Lord expected of them. I think that Mother Eve has given us one of the clearest statements in regard to the fall, our purpose for being here, and what it means. It is a very brief discourse, found in the Book of Moses in Chapter five:

And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.

But Eve added something that is very, very beautiful:

And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. [^1]

Now she grasped this whole situation, the reason for mortality. We are here to be tried, tested, proved.

Lord Ready to Guide

The Lord did not leave Adam to grope and find his way, nor did he any of his descendants from that day until now. The Lord has always been ready to guide, to instruct, to bless. He started Adam and Eve out on the right track and told them to teach their children. The fulness of the gospel was presented to them and then, in obedience, they taught their children. But there is one statement that is very significant in this story:

And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God . . . Believe it not; and they believed it not (that is, the descendants of Adam believed it not) . . . And man began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. [^2]

We are face to face with all these vicissitudes of life. Evil is here; righteousness is here. Any living soul can be directed in ways of truth and righteousness if he so desires, whether he is in the Church of Jesus Christ or whether he is not. There is one great gift that the Lord has given to every living soul—and that is the Light of Christ, which is given to every man who is born into the world—the Light of Christ. If they will hearken to the whisperings that come to them and the guidance that they may receive through the light, it will lead them to the truth.

Gift of Holy Ghost

There is a difference between the Light of Christ and the gift of the Holy Ghost. The gift of the Holy Ghost is only given to those who are baptized for the remission of their sins and have hands laid upon their heads for the gift of the Holy Ghost. That is a far greater blessing. But the Light of Christ will lead every soul to righteousness, to the keeping of the commandments of the Lord, if they will hearken to it. I think this light is many times spoken of as conscience.

What is it that speaks to you when you say your conscience troubles you or your conscience directs you to do this or that, maybe when you are tempted to do something that is contrary to that which is right? Well, I would interpret it as the Light of Christ that is in you, that gives you that spirit of discernment and understanding so that you can choose the right and avoid the evil, if you will just hearken to it. But how much greater is the light that comes through the gift of the Holy Ghost! And that is the privilege given to every member of this Church by the laying on of hands after baptism.

Now I am going to say something that maybe I could not prove, but I believe is true, that we have a great many members of this Church who have never received a manifestation through the Holy Ghost. Why? Because they have not made their lives conform to the truth. And the Holy Ghost will not dwell in unclean tabernacles where perhaps the Light of Christ remains. But the Holy Ghost will not dwell in unclean tabernacles or disobedient tabernacles. The Holy Ghost will not dwell with that person who is unwilling to obey and keep the commandments of God or who violates those commandments willfully. In such a soul the spirit of the Holy Ghost cannot enter.

That great gift comes to us only through humility and and faith and obedience. Therefore, a great many members of the Church do not have that guidance. Then some cunning, crafty individual will come along teaching that which is not true, and without the guidance which is promised to us through our faithfulness, people are unable to discern and are led astray. It depends on our faithfulness and our obedience to the commandments of the Lord if we have the teachings, the enlightening instruction, that comes from the Holy Ghost.

Manifestations Denied

When we are disobedient, when our minds are set upon the things of this world rather than on the things of the kingdom of God, we cannot have the manifestations of the Holy Ghost. Did you ever stop to think what a great privilege it is for us to have the companionship of one of the members of the Godhead? Have you thought of it that way? That is our privilege, if we keep the commandments the Lord has given us.

I have heard occasionally someone say, "It is hard to keep the commandments of the Lord." It is not hard if we love the Lord. We can keep his commandments if we have that love for him that he manifested for us. Then we could set aside temptation. It is not difficult to walk in the light and understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ if our hearts are right, our spirits are contrite, and we are living in accord with the commandments that the Lord has given us in this, our mortal probation.

Now I say this is a probationary existence. We are placed here on probation. The people in our land, as well as in foreign lands, are all going crazy over getting to the moon, setting up headquarters there, and so forth. I think the Lord sits in the heavens and laughs at our foolishness. He does not have to do like he did in the days of the building of the Tower of Babel, come down to take a look. But I think he sits in the heavens and smiles at the foolishness of mortal men. I did not intend to say that, but I have something I am going to read. Then it is time to quit. I forgot the man's name who wrote this:

Twinkle, twinkle, little star, I don't wonder what you are. I surmised your spot in space When you left your missile base. Any wondering I do Centers on the price of you. And I shudder when I think What you're costing us, each wink.

—(Address given before Brigham Young University Student Body, October 25, 1961.)

Footnotes

The gospel of Jesus Christ is the most vital thing in the world to us. We should so live that we can accept every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, and that is a commandment from him.

---
Notas:
[^1] Moses 5:10-11.
[^2] Ibid., 5:13.
