Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

43

The Blessings of Eternal Glory

My dear brethren and sisters, I hope and pray that what I might say may be uplifting to one and all. I have many letters cross my desk in regards to the subject I would like to discuss, "The Blessings of Eternal Glory."

Nothing should be held in greater sacredness and honor than the covenant by which the spirits of men—the offspring of God in the spirit—are privileged to come into the world in mortal tabernacles. It is through this principle that the blessing of immortal glory is made possible. The greatest punishment ever given was proclaimed against Lucifer and his angels. To be denied the privilege of mortal bodies forever is the greatest curse of all. These spirits have no progress, no hope of resurrection and eternal life! Doomed are they to eternal misery for their rebellion! And then to think that we are not only privileged but commanded to assist our Father in the great work of redemption by giving to his children, as we have obtained these blessings for ourselves, the right to life and continue on even to perfection! No innocent soul should be condemned to come into this world under a handicap of illegitimacy. Every child has the right to be well born! Every individual who denies them that right is guilty of a mortal sin.

The importance of these mortal tabernacles is apparent from the knowledge we have of eternal life. Spirits cannot be made perfect without the body of flesh and bones. This body and its spirit are brought to immortality and blessings of salvation through the resurrection. After the resurrection there can be no separation again, body and spirit become inseparably connected that man may receive a fulness of joy. In no other way, other than through birth into this life and the resurrection, can spirits become like our Eternal Father.

Since the kingdom of God is built upon the foundation of marriage and the unity of the family circle, there can be no satisfaction where the family circle is broken. Every soul is entitled to the right to come into this world in a legitimate way—in the way the Father has willed that souls should come. Whosoever takes a course contrary to this is guilty of an almost irreparable crime. Is there any wonder then, that the Lord places the violation of this covenant of marriage and the loss of virtue, as second only to the shedding of innocent blood? Is there not, then sufficient reason for the severity of the punishment which has been promised those who violate this eternal law? The demand for personal purity is made by the Church upon both men and women, equally. There is no double standard of judgment. "If purity of life is neglected," President Joseph F. Smith said once, "all other dangers set in upon us like the rivers of water when the flood gates are opened."

Sexual impurity is a most deadly sin. There are sins unto death John informs us, and this is one of them: John 5:16-17.

President Brigham Young said, the world is fast coming to its destruction because of it. "Learn the will of God, keep his commandments and do his will, and you will be a virtuous person."

How wonderful is the peace and joy which fill the soul of the virtuous person! How terrible are the torments of the unvirtuous! They shall have no place in the first resurrection. When the final judgment comes they are they who remain "filthy still." They cannot enter the Holy City, they are the "dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolators, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie," who are cast out.

When a man was first placed upon this earth he was given the commandment to "be fruitful and multiply." No more important commandment was ever given to man, for, through honorable marriage are the spirits brought to earth. "There are multitudes of pure and holy spirits waiting to take tabernacles, now what is our duty?" said President Young. Then he answered his question: "To prepare tabernacles for them; to take a course that will not tend to drive those spirits into the families of the wicked, where they will be trained in wickedness, debauchery, and every species of crime. It is the duty of every righteous man and woman to prepare tabernacles for all the spirits they can." "Instructions to mothers of the Church" by President Joseph F. Smith.

I think it is a crying evil, that there should exist a sentiment or a feeling among any members of the Church to curtail the birth of their children. I think that is a crime wherever it occurs, where husband and wife are in possession of health and vigor and are free from impurities that would be entailed upon their posterity. I believe that where people undertake to curtail or prevent the birth of their children that they are going to reap disappointment by and by. I have no hesitancy in saying that I believe this is one of the greatest crimes of the world today, this evil practice. [^1]

When young people marry and refuse to fulfill this commandment given in the beginning of the world—and just as much in force today—they rob themselves of the greatest eternal blessing. If the love of the world and the wicked practices of the world mean more to a man and a woman than to keep the commandment of the Lord in this respect, then they shut themselves off from the eternal blessing of increase. Those who wilfully and maliciously design to break this important commandment shall be damned. They cannot have the Spirit of the Lord. Small families are the rule today. Husbands and wives refuse to take upon themselves the responsibilities of family life. Many of them do not care to be bothered with children. Yet this commandment given to Adam has never been abrogated or set aside. If we refuse to live by the covenants we make, especially in the house of the Lord, then we cannot receive the blessings of those covenants in eternity. If the responsibilities of parenthood are wilfully avoided here, then how can the Lord bestow upon the guilty the blessings of eternal increase? It cannot be, and they shall be denied such blessings.

Now I wish to ask a question: "How will a young married couple feel when they come to the judgment and then discover that there were certain spirits assigned to them and they refused to have them?" Moreover, what will be their punishment, when they discover that they have failed to keep a solemn covenant, and spirits awaiting this mortal life were forced to come here elsewhere when they were assigned to this particular couple.

In the next world we are to be judged by the things we do. We will also be punished for the things we should have done and did not do. May I make this personal remark: I am the father of eleven children and to this day every one is a faithful member of the Church and all active, for that is the way they were taught and they were obedient. They will belong to me forever, and are the foundation stones of my kingdom. My posterity reaches today over the one hundred mark.

Couples Will Answer for Their Crimes

I regret that so many young couples are thinking today more of successful "contraceptives" than of having a posterity. They will have to answer for their sin when the proper day comes, and may actually be denied the glorious celestial kingdom.

The world is rapidly coming to its end, that is, the end of the days of wickedness. When it is fully ripe in iniquity the Lord will come in the cloud of heaven to take vengeance on the ungodly, for his wrath is kindled against them. Do not think that he delayeth his coming. Many of the signs of his coming have been given, so we may, if we will, know that the day is even now at our doors.

And it shall come to pass, because of the wickedness of the world, that I will take vengeance upon the wicked, for they will not repent; for the cup of mine indignation is full; for behold, my blood shall not cleanse them if they hear me not. [^2]

May all Latter-day Saint fathers and mothers see to it that they teach their children the sacredness of the marriage covenant. Let them impress upon their children that in no other way than by honoring the covenants of God, among which the covenant of eternal marriage is one of the greatest and most mandatory, can they obtain the blessings of eternal lives. If they refuse to receive this ordinance and other blessings of the house of God, then shall they be cut off from these higher blessings. They shall wear no crown; they shall have no rule and sway no sceptre; they shall be denied the fulness of knowledge and power, and like the Prodigal Son, they may return again to their Father's house, but it will be as servants, not to inherit as sons and daughters. If they will be true to these commandments, their glory and exaltation shall have no bounds, "all things are theirs." [^3] May we all be blessed with the Spirit of the Lord so we may be directed in his ways, and may the Lord bless the young people starting out in life so they may keep every commandment, is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, our Redeemer. Amen.—(Conference Report, October, 1965.)

Footnotes

God has instructed us to use only the finest materials. He cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance, because he knows its terrible destructiveness in people's lives. The Lord has provided that every man should carry within himself the very things he seeks—faith, courage, and love—and we can develop that with which we have already been endowed. We should develop the ability to do the right thing instead of allowing ourselves endlessly to do as we please. The Lord has told us that if we keep ourselves clean we may become joint heirs with Jesus Christ, possessing all that the Father hath.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 88:83.
[^2] Alma 41:10.
[^3] Matt. 7:2.
