Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves ( 1966)

44

Diligence and Love

The saying "Light the way to MIA" is something to be remembered. If we have enough love of our Father in heaven in our hearts, we will always be blessed.

In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 86, it says: "He that seeketh me early shall find me, and shall not be forsaken." [^1]

Procrastination as it may be applied to the gospel is the thief of eternal life, which is the life in the presence of the Father and the Son. There are many among us who feel that there is no need for haste in the observance of the gospel principles and the keeping of the commandments. We are living in the last days. Bad habits are easily formed. They are not so easily broken. Are we yielding to evil habits, thinking they are only trifles after all and we will get rid of them in the grave? Do we expect that our bodies will be cleansed in the grave and we shall come forth with perfect and sanctified bodies in the resurrection? There are some among us who teach this thing and excuse themselves for their practices, saying that they will be cleansed in the grave.

Doctrine Taught by Alma

Alma taught a very different doctrine. He said to Corianton, his son, "Behold, I say unto you, wickedness never was happiness." [^2] The Savior said, ". . . with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." [^3] Some think that a little punishment will not be so bad, and they are willing to take a chance and suffer for the offenses rather than keep the commandments of the Lord as we are instructed. Who could be happy in suffering, all the while thinking that the suffering had come because of a wilful or persistent breaking of the commandments of God when knowledge and counsel to walk in righteousness had been given?

No person can begin too early to serve the Lord. Parents are instructed to teach their children from infancy with the warning that they will be held accountable if they fail to do so. And young people follow the teachings of their parents. The child who is taught in righteousness from birth will most likely follow righteousness always. Good habits are easily formed and easily followed.

Apostle Paul said to the Corinthians, ". . . ye are God's building.

". . . But let every man take heed how he buildeth. . . ." [^4]

Responsibility to Build Personality

One of the greatest responsibilities that is ever entrusted to any human being is that of building his own personality. The chief business of our lives is to build a house that will bear the weight of eternal life. In Grenville Kleiser's book Training for Power and Leadership, he writes,

Nothing touches the soul but leaves its impress. And thus little by little we are fashioned into the image of all we have seen and heard, known or meditated upon. If we learn to live with all that is fairest and purest and best, the love of it will in the end become our very life.

God has instructed us to use only the finest materials. He cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance, because he knows its terrible destructiveness in people's lives. The Lord has provided that every man should carry within himself the very things he seeks—faith, courage, and love—and we can develop that with which we have already been endowed. We should develop the ability to do the right thing instead of allowing ourselves endlessly to do as we please. The Lord has told us that if we keep ourselves clean we may become joint heirs with Jesus Christ, possessing all that the Father hath. [^5] I am sure that we all want to live so that we may receive this blessing. There is nothing in the commandments of the Lord that is difficult to keep. With the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord we will find contentment and happiness in doing his will. The divine law declares that we may obtain the fulness of his kingdom through our faithfulness and obedience. Our Eternal Father cannot offer more. He has placed his greatest gift within the reach of all, but it is based upon obedience to his divine commandments.

Greatest Waste in Mortal Life

The greatest waste in mortal life is that men love evil instead of righteousness. We come to this world to be tried and proved to see if we will keep the commandments when we are shut out of the divine presence. Most human beings live below their possibilities. Mortal life is short at best. It is, however, the life in which we prepare for eternity.

We are told that "the fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise wisdom and instruction." [^6] True knowledge and wisdom come through prayer and wise fasting and through diligent study. Let us not forget the words of Alma:

For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors. [^7]

This important statement is taken from the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him. But we consider that this is a station to which no man ever arrived in a moment: he must have been instructed in the government and laws of that kingdom by proper degrees, until his mind is capable in some measure of comprehending the propriety, justice, equality, and consistency of the same. For further instruction we refer you to Deut. xxxii, where the Lord says, that Jacob is the lot of His inheritance. He found him in the desert land, and in the waste, howling wilderness; He led him about, He instructed him, He kept him as the apple of His eye, etc.; which will show the force of the last item advanced, that it is necessary for men to receive an understanding concerning the laws of the heavenly kingdom, before they are permitted to enter it: we mean the celestial glory. So dissimilar are the governments of men, and so diverse are their laws, from the government and laws of heaven, that a man, for instance, hearing that there was a country on this globe called the United States of North America, could take his journey to this place without first learning the laws of governments; but the conditions of God's kingdom are such, that all who are made partakers of that glory, are under the necessity of learning something respecting it previous to their entering into it. [^8]

One Must First Learn Laws

So it is with the kingdom of God as now established in the earth. One must first learn something concerning the nature of its laws, how far reaching they are in relation to the temporal as well as the spiritual salvation of the individual.

We have been taught that a soul cannot be saved in ignorance of the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Moreover, he is under the necessity of being loyal and obedient to them. The Lord is always merciful and kind. If we draw near to him, he will draw near to us. ". . . seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." [^9] Our chief trouble is we do not seek diligently. Our seeking is superficial. We seem to think that the Lord is bound to hear us without our putting forth much effort. Let diligence and love be our guides, and we shall find the path to eternal life; and let us one and all remember the theme of the Mutual Improvement organization:

He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. [^10]—(Address delivered at 1965 MIA June Conference.)

Footnotes

I appeal to you, my dear brethren and sisters, husbands and wives, fathers and mothers, to take advantage of every opportunity the Church affords to have your children trained in the various organizations provided for them by the revelations of the Lord: the Primary, the Sunday School, the Mutual Improvement organizations, and the quorums of the Lesser Priesthood under the direction of our bishoprics.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 68:25-26.
[^2] Alma 41:10.
[^3] Matt. 7:2.
[^4] 1 Cor. 3:9-10.
[^5] See Rom. 8:17 and D&C 84:38.
[^6] Prov. 1:7.
[^7] Alma 34:32.
[^8] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 51.
[^9] D&C 88:63.
[^10] John 14:21.
