Did you know that missionaries publish peace? To publish peace means to share the gospel of Jesus Christ with others.

The Book of Mormon records that years ago the prophet Abinadi stood in the court of wicked King Noah and his priests. With courage and power, Abinadi bore his testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ. He also gave thanks for all those who had published peace, or shared the gospel with others, for the missionaries who were still publishing peace, and for missionaries who would share the gospel message in the future (see Mosiah 12:17–15:18).

Alma was in the court of King Noah that day. As he listened to Abinadi’s words, he was blessed with a testimony of Jesus Christ. Becoming a missionary himself, he taught the words he had heard Abinadi speak. He published peace to as many people as would listen (see Mosiah 17:2; Mosiah 18:1).

Many other good men and women throughout the history of the world have shared their testimonies of the gospel of Jesus Christ and published peace. We learn of four more of them in Mosiah 27:34–37: “Their names were Ammon, and Aaron, and Omner, and Himni; these were the names of the sons of Mosiah.

“And they traveled throughout all the land of Zarahemla, and among all the people who were under the reign of king Mosiah, … explaining the prophecies and the scriptures to all who desired to hear them.

“And thus they were instruments in the hands of God in bringing many to the knowledge of the truth, yea, to the knowledge of their Redeemer.

“And how blessed are they! For they did publish peace; they did publish good tidings of good; and they did declare unto the people that the Lord reigneth.”

You may know missionaries who are preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ—who are publishing peace all over the world—now. Just as Abinadi expressed so many years ago, we are grateful for them!

You, too, can publish peace by sharing your testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Like Abinadi and Alma and Ammon and Aaron and Omner and Himni, and like those from your family and your ward or branch, you can share the message of the gospel that comes from “the founder of peace, yea, even the Lord” (Mosiah 15:18).

1.  Help each child make an “I Can Publish Peace” page for his or her Book of Peace (see Sharing Time Idea #3, Tambulilit, February 1994, page 10). On it, the child can list and draw things he or she can do or say to help share the gospel message. Examples: “I can invite a friend to church.” “I can share the Book of Mormon with a neighbor.” “I can set a good example by obeying the commandments.” “I can be kind to everyone.” “I can learn the Articles of Faith and recite them to others.” “I can bear my testimony of Jesus Christ.”

2.  Involve children in a missionary discussion (see Primary Sharing Time Resource Manual, page 86).

3.  Share scripture missionary stories about children, such as the little maid of Israel (see 2 Kgs. 5:1–14) and Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego (see Dan. 1). Also use contemporary stories in Primary lesson manuals of children doing missionary work.

4.  Help each child make a missionary name tag that includes the child’s name and the words “I Can Publish Peace.”

Color the missionary finger puppets on this page. On a separate piece of paper, draw more finger puppets to represent other missionaries you know, such as brothers, sisters, grandparents, or friends who have served as missionaries. Then make a puppet of yourself! Cut out each puppet and tape the ends of the label into a circle to fit your finger. Use the puppets to tell about these missionaries.
