Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

Preface

Joseph Smith's Kirtland is the story of Joseph Smith and of the Church of Jesus Christ during the seven years, 1831 to 1838, the Church was headquartered in Kirtland, Ohio. As a leader he lived there longer than at any other place, and it was there that many pivotal events of the latter-day kingdom of God occurred. The story is not a lengthy recital of historical events, but a visit with over one hundred eyewitnesses who lived there. Their observations and testimonies, which are documented and recorded in letters, journals, contemporary publications, and reminiscences, recount their experiences in living and working with Joseph Smith as he fulfilled his mission as the Prophet of the Restoration. Their firsthand accounts help us to know the Prophet in an unusually intimate way, as well as to gain insights into their own lives. These witnesses, similar to witnesses of the Pentecost in Jerusalem, also recorded their testimonies that the gospel of Jesus Christ, as taught by him in the meridian of time, was restored through Joseph Smith by the power of God, and is encompassed today in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Joseph Smith's Kirtland has been written because of the impact that Ezra Taft Benson, a latter-day prophet and thirteenth president of the Church, has had upon Kirtland and upon me. President Benson loves Kirtland, its history, its early leaders, and the posterity of those who lived there in the early days of the Church. His inspiration and leadership have accelerated in our own day the fulfillment of prophecies made in the 1830s; and through his efforts the Church is once again in Kirtland. He has encouraged Latter-day Saints to find and become acquainted with descendants of the early Kirtland Saints. While in his presence, I have felt my soul burn within me as I have received the sure witness of the Spirit that a prophet, once again standing on sacred Kirtland soil, has lifted a scourge and is prophesying and directing the fulfillment of prophecy.

Moreover, living in the shadows of the Kirtland Temple for over twenty years and having frequently walked Kirtland's streets, hills, and places of history, I have sensed the unspoken sacredness of the area. On Sinai the Lord told Moses to remove his shoes, for he stood on holy ground. As I have become aquainted with the Kirtland Saints, the Moseses and Aarons of the 1830s, I have come to understand that they likewise walked on holy ground. The Lord made Kirtland holy the same way as he made Sinai holy. The Saints in Kirtland also consecrated the ground with their sacrifices. In Kirtland one feels a reverence for the places where they lived and worked and where past prophets and Deity visited.

As I have become acquainted with the Kirtland Saints, I have felt indescribable love, awe, and appreciation for them. They made great sacrifices, they had overwhelming spiritual experiences, and they faced almost overpowering temptations and trials. Some were separated from the Church by trials that might have separated many of us today. All of them, however, have become witnesses to the divinity of the Prophet Joseph Smith's calling in Kirtland. Through my experiences in Kirtland and the writing of this book, I have come to realize I feel an additional affinity with them: I too have become a witness to the divine calling of Joseph Smith in Kirtland.

Joseph Smith prophesied in 1836 that these accounts would be "handed down upon the pages of sacred history to all generations." I have felt compelled to assist in that work by writing this book, with the fervent desire that you, too, will experience the reality of Joseph Smith's Kirtland.
