Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

Acknowledgments

Many persons made significant contributions to the completion of Joseph Smith's Kirtland. First I acknowledge key priesthood leaders who, from its inception, provided direction and encouragement that insured its completion.

Mammoth contributions over several years were made by devoted family members. My wife, Joyce, in addition to her unfailing support and encouragement, has provided endless hours, without complaint, processing every word through numerous drafts, proofs, and revisions. Joyce and our children—Carol, Linda, Bonnie, David, Ruth, Joel, and Martha—have been a part of every major endeavor in my life. I thank them for their support and willingness to share my time and assist in mundane tasks of proofreading and reference checking and over the years in making hundreds of trips through Church history sites in Ohio.

My brother Richard L. Anderson, professor of religion at Brigham Young University, provided seemingly endless source documents, information, patient instruction, guidance, and consulting. His life-long example of careful and precise research and his unselfish dedication to family, church, and his career of teaching and writing have always given me an example to emulate. Richard's wife, Carma, selected the artist and supervised the development of the original drawings. Her combined knowledge of art and historic dress insured their accuracy and quality.

Excellent editors were involved at various stages. Maurine Reintjes and Shayne Bell very skillfully guided the development of the manuscript. Special thanks go to Eleanor Knowles of Deseret Book, who transformed the manuscript into the finished product.

Acknowledgment for the original artwork goes to Douglas M. Fryer, an exceptional artist who labored meticulously. His illustrations precisely recreate Kirtland's people, places, and journal accounts. Many of his illustrations accurately capture important scenes for the first time. Richard Erickson, assistant designer at Deseret Book, was responsible for the page and cover designs.

Appreciation is expressed to professors Keith Perkins and Milton Backman of Brigham Young University. Their deep interest in and love of Kirtland and their willingness to unselfishly share their research and insights has been of great assistance.

Others have helped tremendously. Although I would like to acknowledge each and every contribution, appreciation must of necessity be expressed personally.
