Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

1

Joseph Smith Goes to Kirtland

"Go to the Ohio; and there I will give unto you my law; and there you shall be endowed with power from on high." (Doctrine & Covenants 38:32.)

Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the Restoration, cannot be separated from Kirtland, Ohio, the town that became headquarters for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the 1830s. The Church in Kirtland really began when he arrived there and ended when he left. Before summoning Joseph, his twenty-five-year-old prophet, to Kirtland, however, the Lord prepared the area for his coming. For nearly three decades stalwart pioneers were inspired to settle in the Kirtland area.

The preparation commenced as early as 1805, when Oliver Snow moved his wife and two infant daughters, Leonora and Eliza R., to Kirtland from Massachusetts. There a son and future leader of the Church, Lorenzo Snow, would be born. Lorenzo would later be a boyhood friend of future apostles Luke and Lyman Johnson, whose family moved to neighboring Hiram, Ohio, in 1818. The preparation continued when Isaac Morley was led to Kirtland in 1812. This future Church leader became critically ill while serving in the war of 1812, and his wife, Lucy, after remaining in Kirtland "alone in the wild woods, never seeing a human face and continually in fear of Indians and wild beasts," nursed him back to health. [^1] The preparation continued in 1829 when two men who later became Church leaders, Parley P. Pratt and Sidney Rigdon, met and became fast friends. The Lord's hand was manifest again when he called four missionaries from New York to go to the western wilderness; and when Sidney Rigdon, who established a Reformed Baptist congregation, introduced the restored gospel to his members and many were converted. It officially began, however, in 1830, just eight months after the Church was established in upstate New York, when the Lord directed Joseph Smith, his Prophet, to "go to the Ohio." (D&C 38:32.)

The Pioneer Settlement of "The Ohio"

Settlement of Northeastern Ohio actually began in 1796, when a group of men from the Connecticut Land Company surveyed the area. The land, owned by the state of Connecticut, was initially called the Western Reserve. Part of the land, the Firelands, was given to about two thousand people who had been made homeless when their villages were pillaged and burned during the Revolutionary War. The bulk of the land was sold to some of the founders of the Connecticut Land Company. These settlers, mainly from Connecticut and other parts of New England, brought their families and their culture to the new area.

Knowledge of this appealing land spread, resulting in other adventuresome pioneers moving there. The first Kirtland settlers arrived in 1811, and by 1818 they had formed a township. One year later, the first mill was established. In 1823 a pioneer entrepreneur, Newel K. Whitney, established the first general store in a small log house. Mail service began in 1825, with Whitney as postmaster; and by 1827 the first hotel, the Peter French Tavern, was constructed.

One early pioneer described Kirtland's beauty: "The country for many miles around had been for centuries the hunting-ground of the Indians, and surely their most vivid imagination could have portrayed nothing more desirable or delightful concerning their celestial hunting-grounds. The forest-trees were of endless variety and of the tallest kinds. A thick growth of underbrush grew beneath, flowers of rare beauty blushed unseen, birds of varied plumage filled the air with their music, the air itself was fragrant and invigorating." [^2]

In 1826 Parley P. Pratt moved from New York State to Ohio, where he determined to "spend the remainder of [his] days in the solitude of the great West, among the natives of the forest." [^3] He acquired a piece of forest land about thirty miles west of Cleveland, cleared it of timber, and built a house. About a year later he returned to New York, married his sweetheart, and took her back to Ohio with him.

In 1829 Sidney Rigdon, a Campbellite minister, preached in Pratt's neighborhood. The two men soon formed a friendship, and Pratt became affiliated with the Campbellites. The following summer, impressed that he should return to his former home to preach the Campbellite doctrine, he sold his property and, accompanied by his wife, set sail from Cleveland aboard a schooner bound for Buffalo, New York. There they transferred to a canal boat that would take them to Albany. At Rochester, however, Pratt felt impressed to leave the boat, so he left his wife with some friends when the boat docked at Newark, New York, and began walking into the countryside. That first night he heard about a new book of scripture, called the Book of Mormon, and the next day he began reading it. He later wrote in his autobiography: "I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep. As I read, the Spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly and manifestly as a man comprehends and knows that he exists." [^4] Obviously redirected, he immediately set out for Palmyra, where he met Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's brother, and was baptized.

First Mission to the LamanitesHCMissionaries Called into the "Wilderness"

First Mission to the LamanitesHCAfter his baptism, Parley P. Pratt joined three other missionaries, Oliver Cowdery, Ziba Peterson, and Peter Whitmer, Jr., to go on a mission "into the wilderness among the Lamanites [American Indians]." (D&C 32:2.) Traveling west, they journeyed through the Western Reserve and arrived in the Kirtland area on October 15, 1830. They stopped at nearby Mentor, where Pratt sought out his friend Sidney Rigdon and told him about his newfound religion. Engaged with his own doctrines and congregation, Sidney Rigdon was not enthusiastic, but because of his friendship for Parley he committed to read the Book of Mormon. He said he would "endeavor to ascertain whether it be a revelation from God or not." [^5] Sidney's son, John W. Rigdon, said that when he was informed that Joseph Smith was a young man with "hardly a common school education," Sidney replied, "If that is all the education he has got, he never wrote this book." [^6]

President A. W. Cowles of Elmira College interviewed Sidney Rigdon in 1868 and recorded that Sidney's beliefs on this point had not changed: "Rigdon expressed the utmost amazement that such a man should write a book which seemed to shed a flood of light on all the old scriptures, open all their profoundest mysteries, and give them perfect consistency and complete system. In his fresh enthusiasm he exclaimed that if God ever gave a revelation, surely this must be divine." [^7]

After prayer and much meditation, Sidney decided to be baptized. This decision imposed a dilemma upon him, a dilemma that was described by Joseph Smith in the Prophet's history:

The honors and applause of the world were showered down upon him, his wants were abundantly supplied, and were anticipated. He was respected by the entire community, and his name was a tower of strength. His [counsel] was sought for, respected and esteemed.—But if he should unite with the Church of Christ, his prospects of wealth and affluence would vanish; his family dependent upon him for support, must necessarily share his humiliation and poverty. He was aware that his character and his reputation must suffer in the estimation of the community. [^8]

Realizing that baptism, with the subsequent loss of employment and of the home and property provided by his congregation, would greatly affect his family, Sidney asked his wife, Phebe, "My dear, you have once followed me into poverty, are you again willing to do the same?" Phebe's devotion to the Lord and to her husband were clear in her answer: "I have weighed the matter, I have contemplated on the circumstances in which we may be placed; I have counted the cost, and I am perfectly satisfied to follow you; it is my desire to do the will of God, come life or come death." [^9]

After meeting with Sidney Rigdon, the four missionaries requested permission to speak to his Mentor congregation. He agreed. In History of the Church we read:

The appointment was accordingly published, and a large and respectable congregation assembled. Oliver Cowdery and Parley P. Pratt severally addressed the meeting. At the conclusion, elder Rigdon arose and stated to the congregation that the information they had that evening received, was of an extraordinary character, and certainly demanded their most serious consideration: and as the apostle advised his brethren "to prove all things and hold fast that which is good," so he would exhort his brethren to do likewise, and give the matter a careful investigation; and not turn against it, without being fully convinced of its being an imposition, lest they should, possibly, resist the truth. [^10]

Other members of Sidney Rigdon's Campbellite congregation also joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and a branch was established in Mentor, one of four branches organized in the Kirtland area early in 1831.

After introducing the gospel to Sidney Rigdon and preaching to his congregation, the four Mormon missionaries stopped at the Isaac Morley farm in Kirtland. One of the first persons they approached was Lyman Wight, who had just been put in charge of a group of five families who were preparing to join a communal organization in Mayfield, about seven miles from Kirtland. He was loading his wagon when the missionaries from New York approached him. He recorded in his journal:

When I had my goods about half loaded, there came along four men (namely P. Pratt, O. Cowdery, P. Whitmer, and Ziba Peterson) and brought with them the Book of Mormon, which they wished to introduce to us. I desired they would hold on till I got away, as my business was of vital importance, and I did not wish to be troubled with romances nor idle speculations. But nothing daunted, they were not to be put off, but were as good-natured as you please. Curiosity got uppermost, and I concluded to stop for a short time. We called meeting, and one testified that he had seen angels, and another that he had seen plates, and that the gifts were back in the church again, etc. The meeting became so interesting withal that I did not get away till the sun was about an hour high at night, and it was dark before I arrived at my new home. [^11]

Wight concluded, "I shall therefore content myself by saying that they brought the Book of Mormon to bear upon us, and the whole of the common stock family was baptized." [^12]

One of the earliest baptisms as a result of the missionaries' proselyting efforts was of John Murdock, who was baptized in the Chagrin River on November 5, 1830, by Parley P. Pratt. He wrote of his conversion and baptism:

I . . . was soon introduced to those four men from New York, and presented with The Book of Mormon. . . . I stayed alone, and read the Book of Mormon. . . . I read till it was late. . . . The Spirit of the Lord rested on me, witnessing to me of the TRUTH of the work. . . . I told the servants of the Lord that I was ready to walk with them into the waters of baptism. Accordingly, Elder Parley P. Pratt baptised me in the Chagrin River and the Spirit of the Lord sensibly attended the ministration, and I came out of the water rejoicing and singing praises to God, and the Lamb! An impression sensibly rested on my mind that cannot, by me, be forgotten. . . . This was the third time that I had been immersed, but I never before felt the authority of the Ordinance, but I felt it this time and felt as though my sins were forgiven! . . .

On Sunday evening they confirmed about thirty; I was one of the number. Elder Oliver Cowdery was administrator. I was also Ordained an Elder and it was truly a time of the outpouring of the Spirit! I know the Spirit rested on me as it never did before and others said they saw the Lord, and had visions. [^13]

Another convert, Philo Dibble, described a similar feeling of elation:

When I came out of the water, I knew that I had been born of water and of the spirit, for my mind was illuminated with the Holy Ghost. I spent that evening at Dr. F. G. Williams'. While in bed that night I felt what appeared to be a hand upon my left shoulder and a sensation like fibers of fire immediately enveloped my body. . . . I was enveloped in a heavenly influence, and could not sleep for joy. The next morning I started home a happy man. [^14]

After the missionaries preached in Painesville, the local newspaper noted:

About two weeks since some persons came along here with the book [of Mormon], one of whom pretends to have seen angels and assisted in translating the plates. He proclaims that the ordinances of the gospel have not been regularly administered since the days of the apostles till the said Smith and himself commenced the work. . . . In the neighboring township of Kirtland, we understand that twenty or thirty have been immersed into the new order of things, many of whom had been previously baptized. [^15]

One of those who was taught by the missionaries was Edward Partridge, who owned a hatter's shop on Painesville's town square. His wife, Lydia, wrote concerning the missionaries' visit, "[Edward] told them he did not believe what they said, but believed them to be imposters. Oliver Cowdery said he was thankful there was a God in heaven who knew the hearts of all men. After the men were gone my husband sent a man to follow them and get one of their books." [^16] Partridge was subsequently baptized during a visit to Palmyra, New York, where he had gone to investigate the Prophet Joseph Smith. This trusted businessman represented himself and others who esteemed him as "a man who would not lie for his right arm!" [^17] He later became the first bishop of the Church.

The message of the restored gospel was received and took root in Ohio. The four missionaries baptized about one hundred people in less than two months.

Removal to OhioHCThe Command to "Go to the Ohio"

Removal to OhioHCAs the missionaries were completing their work in Kirtland, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith in New York that members of the Church should "assemble together at the Ohio." (D&C 37:3.) "There I will give unto you my law; and there you shall be endowed with power from on high." (D&C 38:32.) "Inasmuch as my people shall assemble themselves at the Ohio, I have kept in store a blessing such as is not known among the children of men, and it shall be poured forth upon their heads. And from thence men shall go forth into all nations." (D&C 39:15.)

Removal to OhioHCAt about that time, Newel K. Whitney, who owned the Gilbert and Whitney store in Kirtland, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, had an unusual experience. Elizabeth Ann related:

Removal to OhioHCOne night—it was midnight—as my husband and I, in our house at Kirtland, were praying to the father to be shown the way, the spirit rested upon us and a cloud overshadowed the house. It was as though we were out of doors. The house passed away from our vision. We were not conscious of anything but the presence of the spirit and the cloud that was over us. We were wrapped in the cloud. A solemn awe pervaded us. We saw the cloud and felt the spirit of the Lord. Then we heard a voice out of the cloud saying: "Prepare to receive the word of the Lord, for it is coming!" At first we marveled greatly, but from that moment we knew that the word of the Lord was coming to Kirtland. [^18]

On about February 1, 1831, a sleigh stopped in front of the Gilbert and Whitney store. A man jumped out and went into the store, where he approached Newel Whitney, extended his hand, and called him by name. Newel, bewildered, responded, "I could not call you by name as you have me." "I am Joseph the Prophet," the stranger said. "You have prayed me here, now what do you want of me?" [^19]

Newel's grandson, Orson F. Whitney, later wrote: "By what power did this remarkable man, Joseph Smith, recognize one whom he had never before seen in the flesh? It was because Joseph Smith was a seer, a choice seer; he had actually seen Newel K. Whitney upon his knees, hundreds of miles away, praying for his coming to Kirtland." [^20]

Elizabeth Whitney described the Prophet's arrival as "the fulfillment of the vision we had seen of a cloud as of glory resting upon our house." [^21] Joseph wrote that he and his wife "lived in the family of Brother Whitney several weeks, and received every kindness and attention which could be expected, and especially from Sister Whitney." [^22]

A glorious new era had begun in Kirtland.
