Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

2

Faithful Saints Gather to Kirtland

"They came, men, women, and children, in every conceivable manner, some with horses, oxen, and vehicles rough and crude, while others had walked all or part of the distance." (History of Geauga County.)

Most of the faithful Saints who followed the Lord's command to "go to the Ohio" acted out of pure faith. Like the children of Israel who had faith that God would sustain them in their journey to the promised land, many came on foot, leaving behind them their worldly goods as well as family and friends. What few possessions these faithful converts were able to carry could not sustain them for long. But the Saints already in Kirtland welcomed these pilgrims and shared their meager substance willingly. These stalwart individuals formed the foundation for the Church's amazing growth and progress.

One of the thousands who converged on Kirtland, Oliver B. Huntington, described his journey with a group of the Saints: "We left Sackets Harbor . . . but [were] driven back, the wind blowing a perfect gale; we landed in Rochester the next morning before sunrise. . . . From Rochester we took the canal to Buffalo and from Buffalo to Fairport, 12 miles from Kirtland we sailed on a steamboat, and in four days from the time we left Sackets we were in Kirtland. We all walked the 12 miles with joy, rejoicing at the privilege of getting there no matter how." [^1]

Nearly all who gathered to Kirtland needed assistance of some kind. Even Brigham Young, who, because of his industry and good business sense, was generally able to provide very well for himself and his family, had virtually nothing when he arrived in Kirtland. He described how he responded with faith to the Prophet's call to gather:

When we arrived in Kirtland [in September [1833], if any man that ever did gather with the Saints was any poorer than I was—it was because he had nothing. . . . I had two children to take care of—that was all. I was a widower. "Brother Brigham, had you any shoes?" No; not a shoe to my foot, except a pair of borrowed boots. I had no winter clothing, except a homemade coat that I had had three or four years. "Any pantaloons?" No. "What did you do? Did you go without?" No; I borrowed a pair to wear till I could get another pair. I had travelled and preached and given away every dollar of my property. I was worth a little property when I started to preach. . . . I had traveled and preached until I had nothing left to gather with; but Joseph said: "come up;" and I went up the best I could. [^2]

Amasa Lyman was another immigrant to Ohio. A note in History of the Church describes his experience:

Elders Orson Pratt and Lyman E. Johnson passed through the section of New Hampshire where young Lyman lived, on a preaching tour. He believed the message proclaimed by these new evangels and was baptized on the 27th of April 1832. . . . In consequence of the ill feelings which arose in his uncle's family [where he was living], owing to his joining the Church, Amasa departed from the home of his kindred, and set out on foot for the gathering place of the Saints in Ohio. After a journey of some seven hundred miles, in which he endured many hardships—for much of the journey was made on foot and with but scant means of subsistence—he arrived at Hiram in Portage county. . . . About the first of July [1832] . . . Amasa had the joy of meeting the Prophet of the new dispensation. Of that meeting and the impressions it produced, he says: "Of the impressions produced I will here say, although there was nothing strange or different from other men in his personal appearance, yet when he grasped my hand in that cordial way (known to those who have met him in the honest simplicity of truth), I felt as one of old in the presence of the Lord." [^3]

Phoebe Carter told of leaving her family behind and traveling alone to Kirtland in 1835:

My friends marveled at my course, as did I, but something within impelled me on. My mother's grief at my leaving home was almost more than I could bear; and had it not been for the spirit within I should have faltered at the last. My mother told me she would rather see me buried than going thus alone out into the heartless world. "Phoebe," she said, impressively, "will you come back to me if you find Mormonism false?" I answered, "yes, mother; I will, thrice." These were my words, and she knew I would keep my promise. My answer relieved her trouble; but it cost us all much sorrow to part. When the time came for my departure I dared not trust myself to say farewell; so I wrote my good-byes to each, and leaving them on my table, ran downstairs and jumped into the carriage. Thus I left the beloved home of my childhood to link my life with the saints of God. [^4]

Housing those who gathered to Kirtland became a constant challenge. Caroline Crosby described this problem: "Several families came in at that time [1836] from [New York State] and as houses were very hard to be rented, every place being filled, Mr. C[rosby] rented the cellar kitchen to a man, and his wife, with two small children. His name was Lewis, a blacksmith by occupation, and very poor people. But they found it rather uncomfortable, and staid only a short time." [^5]

New arrivals often appeared at the doorstep of friends, acquaintances, and strangers with no notice. Brotherly love dictated that members move over and offer hospitality, however meager—at times even sleeping on the floor and giving up their own beds. Caroline Crosby wrote in her journal:

About the middle of July a co[mpany] came from Boston Mass. . . . And no house could be found for their accomodation. John [Boynton] was building, but could not get it ready in season. He therefore came to us and offered to give us four times the amount of rent we paid, if we would go in with sister Sabre Granger, a maiden lady near by us, who was living alone, and let him have our house for his friends. My husband left it with me to say, to which I hesitated some time, but at length consented, rather reluctantly. The remuneration I considered no object; [but] to leave my pleasant little house, and go in with another, after living by ourselves so short a time; but the idea of accomodating friends, stimulated me to make the sacrifice.

Sister Granger's house was small, only one room, besides cellar, pantry, a small closet, and chamber. She had however a stove room, outside where she cooked her food. She had many peculiarities, which in some respects were not as agreeable to us, as we could wish. Notwithstanding being kindhearted, and friendly, atoned in my estimation, for many imperfections. [^6]

Many years later, the memory of thousands arriving with nowhere to live was still vivid enough that this description appeared in a short six-paragraph history of the Latter-day Saints in Kirtland: "The future 'City of the Saints' appeared like one besieged. Every available house, shop, hut, or barn was filled to its utmost capacity. Even boxes were roughly extemporized and used for shelter until something more permanent could be secured." [^7]

Until 1832, most of the Saints gathering to Kirtland settled on the Isaac Morley farm. Later they settled on the Frederick G. Williams farm and other land purchased by the Church. Home building was a constant activity. In January 1836, William W. Phelps, in a letter to his wife, Sally, described the construction work: "I must relate the marvelous works here. There have been built during the past year nearly 20 houses, mostly very small—only one of note called the 'Boston House.' It is 53 feet by 32 feet—three stories high. It is not yet enclosed. It is almost a miracle how such a large number of people live—but the Lord is merciful." [^8]

By the end of 1836, houses and land were fully occupied. Minutes of a conference on December 22, 1836, reflect the problem:

Whereas the Church in this place being poor from the beginning, having had to pay an extraordinate price for their lands, provisions, etc; and having a serious burthen imposed upon them by comers and goers, from most parts of the world, and in assisting traveling Elders and [their] families, while they themselves have been laboring in the vineyard of the Lord, to preach the Gospel; and also having suffered great loss in endeavoring to benefit Zion, it has . . . become a serious matter. . . .

A stop [must be] put to churches or families gathering or moving to this place, without their first coming or sending their wise men to prepare a place for them, as our houses are all full, and our lands mostly occupied, except those houses that do not belong to the Church, which cannot be obtained without great sacrifice, especially when brethren with their families are crowding in upon us, and are compelled to purchase at any rate, and consequently are thrown into the hands of speculators, and extortioners, with which course the Lord is not well pleased. [^9]

Kirtland history is filled with examples of Saints who willingly sacrificed their worldly possessions to gather to Kirtland. Three families, the Millets, the Tanners, and the Huntingtons, exemplify how sacrifice and spiritual commitment overshadowed worldly concerns.

The Millet Family

Artemus Millet was a wealthy builder in Canada at the time he and his wife learned of the restored gospel in late 1832. A family history tells the story:

Brigham Young was given a special mission [by the Prophet Joseph Smith] to go to Canada and baptize Bro. Artemus Millet, . . . which call resulted from a consultation held at Kirtland respecting the building of the Temple there, and as to who they could get that was capable of taking charge of the work. When Elder Lorenzo Young exclaimed to the Prophet "I know the very man who is capable of doing this work," "Who is he?" asked the Prophet. Lorenzo replied ["It] is Artemus Millet." The Prophet turned to Brigham and said "I give you a mission to go to Canada and baptise Brother Artemus Millet, and bring him here. Tell him to bring a thousand dollars with him." Artemus was much surprised when Brigham announced his mission to him and [he] asked "What kind of a church is that?" Then Brigham explained the principles of the Gospel to him and he accepted and was baptized. [^10]

Artemus, obedient to the Prophet's call, left his family and went immediately to Kirtland, where he selected stone for the temple foundation. He later returned to Canada, disposed of his property on credit (which became difficult to collect), and took his family to Kirtland to supervise the masonry work on the temple. He deposited money in the Kirtland Safety Society Bank and loaned money to the Church that he never collected. Despite his financial sacrifices, however, Artemus Millet maintained his testimony. He later immigrated with his family to Utah, where his large posterity now enjoy the blessings of the gospel.

The Tanner Family

John Tanner sold several flourishing businesses, including land in New York, a hotel, and other properties, in order to gather to Kirtland. The proceeds of these sales went mainly to the Church. John's move to Kirtland is described in a biographical account:

About the middle of December [John] received an impression by dream or vision of the night, that he was needed and must go immediately to the Church in the West. He told his family of the instruction he had received and forthwith made preparations for the start, while his neighbors, with deep regret at what they considered an insane purpose, tried their utmost to dissuade him; but he knew the will of God in the present crisis and nothing could deter him from doing it.

On Christmas day he commenced his journey with all his earthly effects, and in the dead of Winter traveled the distance of five hundred miles, to Kirtland where he arrived about the 20th of January, 1835, on the Sabbath.

On his arrival in Kirtland, he learned that at the time he received the impression that he must move immediately to the Church, the Prophet Joseph and some of the brethren had met in prayer-meeting and asked the Lord to send them a brother or some brethren with means to assist them to lift the mortgage on the farm upon which the temple was being built.

The day after his arrival in Kirtland, by invitation from the prophet, he and his son, Sidney, met with the High Council, and were informed that the mortgage of the before mentioned farm was about to be foreclosed. Whereupon he loaned the prophet two thousand dollars and took his note on interest, with which amount the farm was redeemed. [^11]

It is estimated that at various times John gave or loaned over fifty thousand dollars to Joseph Smith and the Church. By the time he was forced to leave Ohio with the Saints, he had lost a virtual fortune:

In April, 1838, [John] fitted up with a turnpike-cart, a borrowed wagon, one horse of his own and three borrowed ones, twenty dollars in cash and a keg of powder to pay expenses, and started for Missouri with his family—eleven persons in all. When the money and powder were spent, they were under the necessity of appealing to the benevolence of the inhabitants on the road for buttermilk and sometimes for other food to sustain life. He had two children. . . . One of these, a lovely girl, died on this tedious journey. [^12]

Later John forgave the remaining debts incurred in Kirtland, as the following incident illustrates:

At the April Conference in 1844, [John] was called on a mission to the Eastern States. Before starting, he went to Nauvoo, where he saw the Prophet Joseph, and, meeting him on the street, gave him his note of hand for the two thousand dollars loaned in Kirtland, January 1835, to redeem the temple land. The Prophet asked him what he wanted done with the note. Elder Tanner replied, "Brother Joseph, you are welcome to it." The Prophet then laid his right hand heavily on Elder Tanner's shoulder, saying, "God bless you, Father Tanner; your children shall never beg bread." [^13]

Historian Leonard Arrington researched the fulfillment of this prophecy. He writes:

When the family moved west after the martyrdom of the Prophet, John Tanner . . . had time to see his family settled and thriving . . . before his death in 1850. His ten children who came west fulfilled the Prophet's prediction, as they participated in the colonization, not only of South Cottonwood, [Utah], but of San Bernardino, California; of such Utah communities as Beaver, Fillmore, Payson, and North Ogden; and of Arizona. . . . Consistently devoted and hard-working, they gave their families economic and spiritual security and left an honorable legacy of commitment that has not decreased with time. [^14]

The Huntington Family

Joseph Smith Sr., while visiting in upstate New York in 1835, asked Oliver Huntington's father to sell his farm and move to Kirtland at "the first opportunity." The new convert "sold his farm, after much anxiety and concern, by sacrificing about fifteen hundred dollars, in selling it for that much less than it was really worth for the sake of living with the church and obeying the word of God as given to Joseph Smith." [^15]

Upon arriving in Kirtland, Huntington was counseled to buy Jacob Bump's house and thirty acres of land. Oliver related how they trusted Jacob Bump with a mortgage on the property, commenting, "We thought all the brethren were honest then." Within one year, Bump "denied the faith and refused to lift the mortgage." [^16] Oliver wrote:

My poor old father who but six months ago was in affluent circumstances, and surrounded with everything to make him comfortable, and render life desirable; [with] a farm of upwards of 230 acres; a good stone house and two frame barns . . . from all these earthly comforts and conveniences, in six months he was brought to live by day work, and that but very poorly, still my mother was the same mother and the same wife.

It was a torment to each, to see the other in want and still more see their children cry for bread and have none to give them nor know where the next was coming from, and after all their trials and sufferings not only there but elsewhere, never did I hear either of them utter a murmuring, or complaining word against any of the authorities of the church, or express a doubt of the truth of the work. . . . John and I, though small, felt for them as much as our age would and could be expected; we often would kneel beside each other in the woods, and in the barn, daily, and pray to God to have mercy and bless father and mother, that they should not want nor see us want for bread. [^17]

The Huntington family left Kirtland in the spring of 1838. They had to borrow money and a yoke of oxen, and they sent their "best goods, and everything but just what we really needed" by riverboat to Missouri. All of their goods, however, were lost, which caused Oliver to reflect on their poor circumstances and rapid loss of material wealth: "We never saw anything more of our goods, which left us as bare as a sheered sheep; we had the hide left, but not whole; and all that change wrought in two years." [^18]
