Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

3

Hardship and Conflict in Kirtland

"The Saints in the city of Kirtland have been called to endure great affliction for the truth's sake and to bear a heavy burden." (Newel K. Whitney.)

Though life in Kirtland was difficult for the early Saints, journal accounts do not indicate that they viewed their lives as such. Rather, they apparently had a sense of gratitude and challenge associated with the opportunity to live as they believed. An example of this feeling was expressed by Mary Fielding Smith after a spiritual experience in the temple, when she wrote, "What I felt that day seemed to [outweigh] all the afliction and destress of mind I have sufferd since I came here." [^1] John Tanner reflected on this experience and said, "Well, if others have come up easier, they have not learned so much." [^2]

Even considering the rigorous missionary journeys, the Saints adjusted to circumstances beyond their control, such as sickness, death, inclement weather, and difficult travel conditions. More difficult for them, however, were external conflicts thrust upon them—economic boycotts, extreme poverty, lawsuits, persecution, and violence. Many persons sold all they had just to get to Kirtland. Others, who had financial reserves, sacrificed greatly to build up the city and the Church.

Since northeastern Ohio in the 1830s was essentially an agrarian area, the Saints' livelihood revolved around agriculture. Most men spent plodding hours planting, plowing, and harvesting crops and cutting wood. The women tended to domestic matters, including cooking over primitive stoves, sewing and mending, housecleaning, and laundering clothes and bedding. Families had to make their own household materials and equipment, such as soap, candles, clothes, leather and wood items, bowls, pitchforks, and brooms.

Wilford Woodruff tells of his first encounter with Joseph Smith:

My first introduction to him was rather singular. I saw him out in the field with his brother Hyrum: he had on a very old hat, and was engaged shooting at a mark. I was introduced to him, and he invited me home with him.

I accepted the invitation, and I watched him pretty closely, to see what I could learn. He remarked, while passing to his house, that this was the first hour he had spent in recreation for a long time.

Shortly after we arrived at his house, he went into an adjoining room, and brought out a wolf-skin, and said, "Brother Woodruff, I want you to help me to tan this;" so I pulled off my coat, went to work and helped him, and felt honoured in so doing. He was about going up with the brethren to redeem Zion, and he wanted this wolf-skin to put upon his waggon seat, as he had no buffalo robe. . . .

I have felt to rejoice exceedingly in what I saw of brother Joseph, for in his public and private career he carried with him the Spirit of the Almighty, and he manifested a greatness of soul which I had never seen in any other man. [^3]

During Kirtland's cold winters, men usually stayed at home, devoting time to their families. Home life centered around the family, and families spent long evenings together. Church meetings were frequently held in the evenings at "early candlelight." Schools were generally conducted during the winter months, when people could not go outdoors.

Some of Joseph Smith's everyday activities provide insight into typical Kirtland life in the 1830s: [^4]

I went to a place near Lake Erie, and spent the day in fishing, and visiting the brethren. [April 12, 1834]

Hauled a load of hay; and on Wednesday plowed and sowed oats for Brother Frederick G. Williams. [April 15, 1834]

Labored in Father's orchard, gathering apples. [October 15, 1835]

Went to Chardon to attend the County Court. [October 26, 1835]

Attended school during school hours, returned and spent the evening at home. [November 6, 1835]

In the forenoon, at home, studying the Greek language. [December 23, 1835]

At early candle-light I preached at the school house to a crowded congregation, who listened with attention for about three hours. [December 29, 1835]

After attending to the duties of my family, retired to the council room to pursue my studies. [December 31, 1835]

Attended at the schoolroom, as usual, . . . and did not feel like studying, but commenced conversing upon heavenly things. [January 23, 1836]

At school in the forenoon. In the afternoon met in the printing office. Received and waited upon those who called to see me, and attended to my domestic concerns. In the evening met in the printing office and listened to a lecture on grammar. [March 15, 1836]

Persecution in OhioHCOpposition and Persecution

Persecution in OhioHCUnable to appreciate that the Lord's purposes were being fulfilled, settlers who had lived in Kirtland before the Mormons arrived suddenly found themselves outnumbered. Before 1830, the population was 1,018. The Mormons began arriving in 1830, and by 1838 their numbers had increased to over two thousand. Within the same period the non-Mormon population grew only to about twelve hundred. With the growth of the Church in the area, the Mormons were able to control much of the development and direction of the community, and there was growing fear that they would gain control of county offices as well. Undoubtedly, this contributed to an increase in violence and persecution against them.

The fact that the Church was not politically aligned with the community also caused conflict. A majority of the Mormons supported the Democratic party, led by President Andrew Jackson, while most non-Mormons supported candidates of the Whig party. Joseph Smith later called the period in Kirtland a "long seven years of servitude, persecution, and affliction in the midst of our enemies." [^5]

The persecution began barely a year after the Saints arrived, starting with the tarring and feathering of the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon, one of his chief supporters, in Hiram, a farm community about thirty miles from Kirtland. On the morning following the tarring and feathering, Joseph went to see Elder Rigdon and "found him crazy, and his head highly inflamed, for they had dragged him by his heels, and those, too, so high from the ground that he could not raise his head from the rough, frozen surface, which lacerated it exceedingly; . . . and he continued delirious some days." [^6]

In 1833 George A. Smith, the Prophet's cousin, expressed grave concern about the situation: "In consequence of the persecution which raged against the Prophet Joseph and constant threat to do him violence it was necessary to keep continual guard to prevent his being murdered by his enemies. . . . During the fall and winter I took a part of this service going two and a half miles to guard at President Rigdon's." [^7]

Joseph Smith wrote that "all of the Church in Kirtland had to lie every night for a long time upon our arms to keep off mobs, of forties, of eighties, & of hundreds to save our lives and the press, and that we might not be scattered & driven to the four winds!" [^8]

Benjamin F. Johnson, who as a youth had moved to Kirland with his family, later recalled how the Saints were forced to guard and protect their homes: "Much of my time in boyhood was spent in assisting to prepare arms for the protection of the Saints. The lower story of my mother's house in Kirtland was at that time used by Brother M. C. Davis as a gunsmith shop, for the manufacture of defensive weapons for the use of the people." [^9]

Finally it became necessary for Joseph Smith and other leaders to have bodyguards. Ira Ames wrote: "Ever since my arrival in Kirtland, I had stood guard at night in consequence of the mob and persecutions we endured. Especially this winter of 1835, I [was] frequently taking my blanket and sleeping in Joseph's house and guarding my portion of the time and continued as one of Joseph's body guards until I left Kirtland." [^10]

On January 21, 1834, Oliver Cowdery wrote in a letter to Missouri: "Our enemies have threatened us, but thank the Lord we are yet on earth. They came out on the 8th. about 12 oclock at night, a little west & fired cannon. we suppose to alarm us, but no one was frightened. but all prepared to defend ourselves if they made a sally upon our houses." [^11]

In 1835, some merchants mounted an economic boycott of the Saints. George A. Smith later recalled:

A majority of the inhabitants of Kirtland combined together and warned all the saints to leave the town. This was done to prevent any of our people becoming a town charge in case of poverty. They then bought up all the grain that was for sale in the country around, and refused to sell a particle of it to our people. Mr. Lyman, a Presbyterian owning the Kirtland Mills, was at the head of the movement. He accumulated several thousand bushels of grain in his mill and refused to sell the least portion of it to any of the saints. This arrangement was brought a combination of all the religious sects in the vicinity. Mr. Chase, a Presbyterian neighbor of ours, who had a quantity of grain on hand and had refused to sell a particle at any price, came to my father one morning and asked him if he could board the school mistress his portion, assigning as a reason that he had not got provisions to feed her on. My father, although he had eaten the last [morsel] of bread stuff we had, told him he could board her as well as not. This was done to ascertain our [straitened] condition, but Joseph in learning the plan of our enemies, got the brethren to put their mites together, and sent to Portage County and bought a supply of wheat at a reasonable price and carried to a mill owned by one of the brethren several miles from town. By so doing, our Christian friends not only had the mortification of not starving out the saints, but when the harvest came round had a large quantity of grain on hand and no market for it, as our people had raised a supply for themselves. [^12]

An Impoverished People

Building the kingdom consumed what little money and resources the Saints had brought to Kirtland with them. It was important that buildings such as the temple and the schoolhouse/printing office be constructed. Money was also needed to buy land, print books, support missionaries and their families, and finance various Church operations. Building up financial resources and finding jobs were difficult as a result of the boycott by the non-Mormons. Jonathan Crosby described the poverty:

Shortly after we got to Kirtland, Brother B. Young, H. C. Kimball, [and] P. P. Pratt came to me to borrow money. I had nearly 100 dol[lar]s . . . they were very poor. Pres. Young said he had nothing in the house to eat, and he knew not where to get it. . . . He stood in the door of the printing office thinking of his condition and he felt so bad the sweat [rolled off] him. Soon P. P. Pratt came along, and he said to him, "What shall we do?" I have nothing to eat and I don't know where to get it. Broth. Pratt said there was a brother and his wife just come to my house he got some money and I think he will lend us some (I had let Brother Pratt have 7 doll[ar]s. before). So they all came and gave me their joint note and I let them have 75 doll[ar]s—25 each, this was Jan. of [18]35. [^13]

W. W. Phelps described the destitute conditions to his wife, Sally, in a letter in May 1835: "It is hard living here, flour costs from six to seven dollars per barrel and cows from twenty to thirty dollars a head. . . . It is a happy thing that I did not move [you and the family] back for everything here is so dear. Our brethren are so poor and hard run for money that it would have been more than I could have done to maintain my family." [^14]

Oliver Huntington wrote: "There was nothing to be had either for love or money, for Mormons, when they had anything to buy with. Many a time did my mother go without her meal of victuals to leave enough for the children, when there was nothing but beach leaves, after string beans and sometimes a very scanty allowance of corn bread, to leave. Once in a while when we were most starved out we would kill a starved to death hen we had wintered over on nothing, and eat as necessity called hardest." [^15]

An urgent letter dated September 18, 1837, from Bishop Newel K. Whitney and his counselors to all members of the Church, asked for financial support:

It is a fact well known that the Saints in the city of Kirtland have been called to endure great affliction for the truth's sake, and to bear a heavy burden in order that the foundation of the kingdom of God might be laid on a sure and certain basis. . . . The exertions of the enemy . . . have given to the Saints great trouble, and caused them much expense. In addition to this, they have had to publish the word of the Lord, which has been attended with great expense. These things, together with building the House of the Lord, have embarrassed them very much; for when subscriptions failed they went on and accomplished the work of building the house themselves, plighting all that they had, property, credit, and reputation, and by these means accomplished this great work which is the wonder and admiration of the world. This they have done in faith. . . . And besides all this there have been a large number of poor who have had to receive assistance from the donations of the Church, which have tended to increase its embarrassment. [^16]

"Poor laws" were enacted in Ohio, allowing communities to expel destitute persons, those who could possibly become wards of the community. Townships elected officers, called Overseers of the Poor, to report such people to the constable; he, in turn, had the authority to force them to leave the city. George A. Smith wrote that "if a person, who had been warned out of town, applied for assistance, he was to be carried to the next town and so on till he was taken out of the state or to the town from which he formerly came." [^17] The Mormons were harassed as a result of the laws, but generally they just ignored the notices. In an address to the Saints in Salt Lake City in 1860, Brigham Young described his experience in Kirtland:

You have frequently heard me refer to my poverty when I moved to Kirtland in the fall of 1833. Not a man ever gathered with the Saints, so far as I have known, but had more property than I had. When I came into the Church I distributed my substance and went to preaching, and when I gathered with the Saints I had nothing. . . . I went to work for Brother Cahoon, one of the Kirtland Temple Committee. He had little or no means, and only a shell of a house. I helped him, and the Lord threw things in his path, and he paid me for my labor.

When I went to Kirtland, I had not a coat in the world, for previous to this I had given away everything I possessed . . . neither had I a shoe to my feet, and I had to borrow a pair of pants and a pair of boots. [^18]

Changes in the Economy

Kirtland went through a short-lived surge of rising prosperity during 1836-37, as did the rest of Ohio and the Western Reserve, and many businesses sprang up. Latter-day Saints founded six mercantile firms, and the Church itself operated a brickyard, printing office, bank, ashery, tannery, shoe shop, forge, pottery, steam sawmill, and lumber kiln. In addition, non-Mormons operated two mercantile firms, a blacksmith shop, a sawmill, a grist mill, a carding mill, and a clothing factory.

Jacob Butterfield described the improving economy in a letter to his mother:

Provisions are high but not so high as they are in Maine—flour is 8 dollars a barrel, wheat $1.25 to $1.50 per bushel, corn 75 cts. per bushel, potatoes 25 cts. per bushel, oxen and cows and sheep are high. This is partly on account of so many moving into the place. There is no lack of work here but it is a better place to work than it is in Maine. Wages are from 12 dollars to 30 or 40 dollars per month. I have 12 or 13 dollars per month to work on a farm or build road or drive a horse team. There is plenty of work of most kinds for men, women or horses. [^19]

When Wilford Woodruff returned from a mission in November 1836, he found Kirtland changed:

Two & a half years since I left Kirtland with my Brethren in their Poverty to go forth . . . our Brethren in Kirtland were poor, despised, & even looked upon . . . with disdain & disgrace. . . . But how changed the scene[. N]ow I behold a cheerfulness beaming upon every countenance that indicates Prosperity & the noise of the ax & the hammer & the sight of their walls & dwellings newly erected & their Bank & market & especially house of God speaks in language loud as thunder that the saints will have a City in prosperity. [^20]

Warren Cowdery wrote in January 1837: "Our streets are continually thronged with teams loaded with wood, materials for building the ensuing season, provisions for the market, people to trade. . . . The number of new buildings erected the last season, those now in contemplation and under contract . . . are evincive of more united exertion, more industry and more enterprise than we ever witnessed in so sparse a population." [^21]

By July, Cowdery wrote, "The starting up, as if by magic, of buildings in every direction around us, were evincive to us of buoyant hope, lively anticipation, and a firm confidence that our days of pinching adversity had passed by. [^22]

It could be argued that the rising prosperity of 1836 came too fast, probably due to population growth. Land prices spiraled. An editorial in the Messenger and Advocate in June 1837 indicated that land prices had increased eight hundred percent in one year "and in many cases more." [^23] Many of the Latter-day Saints became wealthy on paper because of the value of their properties; however, this wealth never materialized.
