Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

4

Staggering Trials for Joseph and Emma

"Thou hast seen much sorrow because the Lord has taken from thee three of thy children." (Blessing given to Emma Smith.)

Just as the official activities and contributions of Joseph Smith cannot be separated from Kirtland, so the personal lives of Joseph and his twenty-six-year-old wife of four years, Emma Hale Smith, cannot be separated from the Church in Kirtland. Everything that happened—the trials, the persecution, financial problems, the gathering and the subsequent growth of the community, and massive spiritual outpourings—deeply affected their home life.

For Joseph and Emma, life in Kirtland was not easy. They lived with other families for almost half of the time they were there; they lost three children; they suffered financial reverses; Church responsibilities placed inordinate demands on their time; visitors and curiosity seekers frequently visited their home; they were often separated because of Joseph's frequent travels for the Church; their living quarters were, in essence, the Church's headquarters; and persecution aimed at the Church invaded their home and personal lives.

In the seven Ohio years, Joseph and Emma lived in five locations. For at least the first three years they shared quarters as guests of other families. The shortest stay was a few weeks, when they lived with Newel K. Whitney and his wife and five children. When they were finally able to build a larger home, intense persecution and financial problems apparently prevented their occupying it before they had to leave Kirtland. [^1]

Persecution in OhioHCJoy and Sorrow

Persecution in OhioHCWhen Joseph and Emma arrived in Kirtland in February 1831, Emma was in her seventh month of pregnancy with twins. Their first child, a boy named Alvin, had died immediately after birth on June 15, 1828, at Harmony, Pennsylvania. On April 30, 1831, while living on the Isaac Morley farm, Emma gave birth to twins, a girl and a boy. They lived for only three hours. Emma's father-in-law, Joseph Smith, Sr., who later became the Patriarch to the Church, told Emma in a special blessing, "Thou hast seen much sorrow because the Lord has taken from thee three of thy children." [^2]

Persecution in OhioHCJoseph and Emma's sorrow was somewhat softened when one of the new converts, John Murdock, approached Joseph and Emma with an unusual request. On April 30, 1831, the same day the Smith twins were born and died, Murdock's wife had died while giving birth to twins, a boy and a girl. After he buried her, he realized he could not care for the twins alone, so he asked Joseph and Emma to raise them. In his biographical sketch, he said the adoption was motivated by a desire to "place them where they can be taught in the faith and principles of Salvation." [^3] The Smiths accepted the twins and gave them the names of Joseph and Julia Smith.

Persecution in OhioHCFurther tragedy came to Joseph Smith's family in March 1832 while they were living at the John Johnson farm. The Prophet described what happened:

Persecution in OhioHCOn the 24th of March [1832], the twins before mentioned, which had been sick of the measles for some time, caused us to be broken of our rest in taking care of them, especially my wife. In the evening I told her she had better retire to rest with one of the children, and I would watch with the sicker child. In the night she told me I had better lie down on the trundle bed, and I did so, and was soon after awakened by her screaming murder, when I found myself going out of the door, in the hands of about a dozen men; some of whose hands were in my hair, and some had hold of my shirt, drawers, and limbs. . . . I made a desperate struggle, as I was forced out, to extricate myself, but only cleared one leg, with which I made a pass at one man, and he fell on the door steps. I was immediately overpowered again, and they swore . . . they would kill me if I did not be still, which quieted me. As they passed around the house with me, the fellow that I kicked came to me and thrust his hand, all covered with blood, into my face and with an exulting hoarse laugh, muttered: " . . . I'll fix ye."

They then seized me by the throat and held on till I lost my breath. After I came to, as they passed along with me, about thirty rods from the house, I saw Elder Rigdon stretched out on the ground, whither they had dragged him by his heels. I supposed he was dead. I began to plead with them, saying, "You will have mercy and spare my life, I hope." To which they replied, ". . . call on yer God for help, we'll show ye no mercy;" and the people began to show themselves in every direction; one coming from the orchard had a plank; and I expected they would kill me, and carry me off on the plank. They then turned to the right, and went on about thirty rods further; about sixty rods from the house, and thirty from where I saw Elder Rigdon, into the meadow, where they stopped, and one said, ". . . pull up his drawers, pull up his drawers, he will take cold." Another replied: "Ain't ye going to kill 'im? Ain't ye going to kill 'im?" . . . They held a council, and as I could occasionally overhear a word, I supposed it was to know whether or not it was best to kill me. They returned after a while, when I learned that they had concluded not to kill me, but to beat and scratch me well, tear off my shirt and drawers, and leave me naked. One cried, "Simonds, Simonds, where's the tar bucket?" "I don't know," answered one, "where 'tis, Eli's left it." They ran back and fetched the bucket of tar, when one exclaimed, . . . "Let us tar up his mouth;" and they tried to force the tar-paddle into my mouth; I twisted my head around, so that they could not; and they cried out, ". . . hold up yer head and let us giv ye some tar." They then tried to force a vial into my mouth, and broke it in my teeth. All my clothes were torn off me except my shirt collar; and one man fell on me and scratched my body with his nails like a mad cat, and then muttered out: ". . . that's the way the Holy Ghost falls on folks!"

They then left me, and I attempted to rise, but fell again; I pulled the tar away from my lips, so that I could breathe more freely, and after a while I began to recover, and raised myself up, whereupon I saw two lights. I made my way towards one of them, and found it was Father Johnson's. When I came to the door I was naked, and the tar made me look as if I were covered with blood, and when my wife saw me she thought I was all crushed to pieces, and fainted. During the affray abroad, the sisters of the neighborhood had collected at my room. I called for a blanket, they threw me one and shut the door; I wrapped it around me and went in. . . .

My friends spent the night in scraping and removing the tar, and washing and cleansing my body; so that by morning I was ready to be clothed again. This being the Sabbath morning, the people assembled for meeting at the usual hour of worship, and among them came also the mobbers . . . With my flesh all scarified and defaced, I preached to the congregation as usual, and in the afternoon of the same day baptized three individuals. [^4]

A contemporary newspaper called the tar and feathering "a base transaction, an unlawful act, a work of darkness, a diabolical trick." [^5] As a tragic consequence of the mob action, Joseph and Emma lost their adopted son, Joseph, on that night. The twins were sick with the measles, and the eleven-month-old boy caught a severe cold and died four days later. [^6]

The Trials Continue

On April 1, 1832, Joseph Smith had to leave for Missouri on Church business. Fearing for his family's safety because of the recent mob action in Hiram, he suggested to Emma that she go to Kirtland and stay with the family of Newel K. Whitney. He later wrote:

She went to Kirtland, to Brother Whitney's, and Sister Whitney's aunt, Sarah Smith, (who was then living with her,) inquired of her niece if my wife was going to stay there; and, and on being answered in the affirmative, said she should go away, for there was not room enough for the both of them; accordingly sister Whitney invited my wife to leave, which she did immediately; having enjoyed about two hours visit. She then went to Brother Reynolds Cahoon's, and father Smith's, and Doctor Williams, where I found her, very disconsolate on my return. [^7]

At the time, Emma had no home of her own and was trying to manage without the help of her husband. After two ill-fated pregnancies, she was in the fourth month of another one, and was mourning for her lost son and caring for Julia, the surviving adopted twin. During the two and a half months that Joseph was in Missouri, she lived with three different families. Joseph also struggled with his trials during this trip. He was poisoned, and except for a healing blessing from Elder Whitney, he probably would have died. On June 6, the Prophet expressed his own loneliness in a letter to her:

Dear Wife:

I would inform you that Brother Martin has arrived here and brought the pleasing news that our family were well when he left there which greatly cheered our hearts and revived our spirits. We thank our Heavenly Father for his goodness unto us and [all of you]. . . . My situation is a very unpleasant one although I will endeavor to be contented, the Lord assisting me. I have visited a grove . . . almost every day . . . and there give vent to all the feelings of my heart. . . . I was grieved to hear that Hyrum had [lost] his little child. I think we can in some degree sympathize with him but we all must be reconciled to our lots and say the will [of the Lord] be done. Sister Whitney wrote a letter to [her husband] which was very cheering and being unwell at that time and filled with much anxiety it would have been very consoling to me to have received a few lines from you. . . . I hope you will excuse . . . my inability in conveying my ideas in writing. . . . I should like [to] see little Julia and once more take her on my knee and converse with you on all the subjects which concerns us. . . . I subscribe myself your husband. The Lord bless you, peace be with [you]. So farewell until I return. [^8]

Not long after Joseph Smith returned from Missouri, he and his family moved into rooms above the Whitney store in Kirtland. That fall he left again, this time on a trip to Boston, Albany, and New York City. During his absence he communicated with Emma through letters that expressed his feelings of tenderness, love, and support. In a letter dated October 13, 1832, he wrote:

My Dear Wife:

This day I have been walking through . . . the City of New York. . . . [A]fter beholding all that I had any desire to behold . . . the thoughts of home of Emma and Julia rushe[d] upon my mind like a flood and I could wish for [a] moment to be with them. My breast is filled with all the feelings and tenderness of a parent and a Husband and could I be with you I would tell you many things. . . . I hope you will excuse me for writing this letter so soon after writing for I feel as if I wanted to say something to you to comfort you in your peculiar trial and present affliction. I hope God will give you strength that you may not faint. I pray God to soften the hearts of those around you to be kind to you and take [the] burden off your shoulders as much as possible and not afflict you. I feel for you for I know your state and that others do not but you must comfort yourself knowing that God is your friend in heaven and that you have one true and living friend on Earth your Husband. [^9]

On November 6, just hours before Joseph returned from this trip, Emma gave birth to a son, whom they named Joseph Smith III. Another son, their second surviving child, was born June 20, 1836. Because of their love for Frederick G. Williams, who served as scribe and counselor to the Prophet, they named their new son Frederick G. W. Smith. This time the Prophet was able to remain in Kirtland with Emma during the full length of her pregnancy.

"Malicious and Vexatious Lawsuits"

The end of Joseph and Emma's stay in Kirtland was foreshadowed by numerous lawsuits against the Prophet and the Church. Seventeen lawsuits have been identified as being filed between 1837 and 1839 in Chardon, the county seat of the county in which Kirtland was situated, [^10] and many others were filed in Painesville.

One example of such harassment occurred on July 27, 1837, when the Prophet, accompanied by Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh, set out to visit members in Canada. At Painesville, the Prophet recorded, "We were detained all day by malicious and vexatious lawsuits. About sunset I got into my carriage to return home to Kirtland; at this moment the sheriff sprang into the carriage, seized my lines, and served another writ on me." The writ had been sworn out by a traveling salesman who contrived to have the Prophet test "a new fashioned cooking stove . . . in [Joseph's] kitchen, saying it would give credit to his stove, wishing to have it tested by our people." This, of course, turned out to be a ploy for a lawsuit. The Prophet concluded, "I gave my watch to the officer for security and we all returned home." [^11]

One historian, in researching the lawsuits, has found that on that same day six writs were served on the Mormon leader in Painesville. "On the first two writs he was tried and released with no action taken against him. He was then arrested a third time and on being examined was held over for the trial. A release was available, however, on a five hundred dollar bond if an acceptable signor could be found. The court would not allow any in his party to sign for him." [^12] Anson Call, a recent convert to the Church, knew the sheriff, and so his signature was accepted. However, after Joseph was released, the sheriff pursued him again with another writ and immediately took him back to Painesville, where he stood trial and was acquitted. He was then arrested a fifth time, and this case also was dropped.

Intense mob action and additional evidence of harassment brought on by lawsuits is evident in an account by Apostle Heber C. Kimball: "Joseph was sued before a magistrate's court in Painesville on a vexatious suit. I carried him from Kirtland to Painesville, with four or five others, in my wagon every morning for five days, and brought them back in the evening. We were often waylaid, but managed to elude our enemies by rapid driving and taking different roads. . . . Mobs were organized around Kirtland, who were enraged against us, ready to destroy us." [^13]

E. D. Howe, publisher of the Painesville Telegraph, indicated that the suits were devised to hinder the Church's progress in Ohio: "All their [the Mormons'] vain babblings and pretensions were pretty strongly set forth and noticed. . . . [T]he surrounding country was becoming somewhat sensitive, and many of our citizens thought it advisable to take all the legal means within their reach to counteract the progress of so dangerous an enemy in their midst, and many law suits ensued." [^14]

Grandison Newell, who owned a chair factory in Kirtland, was a particularly bothersome adversary of Joseph Smith and the Church. It has been estimated that he filed as many as thirty civil suits against the Prophet. In one lawsuit, he claimed that the Prophet was plotting to assassinate him, and a warrant was issued for Joseph's arrest. Several individuals from Painesville, evidently a self-appointed committee to make a citizen's arrest, went to Kirtland to apprehend Joseph and take him back to Painesville. Joseph, who was away at the time, was arrested when he returned and taken to Painesville. At the trial, held on Saturday, June 3, 1837, at the Methodist church, Joseph was charged with attempting "to take the life of said complainant, by inducing two individuals to lay in wait for said Newell, near his dwelling in order to shoot him." Joseph was bound over to the Geauga County Court in Chardon and fined five hundred dollars bond, while Sidney Rigdon, Orson Hyde, and Solomon Denton, who had appeared as his witnesses, were fined fifty dollars bond each. The editor of the Painesville Republican wrote: "I attended the trial and took down the evidence, but was much surprised to find that no testimony appeared, on which, any reliance could be placed, that went in the least degree to criminate the respondent, but rather to raise him in the estimation of men of candor." [^15]

Whether Joseph and Emma's trials stemmed from lawsuits, persecutions, personal tribulation, or separation while Joseph was away, those trials no doubt posed enormous challenges for Emma. She could usually only support Joseph from afar. Through all these trials, though she was often in delicate health and forced to manage without her husband, she remained steadfast and supportive. Her mother-in-law, Lucy Mack Smith, wrote of her:

She did not favor herself on this account, but whatever her hands found to do, she did with her might. . . . I have never seen a woman in my life, who would endure every species of fatigue and hardship, from month to month, and from year to year, with that unflinching courage, zeal, and patience, which she has ever done. . . . [S]he has been tossed upon the ocean of uncertainty—she has breasted the storms of persecution, and buffeted the rage of men and devils, which would have borne down almost any other woman. [^16]

Both Joseph and Emma set obedience to the Lord and devotion to Joseph's calling over personal desires.
