Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

5

The Prophet Joseph at Home

"I spent the evening around my fireside, teaching my family grammar." (Joseph Smith.)

When persecution and outside pressures crowded upon Joseph Smith, he generally found solace and peace in his home, even during periods when guards were posted. As one examines his diary, it is obvious that he enjoyed his home and truly found peace there, whether teaching his family around the fireplace, spending Christmas with them, or entertaining guests and strangers.

The first house Joseph and his wife, Emma, could really call home was built in 1834 in Kirtland, after they had been married seven years. This home, built on a hill near the site of the Kirtland Temple, provided some measure of privacy and family life. Nevertheless, because Joseph Smith was President of the Church, much religious activity centered around his home. Journal entries and records give glimpses into his home life: [^1]

Remained at home and had great joy with my family. [March 27, 1834]

Spent the evening around my fireside, teaching my family grammar. It commenced snowing this afternoon; wind very heavy. [November 10, 1835]

Enjoyed myself at home with my family, all day, it being Christmas, the only time I have had this privilege so satisfactorily for a long period. [December 25, 1835]

Some notations mention illnesses of the Prophet:

Much afflicted with my cold, yet I am determined to overcome. . . . Brother Parrish, my scribe, being afflicted with a cold, asked me to lay my hands on him in the name of the Lord. I did so, and in return I asked him to lay his hands on me. We were both relieved. [November 27, 1835]

I am laboring under some indisposition of health. Slept awhile, and arose feeling tolerably well, through the mercy of God. [December 5, 1835]

I was taken sick, and kept [in] my room. [June 12, 1837]

My afflictions continued to increase, and were very severe, insomuch that I was unable to raise my head from my pillow when the brethren called to bid me farewell. [June 13, 1837]

Dr. Levi Richards, at my request, administered to me herbs and mild food, and nursed me with all tenderness and attention; and my heavenly Father blessed his administrations to the easing and comforting of my system, for I began to amend in a short time, and in a few days I was able to resume my usual labors. [June 14, 1837]

When apostates reported, and the doubtful believed, that his afflictions resulted from transgression, Joseph wrote, "But of this the Lord judge between me and them." [^2]

Chores and duties had to be done, and Joseph Smith did his share of mundane household and family tasks. On November 7, 1835, he wrote in his journal that he spent the day at home "attending to my domestic concerns." In December 1835, he mentioned that he was "at home attending to the duties of my family." He also recorded that he was chopping wood. On December 24, he spent the afternoon assisting the commissioner in "surveying a road across my farm."

In his teachings, the Prophet emphasized the importance of learning. Here are some entries from his journal:

I returned home, being much fatigued from riding in the rain. Spent the remainder of the day in reading and meditation. [October 5, 1835]

Spent the day at home, in examining my books, and studying the Hebrew alphabet. [November 21, 1835]

Spent this day at home, endeavoring to treasure up knowledge for the benefit of my calling. [December 21, 1835]

Continued my studies. O may God give me learning, even language; and endue me with qualifications to magnify His name while I live. [December 22, 1835]

At home, studying the Greek language. [December 23, 1835]

Wherever he lived, Joseph Smith had an office in his home for official Church business, which included working on translations, receiving revelations, instructing the members, entertaining visitors, and holding council meetings. From 1835 through 1837, he also had an office outside of his home, first in the schoolhouse/printing office and then in the temple.

Many visitors, often insensitive and inquisitive individuals, stopped in Kirtland to visit the Prophet. In his journal he tells of some of the visits:

I was this morning introduced to a man from the east. After hearing my name, he remarked that I was nothing but a man, indicating by this expression, that he had supposed that a person to whom the Lord should see fit to reveal His will, must be something more than a man. [November 6, 1835]

This afternoon, Erastus Holmes, of Newbury, Ohio, called on me to inquire about the establishment of the Church, and to be instructed. . . . I gave him a brief relation of my experience . . . my first vision . . . also the revelations that I received afterwards concerning the Book of Mormon. . . . He listened very attentively, and seemed highly gratified, and intends to unite with the Church. [November 14, 1835]

Elder Josiah Clark, from the state of Kentucky, called on me. . . . Elder Clark . . . was bitten by a mad dog some three or four years since; has doctored much. . . . He came here that he might be benefitted by the prayers of the Church. Accordingly we prayed for him and laid hands on him . . . and anointed him with oil, and rebuked his afflictions. [November 28, 1835]

A number of brethren from New York called to visit me and see the Egyptian records. [December 14, 1835]

The Smiths often entertained overnight guests in their home. The Prophet was generous in his hospitality to the point that he was criticized for being too generous. Some of the guests were sincere in seeking for truth and some were not. For example, one person, John Hollister of Portage County, Ohio, wanted to discuss religion with the Prophet. Joseph wrote, "He tarried overnight with me, and acknowledged in the morning that, although he had thought he knew something about religion, he was now sensible that he knew but little." The Prophet, showing his wit, added, " . . . which was the greatest trait of wisdom I could discover in him." [^3] Another guest, Samuel Barnum, "came to my house, much afflicted with a swollen arm." The Prophet commented that "he had not sufficient faith to be healed, my wife applied a poultice of herbs, and he tarried overnight." [^4]

Joseph and Emma had their share of obnoxious guests. Luke Johnson, a Kirtland constable, observed an overnight guest taking advantage of their hospitality: "A Baptist Clergyman from the State of New York, who had been acquainted with the Prophet Joseph in his early life, called upon him and staid all night. Joseph made the minister welcome, and treated him hospitably and respectfully; but, when breakfast was over next morning, he called Joseph a hypocrite, a liar, an imposter and a false Prophet, and called upon him to repent." [^5]

One of the strangest visitors was "Joshua, the Jewish Minister," who arrived in mid-morning on Monday, November 9, 1835. The Prophet described him as "having a beard about three inches in length, quite grey; also his hair was long and considerably silvered with age; I thought him about fifty or fifty-five years old; tall, straight, slender built, of thin visage, blue eyes, and fair complexion; wore a sea-green frock coat and pantaloons, black fur hat with narrow brim; and, while speaking, frequently shut his eyes, with a scowl on his countenance." [^6] Joseph invited him to stay for dinner and overnight. After a lengthy doctrinal discussion and questioning, it turned out that "Joshua" was really a notorious lawbreaker from New York who had been tried in court for murder, manslaughter, contempt of court, and whipping his daughter. Despite this, and knowing that the man had been convicted and imprisoned for contempt and the whipping, the Prophet fed him and put him up in his home for two more nights.

Joseph Smith was constantly faced with financial problems. Because his duties required that he be available at all times, he had to ask members of the Church for financial assistance. In his history, he listed the names of those who contributed and the amounts given. In one entry he commented, "My heart swells with gratitude inexpressible when I realize the great condescension of my heavenly Father, in opening the hearts of these my beloved brethren to administer so liberally to my wants. . . .Whether my days are many or few, . . . let me enjoy the society of such brethren." [^7]

One notation stated that an Elder Tanner "brought me half of a fatted hog for the benefit of my family." Another noted, "Elder Shadrach Roundy brought me a quarter of beef." The Prophet then expressed a wish that "blessings . . . be poured upon their heads, for their kindness towards me." [^8]

Postage was expensive in the 1830s; mailing a letter cost twenty-five cents, which was a half-day's wage. Joseph frequently received letters that had been sent C.O.D. To make matters worse, some of the mail contained insults. The Prophet wrote: "It is a common occurrence [to receive C.O.D. letters], and I am subjected to a great deal of expense by those whom I know nothing about, only that they are destitute of good manners; for if people wish to be benefitted with information from me, common respect and good breeding would dictate them to pay the postage on their letters." [^9]

This problem continued until the Prophet finally put a notice in the Church newspaper, Messenger and Advocate: "I wish to inform my friends and all others, abroad, that whenever they wish to address me thro' the Post Office, they will be kind enough to pay the postage on the same. My friends will excuse me in this matter, as I am willing to pay postage on letters to hear from them; but am unwilling to pay for insults and menaces,—consequently, must refuse all, unpaid." [^10]

In his family relationships, Joseph Smith manifest a strong and tender love. Journal notes indicate he longed to be with them when he was separated from them. When he was at home, he frequently made note of his joy to be with them.

His love for others outside his family circle was also frequently manifest. Perhaps this love was tested most when friends turned against him and the Church. As difficult as it must have been for him to undergo persecution from enemies, his hardest trials came as friends and associates deserted him. But he was always quick to forgive and to welcome back the transgressor. His feelings are revealed in a letter to one such individual: "I have received your letter of the 28th of September, 1835, and I have read it twice, and it gave me sensations that are better imagined than described, let it suffice that I say that the very flood gates of my heart were broken up—I could not refrain from weeping. I thank God that it has entered into your heart to try to return to the Lord, and to this people." [^11]

Joseph was particularly fond of children. Louisa Littlefield, who was baptized in 1834 at age fourteen, recalled: "In Kirtland, when wagon loads of grown people and children came in from the country to meeting, Joseph would make his way to as many of the wagons as he well could and cordially shake the hand of each person. Every child and young babe in the company were especially noticed by him and tenderly taken by the hand, with his kind words and blessings. He loved innocence and purity, and he seemed to find it in the greatest perfection with the prattling child." [^12]

Lorenzo Snow, who later would become President of the Church, was impressed by the Prophet's deep feelings of kindness toward animals: "There was a steep hill in Kirtland which was being leveled, and quite a number of workmen were engaged. President Smith was there and I met him with his first counselor, Sidney Rigdon. The Prophet was overseeing the work. One of the brethren came up to the Prophet, carrying a nest full of young mice. He showed them to Joseph, who after looking at them, seemingly with great interest, said to the workman: 'Pretty little innocent things, take them back and put them where their mother can find them.'" [^13]

The Prophet Develops and Matures

In Kirtland, the Prophet Joseph Smith developed and matured as a leader through facing and overcoming many challenges and difficulties. Lorenzo Snow made two observations of the Prophet's development. The first was in 1832 at the home of John Johnson:

I made a critical examination as to his appearance, his dress, and his manner as I heard him speak. He was only twenty-five years of age and was not, at that time, what would be called a fluent speaker. His remarks were confined principally to his own experiences, especially the visitation of the angel, giving a strong and powerful testimony in regard to these marvelous manifestations. He simply bore his testimony to what the Lord had manifested to him, to the dispensation of the Gospel which had been committed to him, and to the authority that he possessed. At first he seemed a little diffident and spoke in rather a low voice, but as he proceeded he became very strong and powerful, and seemed to affect the whole audience with the feeling that he was honest and sincere. It certainly influenced me in this way and made impressions upon me that remain until the present day. [^14]

Five years later, Lorenzo again met the Prophet, this time at Joseph's home on the hill, and noted:

He seemed to have changed considerably in his appearance since I first saw him at Hiram, four and a half years before. He was very ready in conversation, and had apparently lost that reserve and diffident feeling that he seemed to have before. He was free and easy in his conversation with me, making me feel perfectly at home in his presence. In fact, I felt as free with him as if we had been special friends for years. He was very familiar. [^15]

Christopher G. Crary, a longtime Kirtland resident and non-Mormon, recognized that experiences with people and a "native ability" polished Joseph Smith in spite of his lack of formal education. He observed that "contact with mankind and native ability had given him [Joseph] polished manners, and his language, so far as I was qualified to judge, was correct, forcible, right to the point, and convincing. From my acquaintance and dealings with him, I considered him far superior to the educated Rigdon in intellectual ability." [^16]

Joseph as a Businessman

In an attempt to provide for his family and to meet his financial obligations, Joseph Smith opened a store in the latter part of 1836. He apparently operated the store for less than one year. Accounts written about the store indicate that his compassion for the Saints took precedence over profit. He apparently found it difficult to refuse many of the Saints who came into the store asking to purchase goods on credit. Brigham Young wrote a scenario of possible transactions in the store:

Joseph goes to New York and buys 20,000 dollars' worth of goods, comes into Kirtland and commences to trade. In comes one of the brethren, "Brother Joseph, let me have a frock pattern for my wife." What if Joseph says, "No, I cannot without the money." The consequence would be, "He is no Prophet," says James. Pretty soon Thomas walks in. "Brother Joseph, will you trust me for a pair of boots?" "No, I cannot let them go without the money." "Well," says Thomas, "Brother Joseph is no Prophet; I have found that out, and I am glad of it." After awhile, in comes Bill and sister Susan. Says Bill, "Brother Joseph, I want a shawl, I have not got the money, but I wish you to trust me a week or a fortnight." Well, brother Joseph thinks the others have gone and apostatized, and he don't know but these goods will make the whole Church do the same, so he lets Bill have a shawl. Bill walks off with it and meets a brother. "Well," says he, "what do you think of brother Joseph?" "O he is a first-rate man, and I fully believe he is a Prophet. See here, he has trusted me this shawl." Richard says, "I think I will go down and see if he won't trust me some." In walks Richard. "Brother Joseph, I want to trade about 20 dollars." "Well," says Joseph, "these goods will make the people apostatize; so over they go, they are of less value than the people." Richard gets his goods. Another comes in the same way to make a trade of 25 dollars, and so it goes. Joseph was a first-rate fellow with them all the time, provided he never would ask them to pay him. In this way it is easy for us to trade away a first-rate store of goods, and be in debt for them. [^17]

Brigham Young noted the negative consequences of Joseph's charity in the store:

I have known persons that would have cursed brother Joseph to the lowest hell hundreds of times, because he would not trust out everything he had on the face of the earth, and let the people squander it to the four winds. When he had let many of the brethren and sisters have goods on trust, he could not meet his liabilities, and then they would turn round and say, "What is the matter brother Joseph, why don't you pay your debts?" "It is quite a curiosity that you don't pay your debts; you must be a bad financier; you don't know how to handle the things of this world." At the same time the coats, pants, dresses, boots and shoes that they and their families were wearing came out of Joseph's store, and were not paid for when they were cursing him for not paying his debts. [^18]

Financial problems connected with the store no doubt created further pressures on Joseph and Emma. After they left Kirtland, he was still settling debts connected with this business venture.
