Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

6

Family Heritage and Support

"I saw Mother on her knees under an apple tree praying for us. . . . From that moment we were healed." (Hyrum Smith.)

Joseph Smith's family heritage was crucial to the success of his life and mission. From noble parents and grandparents, he was blessed with character traits and faith that prepared him to meet opposition and persecution in his life.

Joseph and Emma were greatly blessed by the association and support of Joseph's family, who followed them to Kirtland. The family included the Prophet's parents, Joseph Smith Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith; his brothers, Hyrum, Samuel, William, and Don Carlos; several sisters, uncles and aunts, and cousins. Many of them served in Church callings, gave moral support when it was badly needed, assisted in blessings and prayers, and helped to build up the Church in Kirtland.

Joseph Smith Sr.

While living in Kirtland Joseph Smith Sr. served missions, preached, baptized, underwent persecution, helped build the temple, frequently gave blessings to the Saints, and conducted meetings. He was a member of the first high council, served as Patriarch to the Church, was president of the high priesthood, and served in the First Presidency. Joseph Smith Sr. was described as "six feet, two inches high, was very straight, and remarkably well proportioned. His ordinary weight was about two hundred pounds, and he was very strong and active. In his younger days he was famed as a wrestler, and, Jacob like, he never wrestled with but one man whom he could not throw." [^1]

Lorenzo Snow made the following observation: "Anyone seeing Father Smith as he then appeared and having read of old Father Abraham in the scriptures, would be apt to think that Father Smith looked a good deal like Abraham must have looked; at least, that is what I thought. I do not know that any man among the Saints was more loved than Father Smith; and when any one was seriously sick Father Smith would be called for, whether it was night or day. He was as noble and generous a man as I have ever known." [^2]

Lorenzo first met Joseph Smith Sr. following a meeting in the Kirtland Temple. The Patriarch boldly predicted that Lorenzo "would soon be convinced of the truth of the Latter-day work, and be baptized." Lorenzo recorded this impression: "The old gentleman's prediction, that I should ere long be baptized, was strange to me, for I had not cherished a thought of becoming a member of the 'Mormon' Church. . . . I looked at Father Smith, and silently asked myself the question: Can that man be a deceiver? His every appearance answered in the negative. At first sight, his presence impressed me with feelings of love and reverence. I had never seen age so prepossessing. Father Joseph Smith, the Patriarch, was indeed a noble specimen of aged manhood." [^3] His lack of worldly possessions is evident from his comment during a conference on October 25, 1831, when many priesthood brethren had expressed willingness to consecrate all that they possessed to the Lord. Father Smith responded that he "had nothing to consecrate to the Lord of the things of the Earth, yet he felt to consecrate himself and family." [^4]

Lucy Mack Smith

Throughout the Kirtland period, Lucy Mack Smith was supportive and involved with the Church. Her leadership ability surfaced when she led a group of twenty adults and thirty children from Fayette, New York, traveling part of the way by flat boat on the Erie Canal. When a blockage of the canal delayed the barge for more than a day and there was a great deal of murmuring by the Saints because of a food shortage, Lucy stood up and declared, "You will not starve. . . . I have no doubt but the hand of the Lord is over us." [^5] In Buffalo, she was not afraid to let people know that she and her group were members of the Church, though another group of Saints there told her that such an admission might prevent them from getting lodging. She succeeded in finding a place for the women and children to stay. When scoffers said that the ship on which the group were to cross Lake Erie could not sail because of ice, she led the Saints aboard ship and told them:

"If you will all of you raise your desires to heaven, that the ice may be broken up, and we be set at liberty, as sure as the Lord lives, it will be done." At that instant a noise was heard, like bursting thunder. The captain cried, "Every man to his post." The ice parted, leaving barely a passage for the boat, and so narrow that as the boat passed through[,] the buckets of the waterwheel were torn off with a crash, which, joined to the word of command from the captain, the hoarse answering of the sailors, the noise of the ice, and the cries and confusion of the spectators, presented a scene truly terrible. We had barely passed through the avenue when the ice closed together again, and the Colesville brethren were left in Buffalo, unable to follow us.

As we were leaving the harbor, one of the bystanders exclaimed, "There goes the 'Mormon' company! That boat is sunk in the water nine inches deeper than ever it was before, and, mark it, she will sink—there is nothing surer." In fact, they were so sure of it that they went straight to the office and had it published that we were sunk, so that when we arrived at Fairport we read in the papers the news of our own death. [^6]

In Kirtland, Lucy took in visitors, supported those working on the temple, and assisted in building the schoolhouse/printing office. She was noted for her missionary zeal. While traveling with her son Hyrum on a visit to Detroit to visit her brother's family, she spoke rather plainly, with her customary missionary zeal. When someone expressed concern about her outspokenness, Hyrum proposed that "Mother Smith should say just what she pleased, and if she got into difficulty, the Elders should help her out of it." [^7]

Her zeal led many people to convert to the Church. During the trip to Michigan, she was introduced to a Mr. Ruggles, her niece's Presbyterian pastor. In her history, she wrote:

"And you," said Mr. Ruggles, upon shaking hands with me, "are the mother of that poor, foolish, silly boy, Joe Smith, who pretended to translate the Book of Mormon."

I looked him steadily in the face, and replied, "I am, sir, the mother of Joseph Smith; but why do you apply to him such epithets as those?"

"Because," said his reverence, "that he should imagine he was going to break down all other churches with that simple 'Mormon' book."

"Did you ever read that book?" I inquired.

"No," said he, "it is beneath my notice."

"But," rejoined I, "the Scriptures say, 'prove all things'; and, now, sir, let me tell you boldly, that that book contains the everlasting gospel, and it was written for the salvation of your soul, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost."

"Pooh," said the minister, "nonsense—I am not afraid of any member of my church being led astray by such stuff; they have too much intelligence."

"Now, Mr. Ruggles," said I, and I spoke with emphasis, for the Spirit of God was upon me, "mark my words—as true as God lives, before three years we will have more than one-third of your church; and, sir, whether you believe it or not, we will take the very deacon, too."

This produced a hearty laugh at the expense of the minister.

Not to be tedious, I will say that I remained in this section of country about four weeks, during which time I labored incessantly for the truth's sake, and succeeded in gaining the hearts of many, among whom were David Dort and his wife. Many desired me to use my influence to have an elder sent into that region of country, which I agreed to do. As I was about starting home, Mr. Cooper observed that our ministers would have more influence if they dressed in broadcloth.

When I returned, I made known to Joseph the situation of things where I had been, so he despatched Brother Jared Carter to that country. And in order that he might not lack influence, he was dressed in a suit of superfine broadcloth. He went immediately into the midst of Mr. Ruggles' church, and, in a short time, brought away seventy of his best members, among whom was the deacon, just as I told the minister. This deacon was Brother Samuel Bent, who now presides over the High Council. [^8]

Records indicate Lucy Mack Smith's prayers sustained her family. Her son Joseph wrote an account of her prayerful entreaties during the time when he and other brethren had gone with "Zion's Camp," a company of men who went to Missouri to help members of the Church who were being harassed there by mobs. An epidemic of cholera broke out in the camp, and Joseph and Hyrum were both in danger of losing their lives. Joseph wrote:

The disease instantly fastened itself upon us and in a few minutes we were in awful distress. . . . [W]e were scarcely able to stand upon our feet . . . and we were greatly alarmed fearing that we should die in this western wilderness. . . . [T]he cramp siezed the calves of my legs . . . gathering the cords into bunches and then the [operation] extended in like manner all over my system[.] I cried heartily unto God but the Heavens seemed sealed against us and every power that could render us any assistance shut within its gates. . . . [I]n a short time afterwards Hyrum sprung to his feet and exclaimed Joseph we shall return for I have seen an open vision in which I saw Mother on her knees under an apple tree praying for us and she is even now in tears asking God to spare our lives that she may behold us again in the flesh and the spirit testifies to me that her prayers and ours shall be heard—and from that Moment we were healed and went on our way rejoicing. [^9]

After relating the experience to his mother, Joseph told her, "Oh My Mother . . . how often have your prayers been a means of assisting us when the shadows of death encompassed us." [^10]

Lucy Mack Smith and her husband were generous to those who needed help, in their concern for the Saints and desire to see the Church prosper. Members gathering to Kirtland frequently sought them out. Later in life Lucy vividly recalled sacrifices that she and Emma had both made for visitors and guests: "How often I have parted every bed in the house for the accommodation of the brethren, and then laid a single blanket on the floor for my husband and myself, while Joseph and Emma slept upon the same floor, with nothing but their cloaks for both bed and bedding." [^11]

The Prophet, realizing the hardships his parents' generosity created for them, made it a matter of prayer. The Lord responded through a revelation on March 8, 1833: "Let your families be small, especially mine aged servant Joseph Smith's, Sen., as pertaining to those who do not belong to your families; . . . that those things that are provided for you, to bring to pass my work, be not taken from you and given to those that are not worthy—and thereby you be hindered in accomplishing those things which I have commanded you." (Doctrine and Covenants 90:25-27.)

Despite the revelation, the Smiths could not refuse hospitality to those in need. Lucy wrote: "In 1835, we were still living on the farm, and laboring with our might to make the company which was constantly coming in, as comfortable as possible. Joseph [the Prophet] saw how we were situated, and that it would not answer for us to keep a public house, at free cost, any longer; and, by his request, we moved into an upper room of his own house, where we lived very comfortably for a season." [^12]

After his father's death in 1840, Joseph noted that "he was one of the most benevolent of men; opening his house to all who were destitute." [^13]

Hyrum, Joseph's Beloved Brother

Throughout his life, Joseph Smith was very close to his older brother Hyrum. Their lives were intertwined in family as well as Church affairs, and they were seldom separated for more than a few months. Hyrum was one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon and one of the six original members of the Church. He served as chairman of the building committee for the Kirtland Temple. In 1837 he was appointed a counselor in the First Presidency.

Indicative of the closeness of the brothers, Joseph wrote, "I could pray in my heart that all my brethren were like unto my beloved brother Hyrum, who possesses the mildness of a lamb, and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ; and I love him with that love that is stronger than death, for I never had occasion to rebuke him, nor he me, which he declared when he left me to-day." [^14]

Hyrum assisted Joseph in family matters and responsibilities. He was a peacemaker between Joseph and their brother William, who was very headstrong. And when the Prophet was away on Church assignments, Hyrum would look after Emma and other family members.

Hyrum spent a great deal of his time in missionary service and other Church assignments. On one of his missions, he met the Tyler family near Erie, Pennsylvania. Daniel Tyler later reminisced:

About December, 1832, Elder Hyrum Smith, brother to the prophet, came to our neighborhood. My father told him that his daughter, who was present, was bent on being baptized into his church, stating at the same time, that the Elder who baptized her would do so at his peril. The Elder quite mildly remarked in substance as follows: "Mr. Tyler, we shall not baptize your daughter against your wishes. If our doctrine be true, which we testify it is, if you prevent your daughter from embracing it, the sin will be on your head, not on ours or your daughter's."

This remark pricked him to the heart. He began to think that possibly the "Mormons" were right and he was wrong. He therefore decided to counsel his daughter in the matter and then permit her to exercise her free agency. He would thus relieve himself of any responsibility.

His remarks to my sister were to the effect that if this new religion was true, it was the best religion in the world, but, if false, it was the worst. "These men," said he, "know whether it is true or false, but I do not." He wished her to reflect upon all these things before making a move in the matter. She replied that she had weighed them long ago and believed it to be her duty to be baptized. He took her on an ox-sled to Lake Erie, a distance of two miles, where, after a hole was cut through three feet of solid ice, she was baptized and confirmed into the Church by Elder Hyrum Smith. [^15]

In January 1836, Joseph sent for Hyrum to administer to and heal Lorenzo Young, who had become ill while working on the temple. Lorenzo described his miraculous healing and a prophecy that Hyrum uttered:

My disease was pronoun[c]ed to be the quick consumption. . . . Dr. Williams, one of the brethren, came to see me, and, considering my case a bad one, came the next day and brought with him Dr. Seely, an old practicing physician. . . . [H]e said to my father, as he left the house:

"Mr. Young, unless the Lord makes your son a new pair of lungs, there is no hope for him!" . . .

The next morning after the visit of the doctors, my father came to the door of the room to see how I was. I recollect his gazing earnestly at me with tears in his eyes. As I afterwards learned, he went from there to the Prophet Joseph, and said to him: "My son Lorenzo is dying; can there not be something done for him?"

The Prophet studied a little while, and replied, "Yes! Of necessity, I must go away to fill an appointment, which I cannot put off. But you go and get my brother Hyrum." . . .

Brother Hyrum Smith led. The Spirit rested mightily upon him. He was full of blessing and prophecy. Among other things, he said that I should live to go with the Saints into the bosom of the Rocky Mountains, to build up a place there, and that my cellar should overflow with wine and fatness.

At that time, I had not heard about the Saints going to the Rocky Mountains; possibly Brother Smith had. After he had finished he seemed surprised at some things he had said, and wondered at the manifestations of the Spirit. I coughed no more after that administration, and rapidly recovered.

I had been pronounced by the best physicians in the country past all human aid, and I am a living witness of the power of God manifested in my behalf through the administration of the Elders. [^16]

During the Kirtland years, Hyrum supported Joseph even while wrestling with his own personal tragedies. In 1832 Hyrum and Jerusha, his wife, lost their three-year-old daughter, Mary. He wrote in his journal, "I was called to view a scene which brought sorrow and mourning. Mary was called from time to eternity on the 29th day of May. She expired in my arms—such a day I never before experienced, and oh may God grant that we may meet her again on the great day of redemption to part no more." [^17]

One of Hyrum's greatest trials came in 1837, while he was fulfilling a mission in Missouri. Jerusha was expecting their sixth child, and on October 2, she gave birth to the baby girl, whom she named Sarah. Less than two weeks later, Jerusha died. Joseph Smith wrote: "My brother Hyrum's wife, Jerusha Bardon Smith, died on the 13th of October while I was in Terre Haute, and her husband at Far West. She left five small children and numerous relatives to mourn her loss; her demise was severely felt by all. She said to one of her tender offspring when on her dying bed, 'Tell your father when he comes that the Lord has taken your mother home and left you for him to take care of.' She died in full assurance of a part in the first resurrection." [^18]

Lucy Mack Smith, Hyrum's mother, wrote of the death of her daughter-in-law, "A calamity happened to our family that wrung our hearts with more than common grief. Jerusha, Hyrum's wife, was taken sick, and after an illness of perhaps two weeks, died while her husband was absent on a mission to Missouri. She was a woman whom everybody loved that was acquainted with her, for she was every way worthy. The family were so warmly attached to her, that, had she been our own sister, they could not have been more afflicted by her death." [^19]

As soon as news of Jerusha's death reached him, Hyrum returned home. Within weeks he proposed marriage to Mary Fielding, a convert to the Church from Canada who taught school in Kirtland, and they were married on December 24. Hyrum later remarked, "It was not because I had less love or regard for Jerusha, that I married so soon, but it was for the sake of my children." [^20]

Hyrum's name is strongly associated with Kirtland, not only for his contributions toward the building of the temple, his Church service, and his devotion to his family, but also for a prophecy concerning the eventual rebuilding of Kirtland. It was through him that the Lord said, referring to a future time, "Thus saith the Lord . . . I will send forth and build up Kirtland." [^21]

Mary Duty Smith

Death touched the Smiths again when the Prophet's grandmother, Mary Duty Smith, passed away while visiting the family on May 27, 1836, at the age of ninety-three. Of her visit, the Prophet wrote:

She had come five hundred miles to see her children, and knew all of us she had ever seen. She was much pleased at being introduced to her great-grandchildren, and expressed much pleasure and gratification on seeing me.

My grandfather, Asael Smith, long ago predicted that there would be a prophet raised up in his family, and my grandmother was fully satisfied that it was fulfilled in me. My grandfather Asael died in East Stockholm, St. Lawrence county, New York, after having received the Book of Mormon, and read it nearly through; and he declared that I was the very Prophet that he had long known would come in his family.

On the 18th, my uncle Silas Smith and family arrived from the east. My father, three of his brothers, and their mother, met the first time for many years. It was a happy day, for we had long prayed to see our grandmother and uncles in the Church. [Mary Duty Smith, however, had not been baptized because of the opposition of her eldest son, Jesse Smith.]

On May 27, after a few days visit with her children, which she enjoyed extremely well, my grandmother fell asleep without sickness, pain or regret. She breathed her last about sunset, and was buried in the burial ground near the Temple, after a funeral address had been delivered by Sidney Rigdon. [^22]

---
Notas:
[^1] June to August 1831, Missouri; designate Jackson County as the center place of Zion and dedicate a temple site.
[^2] April to June 1832, Missouri; establish printing facilities and oversee the implementation of the united order.
[^3] October and November 1832, New York City, Albany, and Boston; purchase goods for Newel K. Whitney store.
[^4] October and November 1833, Canada; preach and baptize.
[^5] February and March 1834, Pennsylvania and New York; preach and recruit members for Zion's Camp.
[^6] May to August 1834, Missouri; Zion's Camp march.
[^7] October 1834, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
