Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

7

The Missionary Prophet Leads by Example

"I made this my rule: when the Lord commands, do it." (Joseph Smith.)

During the seven years the Church headquarters were in Kirtland, the membership grew rapidly under Joseph Smith's inspired leadership and example. He continually taught the principles of the gospel, groomed new leaders, and comforted those in need. During those years, the Lord directed the young prophet to go throughout the eastern and central United States as well as Canada to conduct church business and spread the gospel. As a result of his efforts, honest seekers of truth flocked to the restored church. The response of Mary Noble typified reactions to his message: "Never did I hear preaching sound so glorious to me as that did. I realized it was the truth of heaven." [^1]

Between 1831 and 1838, the Prophet took twelve major missionary and business trips, which consumed a total of almost twenty months. Though such extensive travels and obligations to the Kingdom of God were taxing, he had resolved always to follow the will of the Lord. During one particularly busy time, he declared a rule of obedience that governed his life: "No month ever found me more busily engaged than November; but as my life consisted of activity and unyielding exertions, I made this my rule: when the Lord commands, do it." [^2]

The twelve journeys and their purposes were as follows:

Accounts from some of these trips indicate how Joseph created lasting impressions and touched lives. They also tell of some of his encounters and give insight into his feelings for his wife and family.

Missouri Mission, 1832

After completing their business in Missouri, Joseph Smith and Newel K. Whitney, who had accompanied him, were returning to Kirtland by stagecoach. Near Greenville, Indiana, the horses pulling the coach became frightened and started to bolt. As the two men leaped from the stagecoach, Bishop Whitney caught his foot in the wheel, breaking his leg and foot in several places. The Prophet nursed him for four weeks at a "public house," or inn, in Greenville. At dinner one evening, poison was placed in the Prophet's food. A violent attack of vomiting followed, and he began to hemorrhage. Great "muscular contortions" caused his jaw to become dislocated, and he replaced it himself. He made his way to Bishop Whitney's bedside and asked for a blessing. Bishop Whitney, he said, "laid his hands on me and administered to me in the name of the Lord, and I was healed in an instant." [^3] The poison's effect was so powerful, however, that much of the Prophet's hair fell out.

At the time of this experience he wrote to his wife, Emma, in Kirtland: "I will try to be contented with my lot. . . . God is my friend. In him I shall find comfort. I have given my life into His hands. I am prepared to go at his call. I desire to be with Christ. I count not my life dear to me, only to do his will." [^4]

Mission to Canada, 1833

The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon preached to many congregations as they traveled through upper New York State to Canada. Lydia Knight wrote of their visit to the home of Freeman Nickerson in Mount Pleasant, Ontario, Canada:

As evening drew near, Mr. Nickerson became anxious to hear something of the newcomer's faith. "Oh," said he, "just let him talk; I'll silence him if he undertakes to talk about the Bible. I guess I know as much about the scriptures as he does." This was to his wife whom he directed to place the family Bible on the table in the parlor.

As soon as supper was over, he invited his visitors and family to go up stairs to the parlor, where he said they would have some talk. All, accordingly, repaired to the large well-furnished room, and then Mr. N. said to the Prophet: "Now, Mr. Smith, I wish you and Mr. Rigdon to speak freely. Say what you wish and tell us what you believe. We will listen." Turning to his wife, he whispered, "Now you'll see how I shall shut him up."

The Prophet commenced by relating the scenes of his early life. He told how the angel visited him, of his finding the plates, the translation of them, and gave a short account of the matter contained in the Book of Mormon.

As the speaker continued his wonderful narrative, Lydia, who was listening and watching him intently, saw his face become white and a shining glow seemed to beam from every feature. As his story progressed he would often allude to passages of scripture. Then Mr. N. would speak up and endeavor to confound him. But the attempt was soon acknowledged even by himself to be futile.

The Prophet bore a faithful testimony that the Priesthood was again restored to the earth, and that God and His Son had conferred upon him the keys of the Aaronic and Melchisedek Priesthoods. He stated that the last dispensation had come, and the words of Jesus were now in force—"Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." . . .

You may be sure that by this time Mr. N. was quite willing to sit and listen, saying but little to interrupt or confound. After both men were through speaking, many questions were asked by all present for information. The listeners were honest-hearted people, and when truth is told to such, they are constrained to accept and believe.

"And is this then," said Mr. N., "the curious religion the newspapers tell so much about? Why if what you have just said is not good sound sense, then I don't know what sense is." [^5]

The Prophet baptized the Nickersons and at least fourteen others in Mount Pleasant.

Mission to Recruit for Zion's Camp

In February and March 1834, Joseph Smith and other Church leaders were on simultaneous trips in the East to recruit men for an army to march to Missouri, where the Saints were facing expulsion from Jackson County as a result of confrontations with angry mobs.

In upstate New York the Prophet rendezvoused with some of the others. Mary Noble describes the group's visit to her parents' home:

The spring of 1834, Brother Joseph Smith came from Kirtland, Ohio, to my father's New York estate, Avon, Livingston County. This was the first time I ever beheld a prophet of the Lord, and I can truly say at the first sight that I had a testimony within my bosom that he was a man chosen of God to bring forth a great work in the last days. His society I prized, his conversation was meat and drink to me. The principles that he brought forth and the testimony that he bore of the truth of the Book of Mormon made a lasting impression upon my mind.

While he was there, Sidney Rigdon and Joseph and Brigham Young, Luke and Lyman Johnson, and 12 or 14 of the travelling elders had a council to my father's. I, in company with my sisters, had the pleasure of cooking, and serving the table, and waiting on the[m], which I considered a privilege and a blessing.

Brother Joseph and Elder Rigdon held a meeting in Geneva, which is called the Orton neighborhood, in a barn. Elder Rigdon preached, Brother Joseph bore testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon, and of the work that had come forth in these last days. Never did I hear preaching sound so glorious to me as that did. I realized it was the truth of heaven, for I had testimony of it myself. [^6]

Zion's Camp March, 1834

From May to October 1834, Joseph Smith led an army of about two hundred men to Missouri to aid the beleaguered Saints there. The group called itself Zion's Camp. Soon after starting out on this journey of over one thousand miles, while camped in Indiana, the Prophet wrote to his wife, Emma, the following letter, which gives insight into his feelings for her:

My Dear Wife

Meeting being over I sit down in my tent to write a few lines to you to let you know that you are on my mind and that I am sensible of the duties of a Husband and Father and that I am well and I pray God to let his blessings rest upon you and the children and all that are around you until I return to your society. The few lines you wrote and sent by the hand of Brother Lyman gave me satisfaction and comfort and I hope you will continue to communicate to me by your own hand, for this is a consolation to me to converse with you in this way in my lonely moments which is not easily described. I will endeavor to write every Sunday if I can and let you know how I am. . . . O may the blessings of God rest upon you is the prayer of your husband until death.

Joseph Smith Jr. [^7]

Visit to Michigan, 1834

Accompanied by his brother Hyrum, David Whitmer, Frederick G. Williams, Oliver Cowdery, and Roger Orton, Joseph Smith went to Pontiac, Michigan, in October 1834 to visit some Saints there. One of those whom he visited, Edward Stevenson, recalled:

I first saw him in 1834 at Pontiac and the impression made upon my mind by him at that time causes me now much pleasure. . . . The love for him, as a true Prophet of God, was indelibly impressed upon my mind, and has always been with me from that time. . . .

In that same year, 1834, in the midst of many large congregations, the Prophet testified with great power concerning the visit of the Father and the Son, and the conversation he had with them. Never before did I feel such power as was manifested on these occasions, and, although only a small percentage of those who saw and heard him accepted the restored Gospel, there was not one who dared to dispute it. Many of our neighbors were heard to say: "Well, if Mormonism is true, it will stand; if not true, it will fall." Many of them lived to see it stand and increase, and while they themselves passed away in death's embrace, the work continued to flourish and prosper. . . .

Joseph said, "If you will obey the Gospel with honest hearts, I promise you in the name of the Lord, that the gifts as promised by our Saviour will follow you, and by this you may prove me to be a true servant of God."

I am, with others, a witness that these gifts did follow many in the branch of the Church which was raised up in Pontiac. [^8]

While the group was traveling on Lake Erie aboard the steamer Monroe, Oliver Cowdery met a man by the name of Ellmer, who said he was "personally acquainted with Joe Smith, had heard him preach his lies, and now, since he was dead, he was glad!" This man claimed to have heard Joseph preach in New York and described him as a "dark-complexioned man." The Prophet responded, "God have mercy on such, if they will quit their lying. I need not state my complexion to those that have seen me." [^9]

Mission to Canada, 1837

On his mission to Canada in 1837, Joseph Smith traveled with Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh. In Toronto they stayed on the farm of Mary Horn and her husband. Mary wrote:

In the latter part of the summer of 1837, I had the great pleasure of being introduced to, and entertaining, the beloved prophet, Joseph Smith, with Sidney Rigdon and T. B. Marsh. I said to myself, "O Lord, I thank thee for granting the desire of my girlish heart, in permitting me to associate with prophets and apostles." On shaking hands with Joseph Smith, I received the holy spirit in such great abundance that I felt it thrill my whole system, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. I thought I had never beheld so lovely a countenance. Nobility and goodness were in every feature. [^10]

Mission to the West, 1837

Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon traveled to Far West, Missouri, in 1837 according to the Prophet, "to fulfill the mission appointed to us on the 18th of September by a conference of Elders, in establishing places of gathering for the Saints." David Osborn tells about a meeting that the Prophet conducted there from a wagon box:

The first time I saw Joseph Smith was at Far West, in 1837. There were but three houses in town at that time. On the south side of the elder Peter Whitmer's house was a wagon with a box on. Here were seated Joseph, Sidney Rigdon and others. There was quite a congregation including old residents (Gentiles) of Caldwell County. I remember many of his sayings. A few things he said on this occasion I will relate. Said he, "You have heard many reports about me. Some perhaps are true and others not true. I know what I have done and I know what I have not done. . . . You may hug up to yourselves the Bible, but except through faith in it you can get revelation for yourself, the Bible will profit you but little. . . . The Book of Mormon is true, just what it purports to be, and for this testimony I expect to give an account in the day of judgment. . . . If I obtain the glory which I have in view I expect to wade through much tribulation."

In closing his remarks he said, "The Savior declared the time was coming when secret or hidden things should be revealed on the house tops. Well," says he, "I have revealed to you a few things, if not on the house top, on the wagon top." [^11]

Future Church Presidents

It was in Kirtland that Joseph Smith groomed four future presidents of the Church for responsibilities to come. Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow were baptized during the Kirtland years and led the Church, in succession, until 1901. In addition, the next three presidents—Joseph F. Smith, Heber J. Grant, and George Albert Smith, whose administrations lasted until 1951—were direct descendants of stalwart Kirtland pioneers.

Seven months after his baptism, Brigham Young met the Prophet. He described the experience:

In September, 1832, Brother Heber C. Kimball took his horse and wagon, Brother Joseph Young and myself accompanying him, and started for Kirtland to see the Prophet Joseph. We visited many friends on the way, and some branches of the Church. . . . We proceeded to Kirtland and stopped at John P. Greene's, who had just arrived there with his family. We rested a few minutes, took some refreshments and started to see the Prophet. We went to his father's house and learned that he was in the woods chopping. We immediately repaired to the woods, where we found the Prophet, and two or three of his brothers, chopping and hauling wood. Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and receiving the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be as a true prophet. [^12]

John Taylor, who had been a Methodist preacher in Canada, first came to Kirtland in March 1837, almost one year after he was converted by Parley P. Pratt. Although hesitant at first to listen to Elder Pratt, John gradually warmed up to the message brought from Kirtland. He boldly told a group of friends, "I desire to investigate his doctrines and claims to authority, and shall be very glad if some of my friends will unite with me in this investigation. But if no one will unite with me, be assured I shall make the investigation alone. If I find his religion true, I shall accept it, no matter what the consequences may be; and if false, then I shall expose it." [^13]

Following his baptism, John Taylor traveled to Kirtland, which was staggering under the pressures of apostasy. He boldly proclaimed to apostates critical of the Joseph Smith, "It is not man that I am following, but the Lord." [^14]

Wilford Woodruff, a convert of barely four months, first went to Kirtland in April 1834. Though friends and neighbors in New York State warned him of the dangers involved in joining the Mormons, he responded: "Parley P. Pratt told me it was my duty to lay aside all my temporal matters, go to Kirtland, and join Zion's Camp. I obeyed his counsel." [^15] He described his first meeting with the Prophet:

I was introduced to Brother Joseph, and he shook hands with me most heartily. He invited me to make his habitation my home while I tarried in Kirtland. This invitation I most eagerly accepted, and was greatly edified and blest during my stay with him. . . .

That night we had a most enjoyable and profitable time in his home. . . . He said in relation to Zion's Camp, "Brethren, don't be discouraged about our not having means. The Lord will provide, and He will put it into the heart of somebody to send me some money." The very next day he received a letter from Sister Vose, containing one hundred and fifty dollars. When he opened the letter and took out the money, he held it up and exclaimed: "See here, did I not tell you the Lord would send me some money to help us on our journey? Here it is." I felt satisfied that Joseph was a Prophet of God in very deed. [^16]

Lorenzo Snow, who lived near Kirtland, experienced a spiritual conversion similar to that of the other future prophets. He first met Joseph Smith at the John Johnson home in Hiram, Ohio:

As I looked upon him and listened, I thought to myself that a man bearing such a wonderful testimony as he did, and having such a countenance as he possessed, could hardly be a false prophet. He certainly could not have been deceived, it seemed to me, and if he was a deceiver he was deceiving the people knowingly; for when he testified that he had had a conversation with Jesus, the Son of God, and had talked with Him personally, as Moses talked with God upon Mount Sinai, and that he had also heard the voice of the Father, he was telling something that he either knew to be false or to be positively true. There for the first time I heard his voice. When I heard his testimony in regard to what the Lord had revealed to him, it seemed to me that he must be an honest man. He talked and looked like an honest man. He was an honest man. [^17]

After his conversion and baptism in Kirtland, Lorenzo made a commitment that was to characterize his leadership: "I made up my mind that I would do my duty and that this principle would be my guide through life. I made up my mind solidly that whatever I was asked to do in the Church and Kingdom of God, I would try to do it." [^18]

In Kirtland, Joseph Smith not only set a missionary example but also labored to instill a missionary spirit and vision in his followers. At a meeting at the schoolhouse on the hill above the Morley Farm, Wilford Woodruff heard the Prophet make an astounding prophecy:

On Sunday night the Prophet called on all who held the Priesthood to gather into the little log school house they had there. It was a small house, perhaps 14 feet square. But it held the whole of the Priesthood of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who were then in the town of Kirtland. . . . When we got together the Prophet called upon the Elders of Israel with him to bear testimony of this work. . . . When they got through the Prophet said, "Brethren, I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight. But I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it." I was rather surprised. He said[,] "[I]t is only a little handfull of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America—it will fill the world. . . . This people will go into the Rocky mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there." [^19]

Though Wilford recorded the instruction and prophecy, he did not understand it at the time. Sixty-four years later, however, standing in the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City, he declared: "I want to bear testimony before God, angels and men that mine eyes behold the day, and have beheld for the last fifty years of my life, the fulfillment of that prophecy. I never expected to see the Rocky Mountains when I listened to that man's voice, but I have, and do today." [^20]

As the Church fulfills its destiny, one can see the literal fulfillment of that prophecy that the gospel message would fill the Americas and then the world.

---
Notas:
[^1] June to August 1831, Missouri; designate Jackson County as the center place of Zion and dedicate a temple site.
[^2] April to June 1832, Missouri; establish printing facilities and oversee the implementation of the united order.
[^3] October and November 1832, New York City, Albany, and Boston; purchase goods for Newel K. Whitney store.
[^4] October and November 1833, Canada; preach and baptize.
[^5] February and March 1834, Pennsylvania and New York; preach and recruit members for Zion's Camp.
[^6] May to August 1834, Missouri; Zion's Camp march.
[^7] October 1834, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
