Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

8

Missionaries Go Forth from Kirtland

"I left with the twelve. . . . for Fairport . . . and went immediately on board of a steamboat which. . . . the Lord in his mercy provided . . . at the very moment we arrived which was according to our prayers." (Orson Pratt.)

Sending the message of Christ's restored church to the world was perhaps the greatest work done by the early Latter-day Saints. Joseph Smith taught the priesthood holders in Kirtland that "the greatest and most important duty is to preach the Gospel." [^1] Based on revelations from the Lord that stated that the gospel would go to all nations from "the Ohio"(D&C 39:15-16), faithful brethren journeyed to other parts of the United States, to Canada, and to England on missions. The Twelve Apostles, men ordained to be special witnesses, set the example. Shortly after their call to the apostleship, on May 4, 1835, they left as a body for various missions.

The missionaries were often armed with little more than faith, the Spirit of the Lord, and all the copies of the Book of Mormon they could carry. Hardship, rejection, persecution, and exhausting travel characterized their labors as they delivered their divine message to the world. Nevertheless, with the Lord's help, they converted great numbers of people, many of whom converged upon Kirtland, the first gathering place of the Church.

The missionaries' mode of travel to and from Kirtland in the 1830s was mostly by foot, horseback, wagon, stagecoach, and steamboat. Though railroads were emerging in New York and a few other areas, there were none near Kirtland. On one mission, Joseph Smith and his companions used the railroad to travel from Schenectady to Albany, New York.

Some missionaries could afford to travel by stagecoach. This was convenient because the main road connecting Cleveland to western Pennsylvania and New York was close to Kirtland. But though stagecoach travelers could cover as much as six to eight miles an hour on good roads, it was usually an uncomfortable way to travel. Many journals refer to rough roads with ruts. It could also be expensive, since the travelers had to pay for food and lodging at stagecoach stops along the way.

A rider on horseback could probably cover only forty to fifty miles a day because of the need to feed, water, and rest the animal. Traveling by wagon was even slower: a loaded wagon averaged only about two miles an hour.

Steamships, which averaged about twenty miles an hour, were a favorite mode of travel. Missionaries often boarded a steamship at Fairport Harbor on Lake Erie to go to Buffalo, Detroit, and other cities. Sometimes they would travel by boat on the Ohio River to visit the southern states and Missouri. The Prophet mentioned that his spring 1832 trip to Missouri included travel on the Ohio River through Cincinnati and Louisville.

For most missionaries, travel was by foot, carrying cloth knapsacks or leather valises. Walking for thirteen or fourteen hours, they could go about forty miles a day if the weather was favorable and the roads were good. George A. Smith described his experience:

My shoes, which Brother Brigham Young gave me, were worn out, and Brother Sherman Brown gave me another pair. There had just been a flood which had destroyed many bridges in the county; this subjected us to great annoyance in traveling and increased the distances we had to walk. . . . From Freedom we walked 35 miles to Lodi; the road was very muddy and my feet sore. We walked 10 miles the next morning and stopped for breakfast accidentally at the house of a Latter-day Saint who recognized us as Traveling Elders and made us welcome. My feet were very sore. I had blisters on all my toes and one on the ball of each foot and one of my heels was one complete blister. Brother William Tinney and Brother Murdock collected a congregation and we preached in the evening. In the morning I proposed to Lyman Smith to rest till my feet got well. [^2]

As George prepared for his mission, his cousin, Joseph, gave him a copy of the Book of Mormon, some cloth to make a coat, and some advice: "Preach short sermons, make short prayers, and deliver your sermons with a prayerful heart." [^3]

Missionary Hardships and Trials

There are numerous examples in Church history of hardships endured by missionaries and their families, as well as stories of incredible faith. Families left behind usually had to sustain themselves or be taken care of by other Church members. In 1831 Joseph Smith declared that "the Lord held the Church bound to provide for the families of the absent Elders while proclaiming the Gospel." [^4]

Many men would serve on their missions for as long as possible, return to Kirtland to accomplish necessary tasks at home and receive further inspiration and instruction from the brethren, and then leave on another mission. Lorenzo Barnes, who was baptized on June 16, 1833, followed such a pattern. Within one month after his baptism, he was ordained an elder and left for Pennsylvania on a mission that lasted for two months, August and September. In October, he returned to Kirtland, where he worked on the temple for three or four weeks. He then returned to his home in Norton to teach school during the winter. In the spring of 1834, he went with Zion's Camp to Missouri. The group disbanded in the summer and he remained in Missouri until October, when he started another missionary journey, which lasted more than six months. He returned home for less than a month before leaving on another mission, which lasted for five and a half months. Upon his return, he was called to study English grammar and Hebrew at the School of the Elders in Kirtland. [^5]

Despite the primitive modes of transportation, some missionaries traveled thousands of miles to preach the gospel. Wilford Woodruff summarized his 1835 experience: "During the last year, I travelled 3,248 miles, held 170 meetings, baptized 43 persons; procured 22 subscribers for the Messenger and Advocate; also 73 on the petition to the Governor of Missouri; wrote 18 letters, and ordained two Teachers and one Deacon. Held three debates &c." [^6]

Many of the missionaries tried to convert their nonmember families. Orson Hyde, the converted Kirtland Campbellite preacher, traveled to Great Falls, New Hampshire, to teach his sister and brother-in-law. Although their greeting was warm, they rejected his message. He wrote: "We saw that they objected to our testimony, and, must I tell?—we took our things and left them, and tears from all eyes freely ran, and we shook the dust of our feet against them, but it was like piercing my heart; and all I can say is 'The Will of the Lord Be Done.'" [^7]

An experience common to numerous missionaries was harassment. Parley P. Pratt, while preaching in Mentor, attempted to hold a meeting on the steps of a meetinghouse owned by the Campbellites because they "refused to open the house" to him. He described what happened:

Some came to hear, and some to disturb the meeting; and one Mr. Newel soon appeared at the head of a mob of some fifty men and a band of music. These formed in order of battle and marched round several times near where I stood, drowning my voice with the noise of their drums and other instruments. I suspended my discourse several times as they passed, and then resumed. At length, finding that no disturbance of this kind would prevent the attempt to discharge my duty, they rushed upon me with one accord at a given signal, every man throwing an egg at my person. My forehead, bosom, and most of my body was completely covered with broken eggs. At this I departed, and walked slowly away, being insulted and followed by this rabble for some distance. I soon arrived in Kirtland, and was assisted by my kind friends in cleansing myself and clothes from the effects of this Christian benevolence. [^8]

In Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, and Massachusetts in 1832, Orson Hyde narrowly missed harm when he and his companion held a meeting in a private home. A mob of several hundred men surrounded the house to tar and feather the elders. Orson noted that "a little boy came into the house to see if we were there and he did not see us, and went out and told them that we were not there, and they then disappeared swearing and scolding, and thus the Lord delivered us." [^9]

While George A. Smith was delivering a sermon at a meeting near Syracuse, New York, in 1835, a Baptist deacon "furnished a pop gun and ammunition, which he passed in through the windows to a man who fired pop-gun wads of tow at me all the time I was preaching. He was an excellent shot with the pop-gun, the most of the wads hit me in the face. I caught several of them in my hands. Many of them tickled, but some of them paid good attention. I finished my discourse without noticing the insult." [^10]

Some missionaries were arrested on frivolous charges. While Parley P. Pratt was teaching the gospel to Simeon Carter in Amherst, Ohio, he was arrested and convicted after being subjected to a mock trial at which he was forced to sing and preach. After spending a night locked in "a public house," he was taken to an inn for breakfast. He recounts what happened:

After sitting awhile by the fire in charge of the officer, I requested to step out. I walked out into the public square accompanied by him. Said I, "Mr. Peabody, are you good at a race?" "No," said he, "but my big bull dog is, and he has been trained to assist me in my office these several years; he will take any man down at my bidding." "Well, Mr. Peabody, you compelled me to go a mile, I have gone with you two miles. You have given me an opportunity to preach, sing, and have also entertained me with lodging and breakfast. I must now go on my journey; if you are good at a race you can accompany me. I thank you for all your kindness—good day, sir."

I then started on my journey, while he stood amazed and not able to step one foot before the other. Seeing this, I halted, turned to him and again invited him to a race. He still stood amazed. I then renewed my exertions, and soon increased my speed to something like that of a deer. He did not awake from his astonishment sufficiently to start in pursuit till I had gained, perhaps, two hundred yards. I had already leaped a fence, and was making my way through a field to the forest on the right of the road. He now came hallooing after me, and shouting to his dog to seize me. The dog, being one of the largest I ever saw, came close on my footsteps with all his fury; the officer behind still in pursuit, clapping his hands and hallooing, "stu-boy, stu-boy—take him—watch—lay hold of him, I say—down with him," and pointing his finger in the direction I was running. The dog was fast overtaking me, and in the act of leaping upon me, when, quick as lightning, the thought struck me, to assist the officer, in sending the dog with all fury to the forest a little distance before me. I pointed my finger in that direction, clapped my hands, and shouted in imitation of the officer. The dog hastened past me with redoubled speed towards the forest; being urged by the officer and myself, and both of us running in the same direction.

Gaining the forest, I soon lost sight of the officer and dog, and have not seen them since. [^11]

Three of the Twelve Apostles—Orson Hyde, Brigham Young, and Wilford Woodruff—give a flavor of missionary hardships in 1833. Orson Hyde summarized his experiences:

To travel two thousand miles on foot, teaching from house to house, and from city to city, without purse or scrip, often sleeping in school houses after preaching—in barns, in sheds, by the way side, under trees, &c., was something of a task. When one would be teaching in private families, the other would frequently be nodding in his chair, weary with toil, fatigue and want of sleep. We were often rejected in the afterpart of the day, compelling us to travel in the evening, and sometimes till people were gone to bed, leaving us to lodge where we could. We would sometimes travel until midnight or until nearly daylight before we could find a barn or shed in which we dare to lie down; must be away before discovered least suspicion rest upon us. Would often lie down under trees and sleep in daytime to make up loss. [^12]

Brigham Young described his travels:

I used to travel without purse or scrip, and many times I have walked till my feet were sore and the blood would run in my shoes and out of them, and fill my appointments—go into houses, ask for something to eat, sing and talk to them. . . . Converse with them until they have given you what you want, bless them, and, if they wish, pray with them, and then leave, unless they wish you to stay longer. . . .

The second time I went to Canada, which was after I was baptized, myself and my brother Joseph traveled two hundred and fifty miles in snow a foot and half deep, with a foot of mud under it. We travelled, preached, and baptized forty-five in the dead of winter. When we left there, the Saints gave us five York shillings with which to bear our expenses two hundred and fifty miles on foot, and one sister gave me a pair of woollen mittens, two-thirds worn out. I worked with my own hands and supported myself. [^13]

Wilford Woodruff described persecution and other trials he experienced while serving on a mission to the Fox Islands off the coast of Maine:

Success did not come without many obstacles. . . .

Notices were posted up, warning me to leave town, but I thought it was better to obey God than man, and, therefore, did not go. . . . I baptized three . . . [and] subsequently a couple of others.

We traveled on foot, in the dead of winter when the snow was very deep, and the first day broke the road for seven miles. . . . On the evening of the next day we wallowed through snowdrifts for a mile . . . and on the way I got one of my ears frozen. . . .

The following day we walked fifteen miles through deep snow to Belfast, and, after being refused lodging for the night by eight families, were kindly entertained by a Mr. Thomas Teppley. [^14]

Despite the hardships, missionaries continued to accept their calls and serve willingly, sometimes under almost miraculous circumstances. Heber C. Kimball accepted a call to England, though he was suffering from excruciating back pain. His wife, Vilate, recalled:

A short time previous to my husband's starting . . . he was prostrated on his bed from a stitch in his back, which suddenly seized him while chopping and drawing wood for his family, so that he could not stir a limb without exclaiming, from the severeness of the pain. Joseph Smith hearing of it came to see him, bringing Oliver Cowdery and Bishop Partridge with him. They prayed for and blessed him, Joseph being mouth, beseeching God to raise him up, &c. He then took him by the right hand and said, "Brother Heber, I take you by your right hand, in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and by virtue of the holy priesthood vested in me, I command you, in the name of Jesus Christ, to rise, and be thou made whole." He arose from his bed, put on his clothes, and started with them, and went up to the temple, and felt no more of the pain afterwards. [^15]

First Mission of the Twelve

The greatest emphasis on missionary work came after the calling of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles and the First Quorum of the Seventy in February 1835. Less than three months after they were organized, the Twelve went on a mission through the Eastern States. Parley P. Pratt wrote of circumstances related to his call:

I was instructed to prepare for a mission . . . with my brethren of the quorum. I now returned home to New Portage, and began to make preparations for my mission, but the state of my affairs was such that it seemed almost impossible for me to leave home; my wife was sick, my aged mother had come to live with me, and looked to me for support—age and infirmity having rendered my father unable to do for himself or family. I was also engaged in building a house, and in other business, while at the same time I was somewhat in debt, and in want of most of the necessaries of life.

Under these embarrassed circumstances, I hesitated for a while whether to attempt to perform the mission assigned me, or stay at home and finish my building and mechanical work. While I pondered these things . . . I was called very suddenly to administer to a brother. . . . I kneeled down to pray, but in the midst of my prayer we were interrupted by the cry of fire! fire!! fire!!! We sprang from our knees, and ran towards my house, which was all in a blaze, being an unfinished, two story frame building, open to the fresh breeze and full of shavings, lumber, shingles, etc. . . .

The building, tools, boards, shingles, building materials, all were consumed in a few moments. Thus closed all my hesitation; my works of that nature were now all completed, and myself ready to fill my mission. One gave me a coat; another a hat; a third, house room; a fourth, provisions; while a fifth forgave me the debts due to them; and a sixth bade me Godspeed to hasten on my mission.

Taking an affectionate leave of my family and friends in New Portage, I repaired to Kirtland, ready to accompany my brethren. [^16]

With each of the Twelve making personal sacrifices, it was characteristic that they make one more sacrifice before they left: they got up and gathered at Elder Johnson's tavern to leave on their missions at two o'clock in the morning. [^17] They then apparently walked briskly twelve miles to Fairport Harbor, where, in answer to prayer, "the Lord in his mercy provided a boat for us at the very moment we arrived," according to Elder Pratt. [^18] They boarded the steamship Sandusky shortly after sunrise and sailed a few minutes later.

The Twelve started out together and later separated to travel individually and in pairs. The rigors of this five-month mission took their toll on the apostles. They covered considerable distances; for example, Brigham Young traveled 3,264 miles into New York, Canada, and New England. They also faced great hardships. Heber C. Kimball related: "A considerable portion of this mission was performed on foot, and I suffered severely from fatigue and blistered feet, which were sometimes so sore I could not wear my boots nor proceed without. I was frequently threatened and reviled by unbelievers, and had great difficulty in finding places to sleep and procuring food to eat." [^19]

On their return trip to Kirtland, the Twelve all met in Buffalo. According to Elder Kimball, "We went on board the steamer United States, and proceeded as far as Dunkirk, where she ran aground and sprung a leak; she made her way for Erie, where she arrived with difficulty, but we were under the necessity of running upon a sand bar, to save the boat from sinking, we reshipped and arrived at Fairport; we reached Kirtland the same evening, Sept. 27." [^20]

Though they experienced many hardships, the Twelve were also blessed in their missionary efforts. A typical example is that of Heber C. Kimball and Luke Johnson:

In Hewton [they] were turned away from twelve houses, where they had solicited entertainment. At midnight they put up at an inn, retiring supperless to bed, as they had but one shilling with which to pay for their lodging. A walk of six miles before breakfast next morning brought them to Esquire David Ellsworth's where they were warmly welcomed and hospitably entertained. The Apostles blessed the kind souls who thus administered to their wants, and who, on bidding them farewell, gave them money, wished them God-speed and wept at their departure. About one year later the whole family embraced the Gospel. [^21]

Sacrifices and Blessings

As husbands, fathers, and brothers left homes to share the gospel with others, their families were often left to fend for themselves. However, both missionaries and families shared intense faith that they would be sustained by the Lord, regardless of illness, poverty, and other trials. For example, when Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde left for missions to England, Elder Hyde left his wife with a three-week-old baby. Elder Kimball described the agony that he felt at being separated from his own family:

The idea of being appointed to such an important mission was almost more than I could bear up under. I felt my weakness and was nearly ready to sink under it, but the moment I understood the will of my heavenly Father, I felt a determination to go at all hazards, believing that he would support me by his almighty power, and although my family were dear to me, and I should have to leave them almost destitute, I felt that the cause of truth, the gospel of Christ, outweighed every other consideration. [^22]

Robert B. Thompson, who accompanied Elder Kimball, described his companion's anguish:

The door being partly open I entered and felt struck with the sight which presented itself to my view. I would have retired, thinking I was intruding, but I felt riveted to the spot. The father [Heber C. Kimball] was pouring out his soul to [God] that he would grant unto him a prosperous voyage across the mighty ocean, and make him useful wherever his lot should be cast, and that he who careth for the sparrows, and feedeth the young ravens when they cry, would supply the wants of his wife and little ones in his absence. He then, like the patriarchs, and by virtue of his office, laid his hands upon their heads individually, leaving a father's blessing upon them, and commending them to the care and protection of God, while he should be engaged preaching the gospel in foreign lands. . . . [H]is emotions were great, and he was obliged to stop at intervals, while the big tears rolled down his cheeks, an index to the feelings which reigned in his bosom. My heart was not stout enough to refrain; in spite of myself I wept and mingled my tears with theirs at the same time. I felt thankful that I had the privilege of contemplating such a scene. I realized that nothing could induce that man to tear himself from so affectionate a family group—from his partner and children who were so dear to him—but a sense of duty and love to God and attachment to his cause. [^23]

Vilate and the children accompanied Heber to the steamship at Fairport. She wrote:

At nine o'clock in the morning of this never-to-be-forgotten-day . . . Heber bade adieu to his brethren and friends and started without purse or scrip to preach the gospel in a foreign land. He was accompanied by myself and children, and some of the brethren and sisters, to Fairport. Sister Mary Fielding, who became afterwards the wife of Hyrum Smith, gave him five dollars, with which Heber paid the passage of himself and Brother Hyde to Buffalo. They were also accompanied by her and Brother Thompson and his wife (Mary Fielding's sister), who were going on a mission to Canada. [^24]

Before Elder Kimball left for England, Joseph Smith had a vision, which he described to his associate: "I saw the 12, apostles of the Lamb, who are now upon the earth who hold the keys of this last ministry, in foreign lands, standing together in a circle much [fatigued], with their clothes tattered and feet [swollen], with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold him, the Saviour looked upon them and wept." [^25]

On his mission to England, Heber learned a lesson from this vision: when people are nearest to the Lord, Satan exerts a greater influence on them to keep them from the Lord. The evening before his first baptism in England, legions of evil spirits appeared in the bedroom. Heber reported: "I perspired exceedingly, my clothes becoming as wet as if I had been taken out of the river. I felt excessive pain, and was in the greatest distress for some time. I cannot even look back on the scene without feelings of horror; yet by it I learned the power of the adversary, his enmity against the servants of God, and got some understanding of the invisible world. We distinctly heard those spirits talk and express their wrath and hellish designs against us. However, the Lord delivered us from them, and blessed us exceedingly that day." [^26]

Heber later asked Joseph Smith the meaning of this evil onslaught. He wondered if he might have done something wrong to cause it, but the Prophet reassured him. "No, Brother Heber, at that time you were nigh, unto the Lord; there was only a veil between you and Him, but you could not see Him. When I heard of it, it gave me great joy, for I then knew that the work of God had taken root in that land. It was this that caused the devil to make a struggle to kill you." Joseph then related some of his own experiences with the evil one and said, "The nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power will be manifested by the adversary to prevent the accomplishment of His purposes." [^27]

Meanwhile, Elder Kimball's prayers were answered at home. His daughter, Helen Mar Whitney, said, "In the absence of my father the Lord was true to his promise. My father's prayer, that he had made upon the heads of his wife and little ones whom he had left poor and destitute, was answered. Kind friends came forward to cheer and comfort them, and administer to their wants." [^28]

Families were sustained and missionaries and their loved ones received great blessings. Such was the case in April 1836, when Parley P. Pratt was called to go to Canada. He hesitated to leave because he was in debt, and Thankful, his wife, was chronically ill. Parley recounts what happened next:

I had retired to rest one evening at an early hour, and was pondering my future course, when there came a knock at the door. I arose and opened it, when Elder Heber C. Kimball and others entered my house, and being filled with the spirit of prophecy, they blessed me and my wife, and prophesied as follows:

"Brother Parley, thy wife shall be healed from this hour, and shall bear a son, and his name shall be Parley; and he shall be a chosen instrument in the hands of the Lord to inherit the priesthood and to walk in the steps of his father. He shall do a great work in the earth in ministering the Word and teaching the children of men. Arise, therefore, and go forth in the ministry, nothing doubting. Take no thoughts for your debts, nor the necessaries of life, for the Lord will supply you with abundant means for all things." [^29]

The blessing that Thankful would bear a son was particularly startling because in ten years of marriage she had been unable to conceive. However, Parley hesitated no longer, for his faith reassured him that the blessing would be fulfilled, and within a few days he left on his mission, which was very successful. Of particular significance, he converted and baptized John Taylor, who would later become President of the Church. Parley was exultant upon his return home two months later when he found that his wife, who had been ill for seven years, had been healed. He was also given money sufficient to take care of most urgent debts. He immediately returned to Canada, accompanied by Thankful, to complete his mission. And less than a year later Thankful gave birth to the promised son. The birth was a bittersweet experience, however, for she died just three hours later. Parley poignantly wrote of his grief:

My dear wife had now lived to accomplish her destiny; and when the child was dressed, and she had looked upon it and embraced it, she ceased to live in the flesh. . . . A few days previous to her death she had a vision in open day while sitting in her room. . . . It also intimated to her that she should have the privilege of departing from this world of sorrow and pain, and of going to the Paradise of rest as soon as she had fulfilled the prophecy in relation to the promised son. This vision was repeated on the next day at the same hour. . . . She was overwhelmed with a joy and peace indescribable, and seemed changed in her whole nature from that time forth. She longed to be gone, and anticipated the time as a hireling counts the days of his servitude, or the prisoner the term of his imprisonment.

She was buried in the churchyard near the Temple in Kirtland, Ohio. Many hundreds attended the funeral and wept sorely for she was extensively known. Her trials, for the gospel's sake, while her husband had been absent from time to time on distant missions, her lingering sickness of years, her barrenness, her miraculous cure, her conception of the promised child, were all matters of note in the Church far and near. But she had gone behind the veil to rest, where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest; while I was left to toil and struggle alone. My grief, and sorrow, and loneliness I shall not attempt to describe. . . .

She was an affectionate and dutiful wife, and exemplary Saint. . . .

Farewell, my dear Thankful, thou wife of my youth, and mother of my firstborn; the beginning of my strength—farewell. [^30]

Missionary Work in the Kirtland Area

Not all of the missionary work took place at some distance from Kirtland. Many conversions were made closer to home. Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, a young girl in Kirtland who attended a meeting in 1831 on the Morley Farm, recorded her conversion story:

We learned that Brother Morley had the book [Book of Mormon] in his possession—the only one in that part of the country. I went to his house just before the meeting was to commence and asked to see the Book. . . . As I looked at it, I felt such a desire to read it, that I could not refrain from asking him to let me take it home and read it, while he attended meeting. . . . He finally said, "Child, if you will bring this book home before breakfast tomorrow morning, you may take it." He admonished me to be very careful, and see that no harm came to it. If any person in this world was ever perfectly happy in the possession of any coveted treasure I was when I had permission to read that wonderful book. . . .

When I got into the house, I exclaimed, "Oh, Uncle, I have got the 'Golden Bible'." . . . We all took turns reading it until very late in the night—as soon as it was light enough to see, I was up and learned the first verse in the book. When I reached Brother Morley's . . . he remarked, "I guess you did not read much in it." I showed him how far we had read. He was surprised, and said, "I don't believe you can tell me one word of it." I then repeated the first verse, also the outline of the history of Nephi. He gazed at me in surprise, and said, "child, take this book home and finish it, I can wait." [^31]

Most of the baptisms were performed in the Chagrin River in a large pool created where the river was dammed to provide power for the grist mill. One of the most "chilling" baptisms was that of Dr. Willard Richards, a physician from Massachusetts, who was baptized by his cousin Brigham Young on December 31, 1836. "Heber C. Kimball and others spent the afternoon in cutting the ice to prepare for the baptism," he wrote. [^32]

Ebenezer Robinson, who worked in the printing office adjoining the office of the First Presidency, was baptized in the river in October 1835. In his journal, he used the editorial term "we" in describing how he summoned the courage to interrupt a meeting of the First Presidency and remind them that the Prophet had promised to baptize him:

We then went to the printing office together, he to his council room which adjoined the room where we worked, and we to our work in the printing office. We worked until well on to the evening, feeling very anxious all the time, for it seemed that we could not live over night without being baptized; after enduring it as long as we could, went to the door of their room, and gently opened it, (a thing we had never presumed to do before.) As soon as Mr. Smith saw us he said, "yes, yes, brethren, Brother Robinson wishes to be baptized, we will adjourn and attend to that."

We repaired to the water, (the Chagrin river which flows through Kirtland,) and, after a season of prayer, Brother Joseph Smith, jr., baptized us by immersion, and as we arose from the water it seemed that everything we had on left us, and we came up a new creature, when we shouted aloud, "Glory to God." Our heart was full to overflowing, and we felt that we had [been] born again in very deed, both of water and of the spirit. [^33]

Lorenzo Snow was baptized in the Chagrin River in June 1836 by John Boynton, one of the Twelve Apostles. He experienced an overwhelming conversion by the Holy Ghost two or three weeks after his baptism when he went to a grove near his home and prayed:

I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray, than I heard a sound, just above my head, like the rustling of silken robes, and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, filling me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and O, the joy and happiness I felt! No language can describe the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of mental and spiritual darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that time imparted to my understanding. I then received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and of the restoration of the holy Priesthood, and the fulness of the Gospel. It was a complete baptism—a tangible immersion in . . . the Holy Ghost; and even more real and physical in its effects upon every part of my system than the immersion by water; dispelling forever, so long as reason and memory last, all possibility of doubt or fear. . . .

I knew that [the Lord] had conferred on me what only an omnipotent being can confer—that which is of greater value than all the wealth and honors worlds can bestow. [^34]

---
Notas:
[^1] June to August 1831, Missouri; designate Jackson County as the center place of Zion and dedicate a temple site.
[^2] April to June 1832, Missouri; establish printing facilities and oversee the implementation of the united order.
[^3] October and November 1832, New York City, Albany, and Boston; purchase goods for Newel K. Whitney store.
[^4] October and November 1833, Canada; preach and baptize.
[^5] February and March 1834, Pennsylvania and New York; preach and recruit members for Zion's Camp.
[^6] May to August 1834, Missouri; Zion's Camp march.
[^7] October 1834, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
