Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

9

New Scriptures Come Forth

"There was never any hesitation reviewing, or reading back. . . . As he dictated [the words], so they stood. . . . I was present to witness the dictation of several communications." (Parley P. Pratt.)

Less than one month after Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, the Lord revealed to him: "Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men . . . and ye are to be taught from on High." (D&C 43:15-16.) From that point, the Prophet and the Church literally were "taught from on High." Intense spiritual activity burst forth in revelations and manifestations, which later became the major part of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Virtually all of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, in which he received instruction from the Lord, occurred in the Kirtland area. When he prayed about biblical passages and doctrines, the Lord responded by giving revelation after revelation. In addition, through ancient Egyptian mummies acquired in Kirtland came papyrus rolls that the Prophet translated. These translations, comprising additional writings from the ancient patriarchs Abraham and Joseph, are a major portion of an additional book of scripture, the Pearl of Great Price. From such divine sources, Joseph Smith identified and solidified the Church's doctrinal foundation during the years the Church was headquartered in Kirtland. During those years, he received eighty-four separate revelations. Sixty-five of these revelations appear in the Doctrine and Covenants and represent almost half of this volume of scripture.

Among the numerous topics given by revelation in Kirtland, revelations that formulated much of the Church's doctrinal foundation, are these:

Christ's mission Role of parents

Millennium Accountability of children

Welfare principles Definition of priesthood

Revelation Priesthood offices and duties

Satan's role and mission

Consecration of properties Priesthood keys

Stewardship Oath and covenant of priesthood

Seeking signs

Moral conduct Missionary work

Forgivness Life after death

Church courts Second coming

Tithing Destiny of Satan

Debt Word of Wisdom

Priesthood authority Godhead

Voice of warning Preexistence

God's dealing with mankind Creation of worlds

Eternal progression Constitution

Judgment Law of the land

Destiny of the Church Patriarchal blessings

Role of a prophet Sabbath day

Within three days of his arrival in Kirtland, the Prophet began to receive revelations. On February 9, 1831, in the presence of elders, the Lord gave a revelation specified as "embracing the law of the Church" (Doctrine and Covenants 42), which included instruction on such subjects as moral conduct, charity, consecration, discipline, new members, and transgressors. The revelation was given in two parts. The first part, comprising seventy-three verses, was "given by Jesus Christ to the Church in the presence of twelve Elders." The remaining forty-six verses were given a few days later. [^1] Other early laws of the Church dealt with economic matters, health, the role of a prophet and how and to whom revelation would be given to the Church.

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCA vision that is considered to have had more impact upon Church doctrine than any other revelation, now known as section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants, was given in the John Johnson home in Hiram in February 1832 as a result of the Prophet's inquiries to the Lord while translating the Bible. At the time Joseph was being assisted in the work by Sidney Rigdon. "While we were doing the work of translation which the Lord had appointed unto us," Joseph recorded, "we came to the twenty-ninth verse of the fifth chapter of John." (D&C 76:15.) In his history, the Prophet elaborates about the questions Elder Rigdon and he were contemplating before the vision was given:

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCUpon my return from [the] Amherst conference, I resumed the translation of the Scriptures. From sundry revelations which have been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body the term "Heaven," as intended for the Saints' eternal home[,] must include more kingdoms than one. Accordingly, on the 16th of February, 1832, while translating St. John's Gospel, myself and Elder Rigdon saw the following vision. [^2]

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCIn this vision, not only did Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon see the throne of God, but their understanding was also expanded concerning death, the Resurrection, the judgment of God, the differing heavens, and the characteristics of those who will inhabit those heavens. About a dozen men were present in the room while Joseph and Sidney experienced the vision. An eyewitness, Philo Dibble, wrote:

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCJoseph would, at intervals, say: "What do I see?" as one might say while looking out the window and beholding what all in the room could not see. Then he would relate what he had seen or what he was looking at. Then Sidney replied, "I see the same." Presently Sidney would say "what do I see?" and would repeat what he had seen or was seeing, and Joseph would reply, "I see the same."

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCThis manner of conversation was repeated at short intervals to the end of the vision, and during the whole time not a word was spoken by any other person. Not a sound nor motion made by anyone but Joseph and Sidney, and it seemed to me that they never moved a joint or limb during the time I was there, which I think was over an hour, and to the end of the vision.

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCJoseph sat firmly and calmly all the time in the midst of a magnificent glory, but Sidney sat limp and pale, apparently as limber as a rag, observing which, Joseph remarked, smilingly, "Sidney is not used to it as I am." [^3]

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCThe most significant message of the revelation concerns the state of man after death. According to some early Mormon journals, the doctrine given conflicted with the prevailing notions of heaven and hell that were being taught by ministers of that day. Brigham Young, in referring to this teaching, observed that initially he "did not reject it." He further stated:

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCWhen God revealed to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon that there was a place prepared for all, according to the light they had received and their rejection of evil and practice of good, it was a great trial to many, and some apostatized because God was not going to send to everlasting punishment heathens and infants, but had a place of salvation, in due time, for all, and would bless the honest and virtuous and truthful, whether they ever belonged to any Church or not. [^4]

Word of WisdomHCThe Word of Wisdom

Another significant revelation is known as the Word of Wisdom, which constitutes the Lord's law of health and directs the Saints to abstain from the use of "hot drinks" (accepted to mean coffee and tea), alcohol, and tobacco. In explaining how this revelation came about, Brigham Young described conditions at the School of the Prophets, which met under Joseph Smith's tutelage in Kirtland:

When they [members of the School of the Prophets] assembled together in this room [schoolroom] after breakfast, the first they did was to light their pipes, and, while smoking, talk about the great things of the kingdom, and spit all over the room, and as soon as the pipe was out of their mouths a large chew of tobacco would then be taken. Often when the Prophet entered the room to give the school instructions he would find himself in a cloud of tobacco smoke. This, and the complaints of his wife at having to clean so filthy a floor, made the Prophet think upon the matter, and he inquired of the Lord relating to the conduct of the Elders in using tobacco, and the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom was the result of his inquiry. [^5]

Word of WisdomHCZebedee Coltrin, who was present when the revelation was received, reported, "The Prophet Joseph was in an adjoining room . . . and came in with that Revelation in his hand. Out of the twenty two members that were there assembled, all used tobacco more or less, except two, Joseph read the Revelation and when they heard it they all laid aside their pipes and use of tobacco." [^6]

Witnesses to the Revelations Testify

Publication of the Book of CommandmentsHCMany of the revelations were given when elders of the Church were present, usually united in prayer and seeking answers to gospel questions. A scribe recorded the heavenly instructions. The revelation known as the "Preface to the Book of Commandments," which is now section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants, was received at a special conference on the Johnson farm November 1, 1831. Minutes indicate that the revelation came in the afternoon of the first day of conference and was "received by inspiration." [^7] This was such a moving experience that ten men who were present "arose in turn and bore witness to the truth of the Book of Commandments. After which br. Joseph Smith jr arose & expressed his feelings & gratitude concerning the Commandment & Preface." [^8]

Publication of the Book of CommandmentsHCThe testimony of these brethren was so important that the Lord revealed the following statement, to be signed by them testifying to the world that they knew the Book of Commandments was from Him:

Publication of the Book of CommandmentsHCThe testimony of the witnesses to the book of the Lord's commandments, which He gave to His Church through Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose; we therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth and upon the islands of the sea, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, that the children of men may be profited thereby. [^9]

Ten persons were present when the "olive leaf" (section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants) was revealed. Frederick G. Williams, one of those who were with the Prophet in the translating room, recorded, "We all bowed down before the Lord, after which each one arose and spoke in his turn his feelings, and determination to keep the commandments of God." A revelation concerning the duty of the elders was subsequently given that afternoon and the following morning, after which the meeting was closed "by prayer in harmony with the brethren and gratitude to our heavenly Father for the great manifestation of his holy Spirit." [^10]

Newel K. Whitney, in whose store this revelation was received, witnessed and recorded revelations both at the store and in his nearby home. He later formally testified to the truth of the revelations: "The Book [Doctrine & Covenants] was then presented to Newel K. Whitney Bishop of Kirtland, who reviewed it & testified that he had examined . . . [it], and the revelations contained in it he knew were true, for God had testified to him by his holy Spirit, for many of them were given under his roof & in his presence through President Joseph Smith Junr. the Prophet of [the] Lord." [^11]

Parley P. Pratt, who was often present when revelations were given, observed:

Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand.

This was the manner in which all [Joseph Smith's] written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject; neither did any of these communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them so they stood, so far as I have witnessed; and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each. [^12]

Orson Pratt, present when section 51 of the Doctrine and Covenants was revealed, observed that "no great noise or physical manifestation was made; Joseph was as calm as the morning sun. . . . Joseph's face was exceedingly white, and seemed to shine." [^13]

Others noted similar changes in the Prophet's appearance while he was receiving revelations, especially in his face. Though Philo Dibble did not himself see the vision of the heavens as it was revealed in the Johnson home, he testified, "I saw the glory and felt the power," [^14] and that Joseph "seemed to be dressed in an element of glorious white, and his face shone as if it were transparent." [^15]

Brigham Young, another witness, explained the source of this change in countenance: "Those who were acquainted with him knew when the Spirit of revelation was upon him, for his countenance wore an expression peculiar to himself while under that influence. He preached by the Spirit of revelation, and taught in his council by it, and those who were acquainted with him could discover it at once, for at such times there was a peculiar clearness and transparency in his face." [^16]

A similar change in facial expression was manifest at times when Joseph Smith was speaking under the influence of the Spirit. Edward Stevenson, as a boy of fourteen, heard the Prophet speak in Michigan and wrote: "He began relating his vision. . . . His countenance seemed to me to assume a heavenly whiteness." [^17]

Doctrines of the Church were not man-made theology, but were revealed by God to the modern-day prophet Joseph Smith. This new bursting forth of revelations was witnessed by scribes and other participants. These new doctrines required people to change their old perspectives of religion. Some members could not accept the revealed doctrines and left the Church. Regardless, truth is truth, as the Lord emphasized: "Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled. What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled." (D&C 1:37-38.)

Joseph Smith Translates the Bible

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCPart of the schooling period was closely related to Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible. In retrospect, it appears that the knowledge and instruction he received while completing the translation were as important as the translation itself. Many revelations and doctrines were given when his mind was stimulated while reading and studying the Old and New Testaments. After he presented his questions to the Lord in prayer, instructions and doctrines were revealed. Dr. Robert J. Matthews, who has done significant research into the Prophet's translation, has concluded:

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCThe real purpose of the Bible translation was not so much to have a new corrected edition of the Bible, but rather, to bring the Prophet to a greater understanding of the gospel. Consequently, the real product is not so much a Bible itself, but the doctrines that were revealed in the process. Consequently, the Prophet's work with the Bible is an indispensible element in the unfolding of the gospel and the building of the dispensation of the fulness of times. . . .

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCThe Prophet worked on the Bible translation primarily between June 1830 and July 1833. This is also the same period of time during which most of the doctrinal revelations now published in the Doctrine and Covenants were received. This is not coincidence, but rather it is consequence. [^18]

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCAlthough the Prophet used the term "translation of the Bible," Elder B. H. Roberts commented: "It would be more proper to say 'revision of the Bible' than 'translation' of it; as the Prophet did not at any time pretend to a knowledge of the ancient languages that would enable him to translate from the Hebrew or the Greek as 'translation' is commonly understood. But what he did was to revise the English text of the Bible under the inspiration of God; and that led him not only to give different renderings of various passages, but also to supply missing parts." [^19]

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCThe translation was a high priority for the Prophet. In 1831 he underscored the importance of the work in remarks at a conference of high priests, telling them that "except the Church receive the fulness of the scriptures that they would yet fall." [^20] These crucial revelations could not be given to the Prophet until he petitioned the Lord with questions and immersed himself in the translating effort. As a result, however, he did not have time to support his family. As a consequence, it was necessary for the Church to support the Smith family during this period. In February 1831, about three days after the Prophet arrived in Kirtland, the Lord through revelation commanded the Saints to build a home for the Prophet. (D&C 41:7.)

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCExplaining the critical nature of the work and the need for temporal assistance so he could concentrate on the translation, Joseph declared at a general conference in October 1831 that "the promise of God was that the greatest blessings which God had to bestow should be given to those who contributed to the support of his family while translating the fulness of the Scriptures." Before the conference adjourned, Oliver Cowdery "begged the privilege" to propose to the conference that elders be sent out to the branches of the Church to "obtain means for the support of br. Joseph Smith jr. & those appointed to assist him in writing & copying the fulness of the Scriptures." [^21]

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCThe translation of the Bible was a primary activity in three places where Joseph resided: the Morley farm, the Johnson home, and an upstairs room at Newel K. Whitney's store. He completed the work on July 2, 1833, while he was at the Whitney store.

Within a few hours the members of the First Presidency—Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams—were preparing to leave on missions. There was a sense of urgency and even eagerness to teach the gospel. Sidney wrote in a letter to the Saints in Missouri, "[We are] going off immediately . . . to proclaim the Gospel; we think of starting tomorrow. Having finished the translation of the Bible, a few hours since, and needing some recreation, we know of [no] way we can spend our time more to divine acceptance than in endeavoring to build up his Zion in these last days, as we are not willing to idle any time away which can be spent to useful purposes." [^22]

The Egyptian Mummies

In the summer of 1835, a man named Michael H. Chandler, who lived in Philadelphia, brought to Kirtland four Egyptian mummies and some ancient scrolls of papyri that he had been displaying in various cities in the United States. The mummies had been discovered on the west bank of the Nile River across from the ancient city of Thebes by Antonio Lebolo, an Italian who was licensed by the French government to deal in artifacts. In 1830, following Lebolo's death in Italy, eleven of the mummies and some of the ancient papyri were shipped to the United States; and in the spring of 1833 they were claimed by Chandler, Lebolo's nephew. A man at the customs house told Chandler that no one in Philadelphia could translate the papyrus, but he referred Chandler to Joseph Smith, who "possesses some kind of power or gifts, by which he had previously translated similar characters." [^23]

Orson Pratt later described what happened:

Mr. Chandler presented to him [Joseph Smith] the ancient characters, asking him if he could translate them. The prophet took them and repaired to his room and inquired of the Lord concerning them. The Lord told him they were sacred records. . . . And he also enquired of the Lord concerning some few characters which Mr. Chandler, gave him by way of a test, to see if he could translate them. The Prophet Joseph translated these characters and returned them, with the translation to Mr. Chandler. [^24]

When Joseph provided Chandler with a translation of some of the characters, Chandler gave him the following statement:

Kirtland July 6, 1835.

This is to make known to all who may be desirous, concerning the knowledge of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., in deciphering the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic characters in my possession, which I have, in many eminent cities, showed to the most learned; and, from the information that I could ever learn, or meet with, I find that of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., to correspond in the most minute matters.

Michael H. Chandler

Traveling with, and proprietor of,

Egyptian mummies. [^25]

Chandler subsequently settled near Kirtland, in Parkman, Ohio.

Oliver Cowdery gave a vivid description of the records: "Upon the subject of the Egyptian records, or rather the writings of Abraham and Joseph, may I say a few words. This record is beautifully written in papyrus with black, and a small part, red ink or paint, in perfect preservation. The characters are such as you find upon the coffins of mummies, hieroglyphics and etc. with many characters or letters exactly like the present, though perhaps not quite so square form of the Hebrew without points." [^26]

A certificate signed by six Philadelphia doctors described the mummies and also the writing: "The features of some of the mummies are in perfect expression. The papyrus covered with black or red ink, or paint, in excellent preservation, are very interesting." [^27]

Early in July 1835 Joseph Smith began translating the papyri, with William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery serving as his scribes. He wrote, "Much to our joy found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt." [^28] Witnesses to the translating process testify that it was done by inspiration.

Orson Pratt, witnessing the translating process, testified: "I saw his [Joseph Smith's] countenance lighted up as the inspiration of the Holy Ghost rested upon him, dictating the great and most precious revelations now printed for our guide. I saw him translating by inspiration, the Old and New Testaments, and the inspired Book of Abraham from Egyptian Papyrus." [^29]

The Prophet translated the scrolls at home until January 1836, when the upper west room in the temple was designated as a translating room.

During the translation, Joseph "engaged in translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the ancients." [^30] Unexpected knowledge came as a by-product of these efforts, for he stated that he learned principles of astronomy from the writings of Abraham and "many things concerning the dealing of God with the ancients, and the formation of the planetary system." [^31]

The artifacts were later put on display in the translating room in the temple. Wilford Woodruff, who visited the room, said: "We . . . viewed four Egyptian mummies and also the Book of Abraham written by his own hand and not only the hieroglyphics but also many figures that this precious treasure contains are calculated to make a lasting impression upon the mind which is not to be erased." [^32]

The Book of Abraham, which the Prophet translated from the ancient papyrus, made a significant contribution to the Saints' understanding of such important gospel teachings as the Creation, premortal life and the plan of salvation, and events that took place in the Garden of Eden. It was subsequently accepted by the Church as scripture and published as a part of one of the standard works: the Pearl of Great Price.

---
Notas:
[^1] June to August 1831, Missouri; designate Jackson County as the center place of Zion and dedicate a temple site.
[^2] April to June 1832, Missouri; establish printing facilities and oversee the implementation of the united order.
[^3] October and November 1832, New York City, Albany, and Boston; purchase goods for Newel K. Whitney store.
[^4] October and November 1833, Canada; preach and baptize.
[^5] February and March 1834, Pennsylvania and New York; preach and recruit members for Zion's Camp.
[^6] May to August 1834, Missouri; Zion's Camp march.
[^7] October 1834, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
