Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

11

Schooling a People

"Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you. . . . Seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:78, 118.)

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCA spiritual schooling of the Church transpired throughout the Kirtland years. The foreshadowing of this schooling began immediately after the arrival of the Prophet in 1831, when revelation after revelation burst forth upon the Saints. Plans for a printing operation to disseminate revelations and teachings were begun in a meeting in 1832. Later that year the Saints were commanded to establish a "school of the prophets." Although the emphasis would initially be on doctrine and spiritual instruction, other subjects, such as penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar, and geology, would be added later.

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCOn January 22, 1833, the School of the Prophets was organized at the Newel K. Whitney store, the first of three locations for the school in Kirtland. Joseph and Emma Smith had moved into quarters in the store in late 1832, and soon afterwards, a schoolroom was prepared. Levi Hancock, a carpenter, was hired to build a desk for the Prophet and enclose the room. In payment for his services, he was allowed to trade at the store, but he refused, saying, "I told him [the Prophet] I would pay for all I purchased and I did do it." [^1]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCBrigham Young described the room: "The first School of the Prophets was held in a small room situated over the Prophet Joseph's kitchen. . . . In the rear of this building [the Whitney store] was a kitchen, probably ten by fourteen feet, containing rooms and pantries. Over this kitchen was situated the room in which the Prophet received revelations and in which he instructed his brethren. The brethren came to that place for hundreds of miles to attend school in a little room probably no larger than eleven by fourteen." [^2]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCAt first, about twenty to twenty-five leaders participated in the school, but later hundreds of people were involved. Secular as well as doctrinal topics were discussed and taught. In the revelation known as the Olive Leaf (section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants), the Lord said that the purpose of the school was for "instruction in all things." (D&C 88:127.) Later he urged Saints to "study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people." (D&C 90:15.) He further challenged:

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCTeach ye diligently . . . of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—that ye may be prepared in all things . . . to magnify the calling . . . and the mission with which I have commissioned you. . . .

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCSeek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith. (D&C 88:78-80, 118.)

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThe School of the Prophets was regarded as a sacred gathering place. Even when it was in the Whitney store, the Lord referred to it as "mine house," "the house of God," "the house of the Lord," and "a sanctuary, a tabernacle of the Holy Spirit." (D&C 88:134-37.) The Prophet said the school would qualify those who attended to be "messengers of Jesus Christ." [^3] When the school was first organized, the members, in order to gain entrance, gave a sacred salutation that identified them as worthy to participate. After entering, they received the ordinance of washing of feet. As written in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 88, the Lord said, "Ye shall not receive any among you into this school save he is clean from the blood of this generation; and he shall be received by the ordinance of the washing of feet." (D&C 88:138-39.) The Lord instructed Joseph Smith on how to perform the ordinance. When the ordinance was instituted, many gifts of the Spirit were witnessed. Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother, wrote:

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCJoseph took all the male portion of our family into the . . . school room [of the School of the Prophets] and administered to them the ordinance of washing of feet; after which the Spirit fell upon them, and they spake in tongues, and prophesied. The brethren gathered together to witness the manifestations of the power of God. At that time I was on the farm a short distance from the place where the meeting was held, and my children being anxious that I should enjoy the meeting, sent a messenger in great haste for me. I went without delay, and shared with the rest, the most glorious out-pouring of the Spirit of God, that had ever before taken place in the Church. [^4]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCTo prepare for the school, the students usually fasted, breaking the fast at the close of the instruction period by partaking of the sacrament. Records indicate that the sacrament was "administered at times when Joseph appointed, after the ancient order; that is, warm bread to break easy was provided, and broken into pieces as large as [a] fist." [^5]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCSeveral names were used interchangeably for the school: "School of the Prophets," "School of the Elders," and "School of Mine Apostles." Sessions were held during winter, when there was less work to be done on farms and elders were not traveling as much on missionary assignments. During the winter of 1834-35, the school moved from the Whitney store to the newly completed schoolhouse/printing office near the temple. A historian, Lyndon W. Cook, gives an overview of the 1834-35 school term:

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCAbout the first of November 1834, arrangements were made to resume the instruction of the Elders in the Kirtland area for the coming winter. A special room, on the ground floor of the newly finished printing office in Kirtland was designated as the school room. Classwork began in early December 1834 and continued until late March 1835, nearly sixteen weeks. A school board (also known as the Kirtland School Committee) consisting of Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and Frederick G. Williams directed the operation and instruction of the school. Though the purpose of instruction was aimed at better preparing the Elders for the ministry, the initial enrollment included nearly fifty adolescents. The resultant overcrowding forced the school board to dismiss the younger students in favor of the Elders. The study of penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar, and geography complemented the theological discussions. [^6]

In January 1835, Joseph Smith began preparing a series of lectures on theology for presentation at the School of the Prophets. These seven lectures were subsequently published in the first seventy-five pages of the Doctrine and Covenants under the title "Lectures on Faith." They were not, however, considered as revelations from the Lord. When the Doctrine and Covenants was submitted to the priesthood quorums for acceptance on August 17, 1835, John Smith, speaking on behalf of the Kirtland high council, "bore record that the revelations in said book were true, and that the lectures were judiciously arranged and compiled, and were profitable for doctrine." He stated that they were not considered as revelations. [^7] Today they are printed separately, not with the Doctrine and Covenants.

The 1835-36 school term commenced on November 2, 1835, and on January 18, 1836, the School of the Prophets moved into the temple. One of the subjects that year was Hebrew, taught by Joshua Seixas, an instructor at a seminary in Hudson, Ohio. He was hired for seven weeks at a salary of $320.00 and was given an office in the building. Forty-five students initially enrolled for the a series of one-hour lectures. By February 4, additional classes were created. Joseph Smith was elated with the course. He wrote in his diary:

Spent the day at school. The Lord blessed us in our studies. This day we commenced reading in our Hebrew Bibles with much success. It seems as if the Lord opens our minds in a marvelous manner, to understand His word in the original language; and my prayer is that God will speedily endow us with a knowledge of all languages and tongues, that His servants may go forth for the last time the better prepared to bind up the law, and seal up the testimony. [^8]

As many as 150 attended sessions of the school held in the winter of 1836-37 in the temple. The increase of the Church members' knowledge and understanding did not go unnoticed among nonmember observers. James H. Eells of Elyria, Ohio, made a critical examination of the Saints in Kirtland and wrote the following letter in March 1836:

The Mormons appear to be very eager to acquire education. Men, women and children lately attended school, and they are now employing Mr. Seixas, the Hebrew teacher, to instruct them in Hebrew; and about seventy men in middle life, from twenty to forty years of age, are most eagerly engaged in the study. They pursue their studies alone until twelve o'clock at night, and attend to nothing else. Of course many make rapid progress. I noticed some fine looking and intelligent men among them. Some in dress and deportment have all the appearance of gentlemen. . . . They are by no means, as a class, men of weak minds. . . .

The rise and progress . . . shows religious teachers the importance of having sound instruction imparted along with high excitement, that men may have some other evidence on which their faith rests. [^9]

The Beginnings of Home Teaching

In Kirtland, members of the priesthood were assigned to visit the homes of the Saints and teach them. In a revelation received in April 1830, nine months before Joseph Smith went to Kirtland, the Lord outlined some of the duties of priesthood holders. The duties of a priest, he declared, were "to preach, teach, expound, exhort, . . . and visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties." (D&C 20:47.) William Cahoon, one of the earliest Ohio converts, later recalled his experience as home teacher to the Prophet's family:

I was called and ordained to act as a teacher to visit the families of the Saints. I got along very well till I found that I was obliged to call and pay a visit to the Prophet. Being young, only about seventeen years of age, I felt my weakness in visiting the Prophet and his family in the capacity of a teacher. I almost felt like shrinking from duty. Finally I went to his door and knocked, and in a minute the Prophet came to the door. I stood there trembling, and said to him:

"Brother Joseph, I have come to visit you in the capacity of a teacher, if it is convenient for you."

He said, "Brother William, come right in, I am glad to see you; sit down in that chair there and I will go and call my family in."

They soon came in and took seats. He then said, "Brother William, I submit myself and family into your hands," and then took his seat. "Now Brother William," said he "ask all the questions you feel like."

By this time all my fears and trembling had ceased, and I said, "Brother Joseph, are you trying to live your religion?"

He answered "Yes."

I then said "Do you pray in your family?"

He said "Yes."

"Do you teach your family the principles of the gospel?"

He replied "Yes, I am trying to do it."

"Do you ask a blessing on your food?"

He answered "Yes."

"Are you trying to live in peace and harmony with all your family?"

He said that he was.

I then turned to Sister Emma, his wife, and said "Sister Emma, are you trying to live your religion? Do you teach your children to obey their parents? Do you try to teach them to pray?"

To all these questions she answered "Yes, I am trying to do so."

I then turned to Joseph and said, "I am now through with my questions as a teacher; and now if you have any instructions to give, I shall be happy to receive them."

He said "God bless you, Brother William; and if you are humble and faithful, you shall have power to settle all difficulties that may come before you in the capacity of a teacher."

I then left my parting blessing upon him and his family, as a teacher, and took my departure. [^10]

First Conference of the Church in Ohio

Additional schooling for the Saints came through the influence and power of the Holy Ghost. On June 3, 1831, a small group of priesthood leaders participated in such schooling at the Church's first conference in Ohio, held at the Morley farm. Several persons recorded their experiences and feelings as spiritual instructions were given.

Jared Carter wrote, "Brother Joseph notwithstanding he is not naturally talented for a speaker yet, he was filled with the power of the holy ghost so that he spoke as I never heard man speak for god by the power of the holy ghost spoke in him and marvelous was the display of the power of the spirit among the Elders present." [^11]

Satan also manifested his power, as recorded by John Whitmer, Church historian: "While the Lord poured out His Spirit upon His servants, the devil took a notion to make known his power. He bound Harvey Whitlock and John Murdock so that they could not speak, and others were affected but the Lord showed to Joseph, the seer, the design of the thing; he commanded the devil in the name of Christ, and he departed, to our joy and comfort." [^12]

Members of the congregation, having witnessed the manifestation of power, left the conference with a more sure knowledge of the divinity of the Church. Some went on missions to bear that witness to other people and nations; some stayed to build up the Church in the areas where they lived.

The Kirtland Printing Office

Perhaps one of the most important things that spiritually strengthened the Saints in Kirtland was being able to have revelations and other communications available in Church publications. Early journals tell how members or investigators stayed up all night to read borrowed books or publications. Many did not have money to purchase them or could not get them because of the limited supply. The Church's publishing capability became a key to instructing the members.

On November 1, 1831, leaders meeting in a conference at the Johnson home in Hiram decided to establish a printing firm. They also decided on a name for the Church's first publication, The Evening and Morning Star. At a conference of high priests on May 4, 1833, a committee was appointed to raise money to build "a schoolhouse, for the accommodation of the Elders, who should come together to receive instruction preparatory for their missions, and ministry." [^13]

That July the Church received word that a printing press being used by the Saints in Missouri had been destroyed. The Prophet reacted by saying, "Another printing office must be built." Subsequently, in a revelation given August 2, 1833, the Lord commanded that a building be constructed for a printing press: "The second lot . . . shall be dedicated unto me for the building of a house unto me, for the work of the printing of the translation of my scriptures, and all things whatsoever I shall command you." (D&C 94:10.) The revelation also directed that a "house for the Presidency" be built. (D&C 94:3.) The latter was never built, but on October 10, a decision was made to build one building for multiple purposes: to house both the First Presidency's office and a printing press, as well as provide space for the School of the Prophets and other meetings.

On October 1, Oliver Cowdery left for New York with eight hundred dollars to purchase another printing press. When he returned to Kirtland with a press and other equipment in December, a temporary printing office was established in the John Johnson inn. He wrote to William W. Phelps and John Whitmer on January 21, 1834, that "our office is yet in the brick building, though we expect in the spring to move on the hill near the Methodist-Meeting house." [^14] This move was not completed until the latter part of November 1834. The printing operation, which was named the "Literary Firm," printed a number of books and publications during the four years it operated. Among the publications issued from the press were the following, which are listed chronologically:

This periodical was printed in Missouri from June 1832 until July 1833, when the Church's press there was destroyed. The paper was subsequently printed in Kirtland from December 1833 until about September 1834. Issues that had originally been printed in Missouri were reprinted in Kirtland in January 1835. Many of Joseph Smith's writings and the revelations given to him were printed in the paper, which helped the Saints to better understand the doctrines of the Church and their individual responsibilities. Some revelations, in fact, were printed in this periodical but were not included in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

After the paper was reestablished in Kirtland, it was published monthly "by F. G. Williams and Co., O. Cowdery, Editor" with a subscription price of one dollar per year "in advance." [^15]

First printed in October 1834, the Messenger and Advocate, a monthly, had the same basic purpose as the Evening and Morning Star. In it were writings to the world, warnings, revelations, and explanations of revelations.

Readers were urged to purchase subscriptions, and as missionaries went out to their fields of labor, they also sold subscriptions. Erastus Snow reported that during his mission, he had been "absent 8 months and 14 days and traveled in all 1600 miles and preached 220 times," and had obtained twenty subscriptions to the Messenger and Advocate. [^16] Oliver Cowdery served as editor until February 1837 and was succeeded by his brother, Warren Cowdery, who edited the paper through its final edition in September 1837.

In July 1830 Emma Smith was directed, in a revelation given through her husband, the Prophet, to select hymns for a hymnal. In the revelation, the Lord declared, "My soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." (D&C 25:12.)

Records of a meeting of the high council on September 14, 1835, indicate that "it was further decided that Sister Emma Smith proceed to make a selection of Sacred Hymns, according to the revelation; and that President W. W. Phelps be appointed to revise and arrange them for printing." [^17]

Many of the hymns selected were printed in the Evening and Morning Star and in the Messenger and Advocate. The hymnal, which was completed in February 1836, measured three inches by four inches. There was no musical score; hymns were sung to various tunes, and congregations sometimes used different tunes for the same hymns.

A monthly political newspaper, the Northern Times was initially intended as a "Democratic" paper that supported Andrew Jackson's administration. It was first published in February 1835 and continued for about a year.

With 101 revelations, publication of the Doctrine and Covenants had begun by June 1835. By August it was ready for binding, and in mid-September 1835 the first copies were received from a bookbinder in Cleveland and sold for one dollar each. The preface stated that the book contained "the leading items of the religion which we have professed to believe." [^18] The seven Lectures on Faith, which were delivered by the Prophet in Kirtland during the winter of 1834-35, were included in this first edition.

Ownership of the printing office was transferred in June 1836 from the "Literary Firm" to a firm named Oliver Cowdery and Co. Sometime between then and the first of February 1837, the firm published the second edition of the Book of Mormon. Upon completion of that printing project, Oliver Cowdery sold his interest in the firm to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon.

Joseph Smith edited the Elders' Journal, a monthly newspaper, which was published in Kirtland in October and November 1837 by Thomas B. Marsh. After the Prophet departed from Kirtland in January 1838, arrangements were made to continue the publication in Far West, Missouri. Only two more issues were published in July and August 1838 in Missouri, and then the publication was discontinued.

The Church in Kirtland was continually faced with financial problems, which thwarted many of the printing efforts. In an effort to reduce the costs of printing and binding, the Church operated its own equipment as much as possible. Oliver Cowdery was sent to New York again in November 1835 to purchase bookbinding materials, after heavy expenses were incurred when the Doctrine and Covenants was bound in Cleveland. But such cost-saving measures failed to solve the financial problems, and finally Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, the only two remaining owners of the printing business, were forced to sell it. In May 1837 William Marks purchased the office, with contractual rights to rent or lease the equipment, which he sub-leased to the former owners until November. But Marks's ownership was short-lived. "The Elders' Journal No. 2 for November was the last paper printed at Kirtland," the Prophet wrote. "Our printing establishment was attached to satisfy an unjust judgment of the county court, and soon after the whole printing apparatus and office were burned to the ground." [^19]

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
