Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

12

"A Storehouse Unto This Church"

"Let the bishop appoint a storehouse unto this church; . . . and let all things both in money and in meat, which are more than is needful for the wants of this people, be kept in the hands of the bishop." (D&C 51:13.)

In February 1831, within three days after Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, the Lord began organizing for the temporal needs of the Church by calling Edward Partridge to "spend all his time" as "bishop unto the church." (See D&C 41:9.) This highest office in the Aaronic Priesthood was designated in the first revelation given in Kirtland. Immediately afterward, welfare principles were revealed that placed the bishop at the heart of the temporal welfare of the Church and its members. A law of consecration and stewardship was revealed and a "united order" established.

Upon being called as the first bishop of the Church, Partridge left his hatter's shop in Painesville to devote full-time service to the Church. He was promptly directed to go to Missouri; consequently, it took about a year before he could find a buyer for his hatter's shop.

In December 1831, Newel K. Whitney was called to be the first bishop in Ohio. (See D&C 72:8.) When the call came, he told the Prophet, "Brother Joseph, I can't see a Bishop in myself." Joseph answered, "Go and ask the Lord about it." As Newel prayed alone in his room, he heard a voice that said, "Thy strength is in me." [^1] This assurance gave him confidence to fulfill the calling, and from this and other reassurances, he developed a conviction that the Lord, not any man, directs His church.

Welfare Principles Are Established

From February to June 1831, several revelations were given through Joseph Smith in which the Lord revealed some basic welfare principles for the Church:

"Behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties for their support." (D&C 42:30.)

"Inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me." (D&C 42:31.)

"For I will consecrate of the riches of those who embrace my gospel among the Gentiles unto the poor of my people." (D&C 42:39.)

"But it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another." (D&C 49:20.)

"Appoint unto this people portions, every man equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and needs." (D&C 51:3.)

"Let every man deal honestly, and be alike among this people, and receive alike, that ye may be one, even as I have commanded you." (D&C 51:9.)

"Let all things . . . which are more than is needful . . . be kept in the hands of the bishop." (D&C 51:13.)

"Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your riches will canker your souls." (D&C 56:16.)

"Wo unto you poor men, whose hearts are not broken, whose spirits are not contrite, . . . whose eyes are full of greediness, and who will not labor with your own hands!" (D&C 56:17.)

"Every man shall be made . . . a steward over his own property . . . as much as is sufficient for himself and family." (D&C 42:32.)

"If there shall be properties . . . more than is necessary for their support . . . it shall be kept to administer to those who have not." (D&C 42:33.)

"The residue shall be kept in my storehouse, to administer to the poor and the needy." (D&C 42:34.)

"Ye must visit the poor and the needy and administer to their relief." (D&C 44:6.)

"Remember in all things the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted, for he that doeth not these things, the same is not my disciple." (D&C 52:40.)

These principles became the basis for several economic laws, such as the law of consecration and stewardship, that were implemented by the Church in the 1830s. They remain the basis of the current Church welfare plan.

The principles were vital in supporting and sustaining needy members who were making financial sacrifices for the Church. Almost everything the members had or acquired went toward the Church: to build the temple and other buildings, to purchase property, to support the printing of the scriptures and Church periodicals, and to assist the Saints in both Ohio and Missouri.

Those who accepted missionary calls often left families at home who needed assistance. The Lord said he "held the Church bound to provide for the families." [^2] In order to fulfill these commandments, the Saints adopted the welfare principles and shared their material means.

"The Family" and the Welfare Plan

Prior to Joseph's arrival in Kirtland, a number of families, influenced by Sidney Rigdon, were persuaded to join on Isaac Morley's farm a group that was known as "the family," "the common-stock family," or "the big family."

Members of the group, filled with a desire to follow strictly Christian principles, attempted to live the New Testament teaching to hold "all things common." (Acts 2:44.) Lyman Wight wrote: "In conformity to this covenant I moved [in February [1830] to Kirtland, into the house with Bro. Morley. We commenced our labors together with great peace and union. We were soon joined by eight other families. Our labors were united both in farming and mechanism, all of which was prosecuted with great vigor. We truly began to feel as if the millenium was close at hand." [^3]

Despite Morley's generosity and good intentions, this attempt to share one's resources fully with everyone else was neither practical nor scriptural. Two early journal accounts depict the type of problems experienced. John Whitmer wrote: "The disciples had all things common, and were going to destruction very fast as to temporal things; for they considered from reading the scripture that what belonged to a brother belonged to any of the brethren. Therefore, they would take each other[']s clothes and other property and use it without leave. . . . They did not understand the scriptures." [^4] Levi Hancock recalled:

Brother Harvey Redfield took us to Brother Isaac Morley[']s who was a cooper by trade and one of the most honest, patient men I ever saw. The company he maintained looked large enough to bring on a famine. I do not know if they lived on him all the time or not.

While I was in the room at "Father Morley's" as we all called him, this same Hermon [Heman] Bassett [Basset] came to me and took my watch out of my pocket and walked off as though it was his. I thought he would bring it back soon but was disappointed as he sold it. I asked him what he meant by selling my watch.

"Oh," said he, "I thought it was all in the family."

I told him I did not like such family doing and I would not bear it. [^5]

Law of Consecration and Stewardship

Five days after Joseph Smith received the revelation calling Edward Partridge to serve as bishop, he received another revelation concerning a law of consecration and stewardship. One specific instruction was: "Thou shalt not take thy brother's garment; thou shalt pay for that which thou shalt receive of thy brother." (D&C 42:54.) As a result, the Prophet said that the plan of "common stock" as practiced by "the family" on the Morley farm was "abandoned for the more perfect law of the Lord." [^6]

The law of consecration and stewardship, as practiced by the Church from 1831 to 1833, required that the Saints convey all of their real and personal property to the bishop. Each person was then given stewardship over whatever resources were needed for support of the individual's family, according to needs and circumstances. Surplus profits were returned to the bishop, which he distributed where they were needed. Later changes in the law permitted private ownership of property, with only the surplus deeded to the bishop.

The law of consecration and stewardship was not an easy principle for many of the Saints to accept and live. Although the law was mainly practiced in Missouri, the first attempt to live it was near Kirtland in Thompson, Ohio. The difficulty in living the law is exemplified by events that took place when members of the Colesville Branch in New York arrived in the Kirtland area and went to live on Leman Copley's farm in Thompson.

In May 1831, Joseph Smith received a revelation concerning how the members were to conduct their temporal affairs while in Thompson. They were told to consecrate their property to the Lord through Bishop Partridge, who would then "appoint unto this people their portions, every man equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and needs." (D&C 51:3.) When Bishop Partridge attempted to implement the law of consecration, however, conflicts arose. Though Leman Copley was willing at first to share his farm, within two months he rescinded his offer, leaving many of the Saints without a home.

Newel Knight and other elders went to Joseph Smith for guidance, and the Prophet subsequently received a revelation in which he was told that inasmuch as the law of stewardship and consecration "has been broken, even so it has become void and of none effect." (D&C 54:4.) The members of the Colesville Branch were told to join the Saints who were gathering in Missouri. Joseph Knight Jr. recalled, "We had to leave his [Copley's] farm and pay sixty dollars damage for fitting up his houses and planting his ground." [^7] The group left for Missouri on July 3, 1831.

Leman Copley left the Church and did considerable damage by testifying falsely against Joseph Smith in a lawsuit in Chardon, Ohio, in 1834. In the spring of 1836, after the Kirtland Temple was completed, Copley returned to the Prophet, confessed his wrongdoing, and asked for forgiveness, which the Prophet said "was readily granted," adding that Copley "wished to be received into the Church again, by baptism, and was received according to his desire." [^8]

Though the law of consecration and stewardship, a divine law, was not practiced for long, its basic principles and spirit allowed the Church to be established more firmly in Kirtland and the members to survive intense economic difficulties.

The United Order

In March 1832, Joseph Smith received a revelation instructing the Church to "stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world." (D&C 78:14.) In an earlier revelation, the Lord had directed that a storehouse be established and "all things both in money and in meat, which are more than is needful for the wants of this people, be kept in the hands of the bishop." (D&C 51:13.) Now the Lord directed that "the storehouse for the poor of my people" be established in order that the Saints be "equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly things also. . . . For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things." (D&C 78:3, 5-6.)

As a result, the "united order" was implemented to help the Saints live the law of consecration, and two storehouses were established, one in Independence and the other in Kirtland. In Kirtland the storehouse was known as Newel K. Whitney and Co.

The major business properties of the united order consisted of a store and an ashery owned by Newel K. Whitney. Within three months after the order was established, the Whitney store was designated as the bishop's storehouse. The ashery produced potash for the use of the Saints as well as for commercial sale.

As part of the united order, in March and April 1833 the Church purchased from Peter French a farm and two businesses being operated on it. The land would be used for the temple and home sites. One of the businesses, the Peter French Tavern, served as a public house and hotel. This was the place where the Church's first printing operation in Kirtland began in December 1833. At this site, the first patriarchal blessing was given, the first Patriarch to the Church was called, and the mummies of Michael Chandler were displayed, and from it the Twelve Apostles left on their first mission. When the united order was disbanded, the building was given to John Johnson and became known as the Johnson Inn.

Also located on the French farm was a brick kiln, which was intended to be used to manufacture brick for the temple.

Another business that was operated as part of the united order was a tannery, which Ezra Thayer was authorized, at a meeting of high priests on April 2, 1833, to purchase from Arnold Mason in Kirtland. [^9]

The initial partners of the united order, or "United Firm," were Joseph Smith, Newel K. Whitney, and Sidney Rigdon. Other partners were added later, but the membership never exceeded twelve. After the order was dissolved on April 23, 1834, the assets were divided among the partners, as specified in section 104 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
