Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

13

Zion's Camp: A Forging Process

"We did not fear. . . . for God was with us . . . [and] the faith of our little band was unwavering. We know that angels were our companions for we saw them." (Joseph Smith.)

Although the initial objective of Zion's Camp was to help restore their lands to the beleaguered Saints in Missouri, the army's long march also became a forging process that produced stalwart Church leaders. Zion's Camp was first discussed at the home of Joseph Smith on February 24, 1834, when the Kirtland high council met to "giv[e] an audience or hearing to Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt, delegates from the Church in Missouri." [^1]

Elders Pratt and Wight, who had left their families in Missouri without protection from mob violence and persecution, had come to solicit help and guidance from the leadership of the Church. Parley described his desperate journey from Jackson County to Kirtland: "I was at this time entirely destitute of proper clothing for the journey; and I had neither horse, saddle, bridle, money nor provisions to take with me; or to leave with my wife, who lay sick and helpless most of the time. Under the circumstances I knew not what to do. Nearly all had been robbed and plundered, and all were poor." A man named Higbee, "moved by the Spirit," gave him a horse and saddle. Sidney A. Gilbert, whose store had been "broken up, and his goods plundered and destroyed by the mob," gave him some material, which some women made into a suit, and Brother Gilbert furnished a coat.

"Faith and the blessings of God had cleared up our way to accomplish what seemed impossible," he continued. "We were soon ready, and on the first of February we mounted our horses, and started in good cheer to ride one thousand or fifteen hundred miles through a wilderness country. We had not one cent of money in our pockets on starting. We travelled every day, whether through storm or sunshine, mud, rain or snow." [^2]

Lyman Wight, Parley's companion on this mission, also placed his faith in the Lord. Before he left, it was reported, "his wife lay by the side of a log in the woods, with a child three days old and he had three days' provisions on hand." [^3]

The Church's commitment in Missouri had begun about three years earlier, on July 20, 1831, when Joseph Smith and other Church leaders had assembled in Jackson County. At that time Joseph received a revelation in which the Lord declared, "The land of Missouri . . . is the land which I have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints. Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. . . . Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place." (D&C 57:1-3.) He also revealed that a temple was to be built there. Sidney Gilbert was appointed to purchase land throughout the area and to establish a store so he could sell goods and with the profits buy additional property. William W. Phelps was to establish a printing business, and Oliver Cowdery was to assist him as an editor.

When Church members heard about the revelation, they migrated to Jackson County in great numbers. Within two years some one thousand members had gathered to Independence.

This great influx of newcomers concerned the citizens of Independence, who were highly suspicious of the Church's migration, purpose, and plans. In July 1833, two years after Missouri was designated as the land of promise, the older settlers banded together and demanded that the Mormons leave Jackson County. Local authorities banned the Church's newspaper, ordered that the printing office discontinue operations, and mandated that stores and businesses operated by Mormons close immediately. When the Saints refused to abide by these directions, violent mobs began harassing them and plundering their property, in an effort to drive them from Missouri. One mobber boasted that 203 Mormon homes had been burned. Among the buildings destroyed were the home of W. W. Phelps, which housed the printing press; the Gilbert and Whitney store, a dozen homes near the Big Blue River, and Sidney Gilbert's home.

Individuals were also humiliated and threatened. An angry mob dragged Bishop Edward Partridge and Charles Allen to the public square and stripped them of their clothes, smeared their bodies with tar containing lime or some other flesh-eating substance, and then put feathers on them. Two Mormons were seized near the banks of the Big Blue River and pummeled with stones and clubs. In the skirmish that resulted, one person was killed and four others were wounded.

The violence and feelings of hate and fear finally drove the Mormons from Jackson County. Forced to surrender their arms, they had no way to defend themselves. It was a matter of leave and live or stay and die. In the wintry days of November 1833, hundreds of members were forced to flee from their homes. The destitute immigrants lined both sides of the Missouri River. Journal accounts portray tragic pictures of forlorn fugitives who, having lost everything they owned, had no protection from the unrelenting cold and the vicious mobs.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, deeply affected by these reports, wrote to the Missouri Saints that the suffering "awakens every sympathy of our hearts; it weighs us down; we cannot refrain from tears." [^4] Lucy Mack Smith wrote that when Joseph heard of the problems in Missouri, "he burst into tears and sobbed aloud, 'Oh my brethren! my brethren. . . . Would that I had been with you, to have shared your fate.'" [^5]

Zion's Camp Is Organized

On the day Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight arrived in Kirtland from Missouri, Joseph Smith received a revelation (D&C 103) that directed him to gather the young and middle-aged men and lead them to Missouri. The revelation stated that five hundred men should travel to Missouri to redeem the land; however, if five hundred could not be found, fewer—even one hundred—should go. (D&C 103:32-33.) When the Prophet presented the revelation to the high council, they approved it unanimously, and some thirty or forty men volunteered immediately. [^6]

Thus, Zion's Camp was formed to restore homes and businesses to Church members in Independence, Missouri. Correspondence and meetings with the governor of Missouri indicated that he would support reinstating the Mormons to their properties.

Preparations had to be hurried so the first group of Zion's Camp could leave Kirtland by May 1. Church leaders worked feverishly during March and April to recruit members for the camp, raise money, and gather clothing to be taken to the Missouri Saints. By the time the camp was ready to march, 207 men had been recruited. The thousand-mile journey began as two groups of men left Kirtland, planning to meet at New Portage, Ohio, about sixty miles away. The first group left on May 1. Wilford Woodruff, who was part of that group, wrote: "The Prophet asked those who were ready, to go as far as New Portage and there await the arrival of those who would follow later. I left in company with about twenty men with baggage wagons. At night we pitched our tents. Climbing to the top of the hill, I looked down upon the Camp of Israel. There I knelt upon the ground and prayed. I rejoiced and praised the Lord that I had lived to see some of the tents of Israel pitched, and a company gathered by the commandment of God to go up and help to redeem Zion." [^7]

Joseph Smith was in charge of the second group, which left four days later. He wrote: "Having gathered and prepared clothing and other necessaries to carry to our brethren and sisters, who had been robbed and plundered of nearly all their effects; and having provided for ourselves horses, and wagons, and firearms, and all sorts of munitions of war of the most portable kind for self-defense . . . I started with the remainder of the company from Kirtland. . . . My company from Kirtland consisted of about one hundred men, mostly young men, and nearly all Elders, Priests, Teachers or Deacons. As our wagons were nearly filled with baggage, we had mostly to travel on foot." [^8]

The anti-Mormon Painesville Telegraph reported on the departure of the small army:

Gen. Joe Smith took upon his line of march from this county on Monday inst. with a large party of his fanatical followers, for the seat of war.—This expedition has been a long time in active preparation. Soon after the outrages committed upon the members of the sect last Nov. in Missouri, the prophet here sent forth his general order, which he pretended was a revelation from God, for all his able bodied men to repair to the scene of difficulty. His preachers were sent forth to all parts of the country among their proselytes, with a printed copy of the revelation in their pockets. . . . They have made every effort to stir up the holy zeal of the "warriors, my young men, and they that are of middle age also," to the combat. . . . For several months past they have been collecting munitions of war for the crusade. Dirks, knives, swords, pistols, guns, power-horns, &c. &c. have been in good demand in this vicinity. [^9]

Joseph Smith rendezvoused with the first group and merged them on May 7 in New Portage. He wrote:

I continued to organize the company, appoint such other officers as were required, and gave such instructions as were necessary for the discipline, order, comfort and safety of all concerned. I also divided the whole band into companies of twelve, leaving each company to elect its own captain, who assigned each man in his respective company his post and duty, generally in the following order: Two cooks, two firemen; two tent men, two watermen, one runner, two wagoners and horsemen, and one commissary. We purchased flour and meal, baked our own bread, and cooked our own food, generally, which was good, though sometimes scanty; and sometimes we had johnny-cake, or corn-dodger, instead of flour bread. Every night before retiring to rest, at the sound of the trumpet, we bowed before the Lord in the several tents, and presented our thank-offerings with prayer and supplication; and at the sound of the morning trumpet, about four o'clock, every man was again on his knees before the Lord, imploring His blessing for the day. [^10]

The March to Missouri

Historian Milton V. Backman Jr., who has researched the Kirtland period extensively, has described the long march of Zion's Camp:

In many respects the daily routine of Zion's Camp was similar to that of other armies. Since the wagons were loaded with supplies, nearly every able-bodied person walked along the muddy and dusty trails, many of them carrying knapsacks on their backs and guns in their arms. They marched from morning till late afternoon or early evening, when they would make camp, generally near a body of water. Guards would be posted around the encampment at night. There was little time for relaxation, for when the men were not busy marching, caring for their animals, or preparing meals, they were drilling and preparing for action when they reached their destination.

In other respects, Zion's Camp was not like an ordinary army. These men were heading west in compliance with what they believed to be a commandment of the Lord, and they were being led by a prophet of God. During the journey their commander-in-chief preached the doctrines of the kingdom to them. Every morning and evening the soldiers offered prayers in their tents. On Sunday, the men would usually rest and hold meetings, where they would hear sermons and partake of the sacrament. [^11]

As the small army approached Jackson County, Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde were sent ahead to Missouri Governor Dunklin asking that he carry out his promises to the Saints and call out the militia to restore the Saints' property and protect them. While he expressed concern for the plight of the Mormons, he refused their request. Other attempts were made to resolve the disputes peaceably, but these also failed.

On June 19, while Zion's Camp was making camp for the night on elevated land between Little Fishing and Big Fishing rivers, five armed men rode into their camp and told them that they would "see hell before morning." These men bragged that 130 men from Richmond and 70 from Clay County were joining with about two hundred men from Jackson County to enforce their threats. [^12]

Wilford Woodruff described what happened then:

When the five men entered the camp there was not a cloud to be seen in the whole heavens, but as the men left the camp there was a small cloud like a black spot appeared in the north west, and it began to unroll itself like a scroll, and in a few minutes the whole heavens were covered with a pall as black as ink. This indicated a sudden storm which soon broke upon us with wind, rain, thunder and lightning and hail. Our beds were soon afloat and our tents blown down over our heads. We all fled into a Baptist meetinghouse. As the Prophet Joseph came in shaking the water from his hat and clothing he said, "Boys, there is some meaning to this. God is in this storm." We sang praises to God, and lay all night on benches under cover while our enemies were in the pelting storm. It was reported that the mob cavalry who fled into the schoolhouse had to hold their horses by the bridles between the logs, but when the heavy hail storm struck them they broke away, skinning the fingers of those who were holding them. The horses fled before the storm and were not found for several days. It was reported that the captain of the company in the schoolhouse said it was a strange thing that they could do nothing against the Mormons but what there must be some hail storm or some other thing to hinder their doing anything, but they did not feel disposed to acknowledge that God was fighting our battles. [^13]

Because of the violent storm, the mob scattered and the battle failed to materialize. A few days later, the army was attacked by an enemy perhaps even more deadly than another army: an epidemic of cholera. Seventy persons were stricken, and thirteen died. The Prophet subsequently disbanded the group on July 3. Most of the men prepared to return to Kirtland. Others went to mission fields, while some stayed in Missouri.

As conflicting reports about Zion's Camp reached Kirtland, the Saints there became alarmed. Rumors abounded. The local newspaper in Chardon reported: "A Mormon Battle.—A letter has been received, by a gentleman in this neighborhood, direct from Missouri, stating that a body of well armed Mormons, led on by their great prophet, Joe Smith, lately attempted to cross the river into Jackson county. A party of the citizens of Jackson county opposed their crossing, and a battle ensued, in which Joe Smith was wounded in the leg, and the Mormons obliged to retreat; that Joe Smith's limb was amputated, but he died three days after the operation." [^14]

Until the Prophet arrived back in Kirtland, almost three weeks later, Emma Smith could not be sure if he was dead or alive. To dispel rumors of his death, Joseph Smith visited the editor who had initiated the story, but the editor refused to believe he was not really dead. George A. Smith, who was with the Prophet, said that the editor felt "assured he had published the true state of the case." [^15]

Zion's CampHCZion's Camp's Accomplishments

Zion's CampHCThough Zion's Camp did not succeed in restoring their land to members of the Church in Missouri, it did have great value in preparing its participants for Church leadership. The men prayed together, were taught by the Prophet, and witnessed miracles and spiritual manifestations. And in spite of their trials, they developed strong faith in the Lord. Joseph Smith wrote: "Notwithstanding our enemies were continually breathing threats of violence, we did not fear, neither did we hesitate to prosecute our journey, for God was with us, and His angels went before us, and the faith of our little band was unwavering. We know that angels were our companions, for we saw them." [^16]

Zion's CampHCAt a meeting of priesthood leaders in Kirtland some time later, the Prophet declared: "Brethren, some of you are angry with me, because you did not fight in Missouri; but let me tell you, God did not want you to fight. He could not organize His kingdom with twelve men to open the Gospel door to the nations of the earth, and with seventy men under their direction to follow in their tracks, unless he took them from a body of men who had offered their lives, and who had made as great a sacrifice as did Abraham." [^17]

The men chosen for the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and the First Quorum of Seventy came principally from those who had offered their lives for the gospel in Zion's Camp. Nine of the original Twelve Apostles, called in 1835, were members of Zion's Camp, as were all seventy members of the First Quorum of Seventy. Their commitment was proven.

In an address to the Saints in the Salt Lake Valley nineteen years later, Brigham Young summarized his feelings about his experience in Zion's Camp: "When I returned from that mission . . . a brother said to me, 'Brother Brigham, what have you gained by this journey?' I replied, "Just what we went for; but I would not exchange the knowledge I have received this season for the whole of Geauga County; for property and mines of wealth are not to be compared to the worth of knowledge." [^18]

And in 1869, Elder Wilford Woodruff declared: "We gained an experience that we never could have gained in any other way. We had the privilege of beholding the face of the prophet, and we had the privilege of travelling a thousand miles with him, and seeing the workings of the Spirit of God with him, and the revelations of Jesus Christ unto him and the fulfillment of those revelations. . . . Had I not gone up with Zion's Camp I should not have been here to-day." [^19]

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
