Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

14

The Restoration of Offices and Organization

"It [is] the will of God that those who went to Zion . . . should be ordained to the ministry, and go forth to prune the vineyard." (Joseph Smith.)

Within three days of his arrival in Kirtland in 1831, Joseph Smith, now holding the keys of the priesthood, called Edward Partridge to be the first bishop of the Church. Within five months of his arrival, he organized the office of high priest. Within the first two years, he organized and ordained the First Presidency (three presiding high priests). In December 1833 the office of Patriarch was added. The seventies and Twelve Apostles were added in 1835. Each step was directed by the Lord and built on the same structure used two thousand years ago in Christ's original church.

A vision given to Joseph Smith preceded and was the basis for the organization of the quorums of the Twelve and the seventy. The Prophet, alluding to this vision several times, emphasized that he saw the order of the Church organization. He also saw the "'order of the Seventy' . . . and the manner in which the Twelve should be chosen." [^1]

From 1831-35, as Joseph Smith moved to each new residence, the headquarters of the Church also moved: to the Morley farm, the Johnson farm, the Whitney store, and the Prophet's home near the temple. Revelations received during this period gave important counsel pertaining to the Melchizedek Priesthood. For example, the "oath and the covenant" of the priesthood encouraged all men to magnify their priesthood callings and promised eternal possessions to those who were obedient.

High Priests Are Ordained

The first high priests of this dispensation were ordained at the Church's first conference in Ohio in June 1831. Among the twenty-three men ordained were many of the the leaders of the Church, including Joseph Smith Jr., Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, and Joseph Smith Sr. Levi Hancock's journal has a description of the conference:

The Fourth of June came and we all met in a little string of buildings under the hill near Isaac Morleys in Kirtland, [Geauga] County, Ohio. Then we all went to a school house on the hill about one fourth of a mile ascending nearly all the way. The building was built of logs. It was filled with slab benches. Here the Elders were seated and the meeting was opened as usual. . . . Joseph put his hands on Harvey Whitlock and ordained him to the high priesthood. . . . Then he ordained Jacob Scott and some others to the High Priesthood. [^2]

At a second conference in Orange on October 25, 1831, additional high priests were ordained. Joseph Smith addressed those who were ordained high priests and promised them: "If we will but cleanse ourselves and covenant before God, to serve Him, it is our privilege to have an assurance that God will protect us at all times." [^3]

Several of those assembled then bore testimony and committed themselves and all they had to the Lord. The testimonies were summarized in minutes of the meeting, including the following:

Br. Sidney Rigdon said[,] I bear testimony that God will have a pure people who will give up all for Christ's sake and when this is done they will be sealed up unto eternal life. . . .

Br. Orson Hyde said that he covenanted to give all to the Lord and be for his glory. . . .

Br. Wm. E. McLellin said that he had the greatest reason to rejoice of any present and that he also would be subject to the will of God even unto death. . . .

Br. Martin Harris . . . also covenanted to give all for Christ's sake.

Br. John Smith said that he felt through grace to do the will of the Lord notwithstanding his extreme old age, also felt to covenant to give all to the Lord. . . .

Br. David Whitmer said that he felt to declare to this conference that he had consecrated all that was his to the Lord, and also was desirous to do all for the glory of God.

Br. Simeon Carter . . . testified that the Book of Mormon was true. [^4]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCThe First Presidency Is Organized

Organizational Changes in OhioHCOn March 18, 1833, in the Newel K. Whitney store, the First Presidency was organized as directed by revelation (section 90 of the Doctrine and Covenants), with a president—Joseph Smith—and two counselors. The counselors' position was to be "equal with [Joseph Smith's] in holding the keys of this last kingdom." (D&C 90:6.) [^5]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCAt this meeting, great spiritual manifestations took place. The Prophet recorded: "Elder Rigdon expressed a desire that himself and Brother Frederick G. Williams should be ordained to the offices to which they had been called, viz., those of the Presidents of the High Priesthood, and to be equal in holding the keys of the kingdom with Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., according to the revelation given on the 8th of March, 1833. Accordingly I laid my hands on Brothers Sidney and Frederick, and ordained them to take part with me in holding the keys of this last kingdom, and to assist in the Presidency of the High Priesthood, as my Counselors." [^6]

The Patriarch and Patriarchal Blessings

On December 18, 1833, while the elders were assembled at the John Johnson inn to dedicate the printing office, Joseph Smith Sr. was called and ordained as Patriarch to the Church by his son, Joseph Smith Jr., and Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams. [^7]

The first patriarchal blessings of this dispensation were also bestowed at the meeting. Since the Prophet Joseph Smith held the keys of all the authority in the Church, he gave the first blessings. Those who received blessings on this occasion were Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith Sr., and Lucy Mack Smith, as well as the Prophet's brothers, Hyrum, Samuel, and William. [^8]

Numerous journals indicate that the Prophet's father, as Patriarch to the Church, actively bestowed blessings throughout the Kirtland period. Lorenzo Snow testified to the inspiration through which the blessings were given:

148I listened with astonishment to him telling the brethren and sisters their parentage, their lineage, and other things which I could not help but believe he knew nothing about, save as the Spirit manifested them unto him. After listening to several patriarchal blessings pronounced upon the heads of different individuals with whose history I was acquainted, and of whom I knew the Patriarch was entirely ignorant, I was struck with astonishment to hear the peculiarities of those persons positively and plainly referred to in their blessings. I was convinced that an influence, superior to human prescience, dictated his words. [^9]

The High Council

The first high council was organized on February 17, 1834, in Joseph Smith's home. This meeting was so important that Joseph Smith spent the following day, February 18, reviewing and correcting the minutes. Carefully guarding against error, he presented them to the council and "urged the necessity of prayer, that the Spirit might be given, that the things of the Spirit might be judged thereby." The minutes, read three times, were then unanimously adopted and received as a "form and constitution of the High Council." [^10]

The minutes indicate that the high council was chosen from twenty-four high priests who were present. The Prophet said the council was appointed by revelation to settle important difficulties that might arise in the Church, particularly those which could not be settled by the Church or the bishop's council to the satisfaction of the parties involved. The procedures "for the purpose of settling important difficulties" were also defined. (D&C 102:2.)

The Kirtland Stake

The organization of the first stake, the Kirtland Stake, is assumed to have been simultaneous with the organization of the first high council. On February 18, 1834, Joseph Smith and his two counselors in the First Presidency, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, were set apart to preside over the high council, which meant that they also were to preside over the stake. The establishment of a stake had long been expected, for the term stake had been used in revelations beginning in 1831. In 1832, the Lord said that Zion's "stakes must be strengthened" and "I have consecrated the land of Kirtland . . . for a stake to Zion." (D&C 82:13-14.) In 1833, the Lord referred to the Kirtland Stake in two revelations. Since the high council was organized in 1834, the long-awaited stake certainly had come into being by that time.

Organizational Changes in OhioHCThe Twelve Apostles

Organizational Changes in OhioHCOrganization of the Melchizedek Priesthood continued as the Twelve Apostles were named in the schoolroom on February 14, 1835. Joseph Young described going with his brother, Brigham, to Joseph Smith's home the previous Sunday, February 8, 1835, when the Prophet related a vision to them:

"Brethren, [the Prophet said,] I have seen those men who died of the cholera in our camp; and the Lord knows, if I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more." At this revelation he wept, and for some time could not speak. When he had relieved himself of his feelings, in describing the vision, he resumed the conversation, and addressed himself to Brother Brigham Young. He said to him, "I wish you to notify all the brethren living in the branches, within a reasonable distance from this place, to meet at a general conference on Saturday next. I shall then and there appoint twelve Special Witnesses, to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nations, and you" said he, (speaking to Brother Brigham,) "will be one of them.". . . Agreeable to his request to Elder Brigham Young, the branches were all notified, and a meeting of the brethren in general conference was held in Kirtland, in the new school house under the printing office, on the following Saturday, February 14th. [^11]

Before the apostles were chosen, Joseph Smith explained that the conference was called "because God had commanded it" and it had been made known to him (Joseph) through a vision. [^12] He then asked those who had gone to Missouri with Zion's Camp to be seated together in a section apart from the others, explaining that "it was the will of God that those who went to Zion, with a determination to lay down their lives, if necessary, should be ordained to the ministry, and go forth to prune the vineyard." [^13]

Joseph Smith then talked about choosing the Twelve and asked the brethren if they would be satisfied to have "the Spirit of the Lord dictate in the choice of the Elders to be Apostles." [^14] Those present concurred, and Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, Orson Pratt, William Smith, Thomas B. Marsh, and Parley P. Pratt were named to serve as the first apostles in this dispensation. They were set apart by the three men who had been witnesses to the Book of Mormon—Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris—and the ordination was confirmed by the First Presidency. Orson Hyde, one of these original apostles, later said:

Joseph said to me, although I was young, weak, inexperienced, especially in public speaking, and ignorant of many important things which we now all understand, that I should be one of this Twelve. It seemed to me a very great saying. I looked upon the Twelve Apostles who lived in ancient days with a great deal of reverence—as being almost superhuman. They were, indeed, great men—not by virtue of the flesh, nor their own natural capacities, but they were great because God called them. When Joseph told me that I would be one of the Twelve, I knew all things were possible with God, but it seemed to me that I would have to be altogether changed to occupy such a great position in the Church and Kingdom of our God. [^15]

The First Quorum of the Seventy

Joseph Smith's history indicates that on Saturday, February 28, 1835, the Church met in council to select certain individuals to be ordained as seventies from "the number of those who went up to Zion with me in the camp." [^16] Seven men were named to be presidents of the quorum of the seventies, and they, along with sixty-three others, constituted the quorum. All had participated in Zion's Camp. Joseph Young, who was one of the presidents of the seventies, recorded the startling way his call came to him. The Prophet asked Brother Young to come to his home, and there he was told, "Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies." [^17] The Prophet instructed the seventies "to constitute traveling quorums, to go into all the earth, whithersoever the Twelve Apostles shall call them." [^18] Thus, the seventies were called to do missionary work.

Caroline Crosby, whose husband was one of those called, wrote: "I well recollect the sensations with which my mind was actuated when I learned the fact that my husband had been called and ordained to the Melchisedek priesthood and would undoubtedly be required to travel and preach the gospel to the nations of the earth. I realized in some degree the immense responsibility of the office, and besought the Lord for grace and wisdom to be given him that he might be able to magnify his high and holy calling." [^19]

Support of Priesthood Holders

Wives and families of priesthood holders often made considerable sacrifices by carrying extra burdens so their husbands and fathers could attend to their Church callings. The men went on missions, constructed the temple and other buildings, went to Missouri on Zion's Camp, and attended frequent meetings. In their absence, women often had to provide income for their families, perform chores around the home that might normally be done by their husbands, and assume responsibility for rearing children and making family decisions.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney, whose husband, as bishop to the Church in Ohio, was frequently away from home, epitomized the attitude of these early mothers. She wrote: "During all these absences and separations from my husband I never felt to murmur or complain in the least . . . yet I was more than satisfied to have him give all, time, talents and ability into the service of the Kingdom of God; and the change in our circumstances and associations which were consequent upon our embracing the Gospel, never caused me a moment's sorrow. I looked upon it as a real pleasure to give all for the sake of my faith in the religion of Jesus, considering all as nought in comparison with the example of our blessed Savior." [^20]

Church Administration Headquarters

Since Joseph Smith presided over the Church, the headquarters literally moved when he moved until permanent office space could be secured.

At the Isaac Morley farm, where the Smith family resided in 1831, welfare principles were revealed and put into practice, the priesthood and a branch of the Church were organized, and a number of conferences were held. The farm was also the scene of several revelations and other spiritual manifestations.

At the John Johnson farm in Hiram, where the family moved in September 1831, the Prophet worked on his translation of the Bible. Fifteen revelations were received there, including section 1 (also known as the preface) of the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Prophet received visions of Deity and of the eternal worlds.

At least eight special conferences were held in Hiram, and journals mention many meetings at the Johnson home. Lorenzo Snow recorded that at one meeting, "Joseph Smith was standing in the door of Father Johnson's house, looking into the bowery," where some 150 or 200 people had gathered. [^21]

The upper story of the Newel K. Whitney store, into which the Prophet moved in September 1832, served as Church headquarters for about eighteen months.The initial command to build the Kirtland Temple and much of the subsequent planning occurred there. A survey of the high council minutes reveals that at least eighteen meetings and conferences were held in the store between December 3, 1832, and June 21, 1833. At the Whitney store building, Joseph received seventeen revelations that were compiled into the Doctrine and Covenants, continued his translation of the Bible, conducted the School of the Prophets, and organized the First Presidency. Great spiritual outpourings occurred there, including visions of the Father and the Son. The store also served as the first bishop's storehouse.

Joseph Smith's home on the hill, near the temple, was the next Church headquarters. Minutes record that various council meetings were held there, including meetings of the Twelve Apostles, high priests, elders, and high council, as well as many individual and impromptu gatherings. It is believed that six revelations were received there, including directives to organize the first high council, initiate Zion's Camp, and dissolve the united order. The Egyptian mummies and papyrus scrolls were exhibited in this home, and hundreds flocked to view them. Translation of the scrolls also commenced here.

The schoolhouse/printing office was completed in November 1834, and this building finally provided an office outside the Prophet's home. Following that, in 1836 the west room on the top story of the temple was reserved for the Prophet's "translating room" and office until the end of the Kirtland period.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
