Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

15

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCBuilding a House of the Lord

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHC"Had it not been for the assurance that God had spoken, . . . an attempt towards building that temple, under the then existing conditions, would have been . . . . pronounced preposterous." (Eliza R. Snow.)

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCFrom a command of God, the Saints began the seemingly impossible feat of building the Kirtland Temple—a modern "house of God." (D&C 88:119.) [^1] Construction of the temple, the main priority of the Church between 1833 and 1836, presented challenges of gigantic proportions to the Saints, who lacked both the necessary manpower and money. According to Eliza R. Snow, "At that time . . . the Saints were few in number, and most of them very poor; and, had it not been for the assurance that God had spoken, and had commanded that a house should be built to his name, of which he not only revealed the form, but also designated the dimensions, an attempt towards building that Temple, under the then existing circumstances, would have been, by all concerned, pronounced preposterous." [^2]

Neither the Church nor its poverty-stricken members had ever undertaken such a task. The cost of the building, estimated at about $40,000, was a staggering sum for the 1830s. [^3] Relative to the meager resources of the Saints at the time, the Kirtland Temple is probably the most costly temple ever constructed by the Church. In addition, there were only a handful of experienced builders among the Saints, and certainly none had constructed anything as huge and complex as the temple.

The Saints also faced great opposition from the community. Townspeople thought it foolhardy for them to build such a structure, and some vowed "that the walls should never be erected." [^4] The Lord, however, promised support, declaring, "It is my will that you should build a house. If you keep my commandments you shall have power to build it." (D&C 95:11.)

Brigham Young acknowledged that the Church members were "too few in numbers, too weak in faith, and too poor in purse, to attempt such a mighty enterprise. But by means of all these stimulants, a mere handful of men, living on air, and a little hominy and milk, and often salt or no salt when milk could not be had; the great Prophet Joseph, in the stone quarry, quarrying rock with his own hands; and the few then in the Church, following his example of obedience and diligence wherever most needed; with laborers on the walls, holding the sword in one hand to protect themselves from the mob, while they placed the stone and moved the trowel with the other." [^5]

A non-Mormon historian, writing about the temple in 1965, said, "The Kirtland Temple stands as a monument to Joseph Smith and to those faithful souls. . . . It appears a miracle the temple was constructed and a second miracle it was not harmed in all the years since it was built. . . . Members of the Church of Christ constructed a temple lovelier perhaps than Smith's fondest hopes, for they were inspired by almost superhuman exertion of body and brilliance of mind, by their devotion to Smith and to the visions and revelations experienced by him." [^6]

Joseph Smith, given both the commandment and the promise, expressed the intensity of his determination in a letter written to William W. Phelps on January 11, 1833: "You will see that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and establish a school for the Prophets. This is the word of the Lord to us, and we must, yea the Lord helping us, we will obey. . . . He has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with His own presence." [^7]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe Lord Provides the Plan

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOn December 27, 1832, the Prophet received a commandment to "establish a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God." (D&C 88:119.) In a subsequent revelation, on June 1, 1833, the Lord directed him to build the temple "after the manner which I shall show unto three of you" (D&C 95:14), meaning Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams, members of the First Presidency.

Truman O. Angell (who was architect of the Salt Lake Temple), recorded in his journal President Williams's description of how the temple plan was revealed: "Joseph received the word of the Lord for him to take his two counsellors Williams and Rigdon and come before the Lord, and He would show them the plan or model of the House to be built. We went upon our knees, called on the Lord, and the Building appeared within viewing distance: I being the first to discover it. Then all of us viewed it together. After we had taken a good look at the exterior, the building seemed to come right over us, and the Makeup of this Hall seemed to coincide with what I there saw to a minutia." [^8]

In a letter to John Taylor in 1885, Truman O. Angell confirmed the fact that the temple had been seen in vision: "F.G. Williams came into the Temple about the time the main hall 1st floor was ready for dedication. He was asked, how does the house look to you. He answered that it looked to him like the model he had seen. He said President Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon and himself were called to come before the Lord and the model was shown them. He said the vision of the Temple was thus shown them and he could not see the difference between it and the House as built." [^9] He further stated in his journal that "the leading mechanic" recommended to Joseph Smith that the seats in the building be rearranged. The Prophet responded by saying he had seen them in vision and insisted that the original plans be carried out. [^10]

Brigham Young drew a parallel with Moses and Solomon and emphasized that without this direct vision, Joseph Smith "could not know what was wanting, having never seen one [a temple], and not having experienced its use." [^11]

At a meeting in Kirtland, Joseph Smith asked the brethren for their views about how the temple was to be constructed. Lucy Mack Smith described their responses: "Some were in favor of building a frame house, but others were of a mind to put up a log house. Joseph reminded them that they were not building a house for a man, but for God; 'and shall we, brethren,' said he, 'build a house for our God, of logs? No, I have a better plan than that. I have a plan of the house of the Lord, given by himself; and you will soon see by this, the difference between our calculations and his idea of things.'" [^12]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe Work Begins

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCAlthough the Prophet had been commanded by the Lord to build the temple, overwhelming problems and other priorities delayed construction. On June 1, 1833, the Lord chastized the Church for not having made greater progress on the sacred edifice. (See D&C 95:1-6.) Needless to say, activity started immediately. The ground was broken on June 5. Lucy Mack Smith wrote: "Joseph took the brethren with him, for the purpose of selecting a spot for the building to stand upon. The place which they made choice of was situated in the north-west corner of a field of wheat, which was sown by my sons the fall previous, on the farm upon which we were then living. In a few minutes the fence was removed, and the standing grain was levelled, in order to prepare a place for the building and Hyrum commenced digging a trench for the wall, he having declared that he would strike the first blow upon the house." [^13]

Less than two months later, on July 23, 1833, twenty-four Church leaders met to lay the cornerstones "after the order of the Holy Priesthood." [^14] The First Presidency laid the stone on the southeast corner, and the remaining three cornerstones were laid by other leaders.

The major activity in Kirtland from July 1833 through March 1836 centered around construction of the temple. According to the Prophet's mother, the Saints "had to endure great fatigue and privation, in consequence of the opposition they met with from their enemies, and which was so great, that they were compelled to keep a guard around the walls much of the time until they were completed. They 'gave no sleep to their eyes, nor slumber to their eyelids, until they found a place for the Lord, a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.' . . . There was but one mainspring to all our thoughts and actions, and that was, the building of the Lord's house." [^15]

Initially the brethren desired to construct the temple out of brick. One of the main reasons they purchased the Peter French farm was "on account of the facilities found there for making brick." [^16] Benjamin F. Johnson wrote that "the purpose of building the Temple of brick was abandoned as a stone quarry at easy distance was opened to obtain the rock for its construction." [^17] Evidently to create the desired effect, the finished walls were marked to have the appearance of brick.

The Stannard Stone Quarry, two miles away, provided most of the stone for the temple. When construction began, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, Lorenzo D. Young, and Reynolds Cahoon rode south to visit the quarry and make sure the stone was suitable for the temple walls, which would be two feet thick and more than sixty feet high. Lorenzo's wagon was then loaded with stones and taken back to the construction site.

Joseph Smith himself helped quarry the stone. Heber C. Kimball told how, when the brethren returned to Kirtland from the march of Zion's Camp, "Joseph said, 'Come, brethren, let us go into the stone quarry and work for the Lord.' And the Prophet went himself, in his tow frock and tow breeches and worked at quarrying stone like the rest of us. Then, every Saturday we brought out every team to draw stone to the temple, and so we continued until that house was finished." [^18]

Everyone who had a team was enlisted to carry stone to the temple site. Elder Kimball reported that "those who had no teams went to work in the stone quarry and prepared the stones for drawing to the house. President Joseph Smith jr. being our foreman in the quarry. The Presidency, High Priests, and Elders all alike assisting.—Those who had teams assisted in drawing the stone to the house. These all laboring one day in the week, brought as many stones to the house as supplied the masons through the whole week. We continued in this manner until the walls of the house were reared." [^19]

Obtaining sufficient wood for the temple was a problem because a vast quantity was needed quickly. Much of the freshly cut wood from neighboring forests had to be dried and seasoned before it could be cut and used. In order to expedite the drying and seasoning process, a board kiln was built in the flats. The board kiln was apparently located adjacent to the sawmill so that when the wood was ready, it could be cut.

The kiln, which required heat and evidently open flame, caught fire frequently. The Prophet recorded in his diary on December 10, 1835, "The board kiln had taken fire, and on our return we found the brethren engaged in extinguishing the flames. After laboring about one hour against this destructive element, we succeeded in conquering it, and probably saved about one-fourth part of the lumber. I do not know the amount of loss the committee have sustained, but it must have been considerable, as there was much lumber in the kiln. There were about two hundred brethren engaged on this occasion; they displayed much activity and interest, and deserve much credit." [^20]

Three days later he wrote, "To day the board kiln, took fire again," [^21] and the next day he recorded that he met "to make ar[r]angements to guard against fire, and organized a company for this purpose." [^22]

Because the Saints could not overcome problems with the kiln, they did not have enough seasoned wood for the temple and finally had to contract with a non-Mormon Kirtland businessman to furnish lumber.

Construction of the temple required vigorous labor by the workers, who often labored into the night and had to rely on others to provide them with sufficient clothing and food. Daniel Tyler recalled:

How often have I seen those humble, faithful servants of the Lord, after toiling all day in the quarry, or on the building, when the walls were in course of erection, weary and faint, yet with cheerful countenances, retiring to their homes with a few pounds of corn meal that had been donated. And, in the case of those who lacked a cow to give a little milk, the corn meal was sometimes, for days together, all that they and their families had to subsist upon. When a little flour, butter or meat came in, they were luxuries. Sometimes a little New Orleans molasses, not as good as our sorghum, would be donated; but oftener the hands had to seek a job elsewhere to get a gallon or so, and then return to the labor on the temple. [^23]

Because of the height of the building—110 feet to the dome of the steeple—the builders erected a scaffolding so they could raise the walls and construct the interior. Such work was dangerous, and Daniel Tyler described the results of one accident:

I think it was Father Fisher, who, by some accident, fell from the scaffold, and was disabled for performing manual labor. He could manage, by the labor of his boys, to get a little corn; but corn bread alone was dry food. He went to the Prophet and asked him what he should do, and was told to get up a subscription paper and present to those who were best able to donate, and raise money enough to buy a cow, which would cost from ten to twelve dollars. He did as directed, and received the full sum of seventy-five cents. One person gave fifty and another twenty-five cents. This so disgusted the Prophet that he preferred a charge against them before the High Council "for a lack of charity to the Church, and benevolence to the poor." One of them made a humble acknowledgment, and the other was disfellowshipped. [^24]

The temple construction progressed fairly well except for the winter of 1833, when work was suspended because there was not enough wood, stone, or other necessary materials, and the summer of 1834, when so many men went to Missouri with Zion's Camp. The work was also sometimes suspended when the winter weather was harsher than usual, especially before the exterior walls were completed. Lorenzo Young described the winter of 1835-36:

It was then the last of November, and the weather daily grew colder. A Brother Stillman assisted me a day or two, but said that he could not stand the cold, and quit the work. I continued, day after day, determined, if possible, to complete the job. When I got badly chilled I went into my house, warmed myself and returned again to the work.

I completed the task in the forepart of December, but was sick the last two days. I had caught a bad cold, had a very severe cough, and, in a few days was confined to my bed. My disease was pronounced to be the quick consumption. I sank rapidly for six or seven weeks. For two weeks I was unable to talk. [^25]

The women in Kirtland contributed toward completing the temple by providing support for the workers. Heber C. Kimball reported:

Our women were engaged in spinning and knitting in order to clothe those who were laboring at the building, and the Lord only knows the scenes of poverty, tribulation, and distress which we passed through in order to accomplish this thing. My wife toiled all summer in lending her aid towards its accomplishment. She had a hundred pounds of wool, which, with the assistance of a girl, she spun in order to furnish clothing for those engaged in the building of the Temple, and although she had the privilege of keeping half the quantity of wool for herself, as a recompense for her labor, she did not reserve even so much as would make her a pair of stockings; but gave it for those who were laboring at the house of the Lord. She spun and wove and got the cloth dressed, and cut and made up into garments, and gave them to those men who labored on the Temple; almost all the sisters in Kirtland labored in knitting, sewing, spinning, etc., for the purpose of forwarding the work of the Lord. [^26]

As the building neared completion, the women also made carpets and veils, or curtains, of white canvas that were mounted on rollers and hung from the ceiling. They could be dropped to divide the large rooms on the first and second floors into four separate, smaller rooms, and were also placed above the pulpits so they could be dropped for privacy. Joseph Smith wrote: "This afternoon the sisters met again at the Temple to work on the veil. Towards the close of the day I met with the Presidency and many of the brethren in the house of the Lord, and made some remarks from the pulpit upon the rise and progress of the Church of Christ of Latter-day Saints, and pronounced a blessing upon the sisters, for their liberality in giving their services so cheerfully, to make the veil for the Lord's House." [^27]

Polly Angell, wife of the Church architect, said that the Prophet told them: "Well, sisters, you are always on hand. The sisters are always first and foremost in all good works. Mary was first at the resurrection; and the sisters now are the first to work on the inside of the temple." [^28]

One apparently apocryphal story was that the women furnished their finest glass and crockery to be mixed with the stucco for the outside walls. And when it was finished, the temple did sparkle when the sun shone on it. The biography of Artemus Millet explained: "When the wall of the Temple was finished, [Artemus] sent men and boys to the different towns and places to gather old crockery and glass to put in the cement which [he] had invented. Not that glass and crockery had any adhesive property but it had its use. . . . Many ladies would smooth their hands over the plaster, which looked so smooth, then look at their hands and tell where the fine glass had cut them and made them bleed." [^29]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCPoverty and Tribulation

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe temple wasn't completed without exacting a toll on the Saints. In the dedicatory prayer, the Prophet said, "For thou knowest that we have done this work through great tribulation; and out of our poverty we have given of our substance to build a house to thy name." (D&C 109:5.)

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHC"Poverty" is a word used many times in journals and accounts of the members in Kirtland. Benjamin F. Johnson said that when the work commenced, "There were but few saints in Kirtland, and those all of the poorer class. . . . There was not a scraper and hardly a plow that could be obtained among the Saints." [^30] Another account noted, "Joseph Smith and Brigham Young worked on that building day after day; also, many others did so. They did not have molasses to eat with their johnny cake. Sometimes they had shoes, and sometimes not; sometimes they would have tolerable pants, and, sometimes, very ragged ones." [^31]

Heber C. Kimball originally felt that to build the temple would be almost impossible because of the poverty: "When I got to Kirtland the brethren were engaged in building the house of the Lord. The commandment to build the house, and also the pattern of it was given in a revelation to Joseph Smith jr., Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams, and was to be erected by a stated time. The church was in a state of poverty and distress, in consequence of which it appeared almost impossible that the commandment could be fulfilled, at the same time our enemies were raging and threatening destruction upon us." [^32]

Not only was the Church poor, but it was also in debt. Joseph Smith revealed his deep concern for the Church's debts in writing to Missouri in December 1833: "It will be impossible for us to render you any temporal assistance, as our means are already exhausted, and we are deeply in debt, and know of no means whereby we shall be able to extricate ourselves." [^33]

Since nearly everyone worked on the temple, most financial reserves were used to sustain the workers. Special mission calls were issued for men to solicit funds from members of the Church in other areas. In May 1834 Jared Carter was sent east to obtain funds, and a year later Phineas Young was sent to Michigan. Christopher Crary, a non-Mormon businessman in Kirtland, said that "property of all kinds was sent in." He told of purchasing from the Church a horse and yoke of oxen that had been donated to the temple fund. [^34] Though many contributions were collected, at least fourteen thousand dollars had to be borrowed to finance the temple. [^35]

Despite the poverty and tribulation, however, the Lord answered the prayers of the Saints, sometimes in their darkest hours. Heber C. Kimball told of Sidney Rigdon's intense petitions: "Looking at the sufferings and poverty of the Church, he frequently used to go upon the walls of the building both by night and day and frequently wetting the walls with his tears, crying aloud to the Almighty to send means whereby we might accomplish the building." [^36]

Oliver Huntington, the Prophet's bodyguard, tells how one prayer was answered:

At a time when Joseph Smith was guarded day and night by his brethren from mob violence, that he might perform his necessary business labors and get the necessary night's rest and that his life should be safe; he was in a log house at night. Several brethren were with him and were making arrangements as to who should stand guard that night.

Joseph was listening to the prayer of a little boy in the room adjoining. The boy prayed for the Prophet, that he might be secure and safe from his enemies, the mob, that night.

When the boy had done praying, Joseph turned to his brethren and told them all to go to bed and all sleep and rest themselves that night, for God had heard and would answer that boy's prayer. They all went to bed and slept safely until morning undisturbed. [^37]

In addition to answering prayers for protection, the Lord also answered prayers for financial assistance. At a time of the Saints' greatest need, the Lord directed wealthy Church members, such as John Tanner and Artemus Millet, to go to Kirtland, and there they sacrificed their means freely to save the temple from foreclosure.

Unseen forces also protected the Saints and their efforts. In January 1836, prior to completion of the temple, Joseph Smith reported: "Elder Roger Orton saw a mighty angel riding upon a horse of fire, with a flaming sword in his hand, followed by five others, encircle the house, and protect the Saints, even the Lord's annointed, from the power of Satan and a host of evil spirits, which were striving to disturb the Saints." [^38]

Many accounts tell of persecution and mob violence. Heber C. Kimball wrote from firsthand experience: "While we were building the Temple, in Kirtland, . . . we were persecuted and were under the necessity of laying upon the floor with our firelocks by our sides to sustain ourselves, as there were mobs gathering all around to destroy us, and prevent us from building the Temple. And when they were driven, every man that was in the church, arose, and we took our firelocks, to reinstate our brethren, and in the night we laid upon the floor; we laid upon Brother Joseph's floor, and upon Sidney Rigdon's floor, so as to be ready to keep our enemies at bay." [^39]

Joel Hills Johnson said that the Saints had "but very few friends" while they also had "thousands of enemies who were holding their secret meetings to devise plans to thwart and overthrow all of our arrangements. . . . We were obliged . . . to keep up night watches to prevent being mobbed, and our work being overthrown." [^40]

In December 1833 the Prophet wrote to Church members in Missouri: "The inhabitants of this county threaten our destruction, and we know not how soon they may be permitted to follow the example of the Missourians; but our trust is in God, and we are determined, His grace assisting us, to maintain the cause and hold out faithful unto the end." [^41]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCBlessings for the Faithful Saints

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCIn early March 1835, while the temple walls were still being erected, a spiritual meeting was called for the purpose of blessing those who were assisting in the building. Even though much work remained, the Prophet felt a blessing was needed for the faithful who had consecrated themselves to the work. One hundred nineteen faithful brethren were blessed one by one under the hands of the First Presidency. These individual blessings also provided motivation to the individuals to complete the temple.

Benjamin Johnson was the last person to be blessed. He was young—only seventeen years old—and in poor health. Four of his brothers and sisters had also been ill and died of consumption. Although Benjamin had not worked on the temple, he fervently desired a blessing. He recalled:

Oh! how I did yearn for a blessing! And as the last blessing, apparently, was given, the Prophet earnestly looked towards the door where I was standing, and said to his brother Hyrum, "Go and see if there is not one more yet to be blessed." Brother Hyrum came to the door, and seeing me, put his hand upon my shoulder and asked me if I had not worked upon the Temple. I said, "No sir," but it seemed like passing a sentence upon my fondest hopes. He then asked if I had done nothing towards it. I then thought of a new gun I had earned and given as a donation, and of the brick I had helped to make. I said, "I did give often." "I thought," he said, "there was a blessing for you," and he almost carried me to the stand. The Prophet blessed me, with a confirmation of all his father had sealed upon me, and many more also. I felt then that the Lord had respect for my great desire. Even to be the youngest and last to be blessed seemed to me a high privilege. When the Prophet had looked towards the door, I felt as though he would call for me, though I could not see how I had merited so high a privilege. But so it was, and my joy was full. [^42]

With faith and with the Lord sustaining them, the Church members accomplished the miracle. Overcoming mob action and hostility, extreme poverty, and other hardships, they completed the temple in a remarkably short time—just over two and one-half years. The temple was completed in March 1836. The house of the Lord was ready to be dedicated.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
