Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

17

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCThe Temple Is Dedicated

"I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house." (D&C 110:7.)

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCThe long-awaited day had finally arrived. On Sunday, March 27, 1836, the Kirtland Temple was dedicated to the Lord.

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCJoseph Smith estimated that by seven o'clock that morning, more than one thousand persons waited near the temple doors. Over the next hour, a number of Church leaders and ushers entered the building. Finally, at eight o'clock, the temple doors opened, and about one thousand people crowded into the main hall. The doors were closed when all available space was occupied. Hundreds could not enter the building. To accommodate the overflow, Joseph Smith directed that a meeting be held in the schoolhouse west of the temple. After that room was filled to capacity, many still remained outside, so the temple windows were opened to allow those outside to listen, if possible. A repeat of the dedicatory services was also scheduled for the following Thursday.

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCThe dedicatory services began at nine o'clock with Sidney Rigdon, a counselor in the First Presidency, reading Psalms 96 and 24. A choir then sang the hymn "Ere Long the Veil Will Rend in Twain," after which President Rigdon offered the invocation. This was followed by a song by the congregation, "O Happy Souls, Who Pray Where God Appoints to Hear." Then President Rigdon spoke for two and a half hours, using as his text Matthew, chapter 8, verses 18 to 20. He emphasized the Savior's comment that "the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." [^1] According to Eliza R. Snow, although it was a lengthy sermon, it was eloquent and moving. "At one point," she said, "as he reviewed the toils and privations of those who had labored in rearing the walls of that sacred edifice, he drew tears from many eyes, saying, there were those who had wet those walls with their tears, when, in the silent shades of the night, they were praying to the God of heaven to protect them, and stay the unhallowed hands of ruthless spoilers, who had uttered a prophecy, when the foundation was laid, that the walls should never be erected." [^2]

Following President Rigdon's talk, Joseph Smith was sustained as a prophet and seer first by the priesthood quorums and then by the congregation. This part of the service concluded with the choir and congregation standing to sing "Now Let Us Rejoice in the Day of Salvation." An intermission of about fifteen or twenty minutes followed, during which most people remained in the building. The service then continued with another song, "This Earth Was Once a Garden Place," also known as "Adam-ondi-Ahman." After a few brief remarks by Joseph Smith, the congregation sustained various officers of the Church and then sang another song, "How Pleased and Blessed Was I."

Joseph Smith then read the dedicatory prayer, which had been revealed to him. This prayer, recorded in section 109 of the Doctrine and Covenants, contains a petition that the Kirtland Temple "may be a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God. . . .

"That we may be found worthy, in thy sight, to secure a fulfilment of the promises which thou hast made unto us, thy people. . . .

"That thy glory may rest down upon thy people, and upon this thy house, which we now dedicate to thee, that it may be sanctified and consecrated to be holy, and that thy holy presence may be continually in this house;

"And that all people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord's house may feel thy power, and feel constrained to acknowledge that thou hast sanctified it, and that it is thy house, a place of thy holiness." (D&C 109:8, 11-13.)

Following the dedicatory prayer, the choir sang a hymn written by William W. Phelps. This hymn proclaimed their experiences as they sang and shouted "with the armies of heaven":

The Spirit of God like a fire is burning! The latter-day glory begins to come forth; The visions and blessings of old are returning; The angels are coming to visit the earth. . . . The Lord is extending the Saints' understanding— Restoring their judges and all as at first; The knowledge and power of God are expanding; The veil o'er the earth is beginning to burst. . . . Joseph Smith's Kirtland: The Temple Is Dedicated, page 181] We'll call in our solemn assemblies, in spirit, To spread forth the kingdom of heaven abroad, That we through our faith may begin to inherit The visions and blessings and glories of God. . . . Joseph Smith's Kirtland: The Temple Is Dedicated, page 181] How blessed the day when the lamb and the lion Shall lie down together without any ire; And Ephraim be crowned with his blessing in Zion, As Jesus descends with His chariot of fire! Joseph Smith's Kirtland: The Temple Is Dedicated, page 181] We'll sing and we'll shout with the armies of heaven— Hosanna, hosanna to God and the Lamb! Let glory to them in the highest be given, Henceforth and forever: amen and amen! [^3]

After the song, the quorums accepted the dedicatory prayer and the sacrament was passed to members of the Church. Then Joseph Smith, Don Carlos Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Frederick G. Williams, and David Whitmer bore their testimonies. After some remarks by Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon and a short prayer by Sidney Rigdon, the congregation gave the Hosanna Shout, shouting three times, "Hosanna, hosanna, hosanna to God and the Lamb." Each series of hosannas ended with three amens. Brigham Young then arose and spoke briefly in tongues while David W. Patten interpreted, and David W. Patten delivered a short exhortation in tongues. At about four o'clock, the Prophet concluded the seven-hour dedicatory service by blessing the congregation.

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCSpiritual Powers Are Manifested

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCMany participants in the dedicatory service reported a rich outpouring of spiritual manifestations. Benjamin Brown testified that "there the Spirit of the Lord, as on the day of Pentecost, was profusely poured out. . . . We had a most glorious and never-to-be-forgotten time. Angels were seen by numbers present." [^4] Many mentioned hearing heavenly singing and others witnessed visions and appearances of heavenly beings. Eliza R. Snow testified that a babe in arms participated in the Hosanna Shout. Summarizing this extraordinary event, she said, "As marvelous as that incident may appear to many, it is not more so than other occurrences on that occasion." [^5] It was reported that hundreds spoke in tongues, prophesied, or saw visions. A heavenly messenger, identified by Joseph Smith as Peter, the ancient apostle, [^6] was seen entering the temple and sat near Frederick G. Williams and Joseph Smith Sr. Heber C. Kimball described him as being tall, with "black eyes, white hair, and stoop shouldered; his garment was whole, extending to near his ankles; on his feet he had sandals. He was sent as a messenger to accept of the dedication." [^7]

This day, comparable to the biblical day of Pentecost, was a glorious and memorable day. Eliza R. Snow recorded: "The ceremonies of that dedication may be rehearsed, but no mortal language can describe the heavenly manifestations of that memorable day. Angels appeared to some, while a sense of divine presence was realized by all present, and each heart was filled with "joy inexpressible and full of glory." [^8]

Indelible impressions were made even upon children. Sylvia Cutler Webb said,

One of my earliest recollections was the dedication of the Temple. My father took us up on his lap and told us why we were going and what it meant to dedicate a house to God. And although so very young at that time, I clearly remember the occasion. I can look back through the lapse of years and see as I saw then Joseph the Prophet, standing with his hands raised towards heaven, his face ashy pale, the tears running down his cheeks as he spoke on that memorable day. Almost all seemed to be in tears. The house was so crowded the children were mostly sitting on older people's laps; my sister sat on father's, I on my mother's lap. I can even remember the dresses we wore. My mind was too young at that time to grasp the full significance of it all, but as time passed it dawned more and more upon me, and I am very grateful that I was privileged to be there. [^9]

That evening, in a priesthood meeting in the temple, additional manifestations were given. George A. Smith describes them: "There were great manifestations of power, such as speaking in tongues, seeing visions, administration of angels. Many individuals bore testimony that they saw angels, and David Whitmer bore testimony that he saw three angels passing up the south aisle, and there came a shock on the house like the sound of a mighty rushing wind, and almost every man in the house arose, and hundreds of them were speaking in tongues, prophecying or declaring visions, almost with one voice." [^10]

Joseph Smith also described the evening meeting: "All the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place." [^11]

Angels also were seen outside the temple, and heavenly singing was heard coming from the roof. Oliver Cowdery testified: "The Spirit was poured out—I saw the glory of God, like a great cloud, come down and rest upon the house, and fill the same like a mighty rushing wind. I also saw cloven tongues, like as of fire rest upon many, (for there were 316 present), while they spake with other tongues and prophesied." [^12]

On the day of dedication, the Lord rewarded his valiant people for building the Kirtland Temple so that "the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people." (D&C 109:5.) When the Lord told the Church to move to "the Ohio," he promised that they would be given "a blessing such as is not known among the children of men." (D&C 39:15.) Numerous accounts attest that the divine promise was fulfilled, and unparalleled spiritual manifestations were the rewards.

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCChrist Appears and Accepts the Temple

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCPossibly no other manifestation was as welcome and rewarding as the appearance of Christ when he accepted the temple during a meeting there on Sunday, April 3, 1836, one week after the dedication. The Prophet wrote:

In the afternoon, I assisted the other Presidents in distributing the Lord's Supper to the Church, receiving it from the Twelve, whose privilege it was to officiate at the sacred desk this day. After having performed this service to my brethren, I retired to the pulpit, the veils being dropped, and bowed myself, with Oliver Cowdery, in solemn and silent prayer. After rising from prayer, the following vision was opened to both of us—

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father.

Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me; therefore, lift up your heads and rejoice.

Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house.

Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. Even so. Amen. [^13]

This vision apparently took place in the Melchizedek Priesthood pulpits, at the second pulpit from the top on the west end of the main auditorium. What a confirmation to the Saints! The Savior himself accepted their efforts and promised that he would manifest himself to them in this temple.

An Endowment Is Bestowed

The sacred purposes for which the temple was built, however, were far more significant than the dedication ceremony or the many pentecostal experiences. The long-awaited endowment could now be bestowed upon individual members. In remarks to the Twelve Apostles, Joseph Smith taught that ordinances performed in the temple would "unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment, and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot overthrow us, nor have any power over us here. . . . You need an endowment, brethren," he said, "in order that you may be prepared and able to overcome all things." He promised them that "all who are prepared, and are sufficiently pure to abide the presence of the Savior, will see Him in the solemn assembly." [^14]

Before the Ascension in the meridian of time, the Savior asked his disciples to "tarry" in Jerusalem. In Kirtland, he likewise instructed his disciples: "I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem." The Lord promised both the ancient disciples and the Kirtland Saints that they would be endowed "with power from on high." (Luke 24:49; D&C 95:8-9.)

The disciples in both time periods had similar missions: to establish the Church and "to go into all the world to preach [the] gospel." (D&C 38:32; see also Matthew 28:19.) Both groups established new dispensations while enduring opposition, persecution, and poverty. In both times, the Lord blessed them with an overwhelming pentecostal outpouring and endowments of power. As they began their sacred missions, divine manifestations strengthened their testimonies and gave them knowledge that the Lord supported them and directed his work.

The Lord designated the Kirtland Temple as the place where the Saints would receive further instructions and a temple endowment. John Whitmer, Church historian, wrote that "the first Elders were to receive their endowment at Kirtland, Ohio in the house of the Lord built in that stake." [^15] For five years, the Saints had prepared to receive the special blessing. In meetings prior to the dedication of the temple, brethren learned more about the promised endowment, which early Church sources indicate consisted of several parts. One part was a gift of knowledge and instruction; another consisted of ordinances and ceremonies, such as washings and anointings. Those who received the endowment were also promised "power from on high." Although the endowment given in the Kirtland Temple was later referred to as "a portion," "introductory," and "preparatory" and was not the full endowment given later, it was of great importance. [^16]

Joseph Smith emphasized the significance of the endowment in a charge to the Twelve: "Remember, you are not to go to other nations till you receive your endowments. Tarry at Kirtland until you are endowed with power from on high. You need a fountain of wisdom, knowledge and intelligence such as you never had. . . . He can give you that wisdom, that intelligence, and that power, which characterized the ancient saints and now characterizes the inhabitants of the upper world." [^17]

He encouraged leaders to prepare for the endowment through a cleansing of both spirit and body. They were cautioned, "Strive to be prepared in your hearts, be faithful in all things. . . . Do not watch for iniquity in each other, if you do you will not get an endowment, for God will not bestow it on such." [^18]

Although the temple was used for public meetings and schooling, we know, from reviewing the Prophet's instruction and from the many journals kept by others, that sacred ordinances relating to the endowment were also performed in private sessions. For example, on April 6, 1836, four hundred priesthood holders "met together in the House of the Lord to attend to further ordinances; none being permitted to enter but official members who had previously received their washings and annointings." [^19]

Many journal accounts attest to washings, anointings, and endowments being received in the temple. Here are some typical references from the time:

Wilford Woodruff: "This winter [1836] and the following spring, in some respects, may be regarded as one of the most interesting periods of the history of the Church, when we consider the endowments and teachings given in the temple." [^20]

Daniel Tyler: "I had the inestimable blessing of receiving my endowments in the temple at Kirtland." [^21]

Newel Knight: "I . . . commenced labor on the temple . . . until it was finished, and ready for the endowments. . . . I then received my anointings." [^22]

George A. Smith: "I passed through the ordinances of endowments and received much instruction and many manifestations of the spirit." [^23]

Artemus Millet: "I was then ordained an Elder, and got my Endowments in the Temple and in 1836 went on a mission." [^24]

Heber C. Kimball: "I . . . received my washings and anointings . . . and . . . all the blessings and ordinances of endowment which were then administered." [^25]

At the Pentecost in Jerusalem, large numbers of the people witnessed appearances of the resurrected Christ, spoke in tongues, and saw "cloven tongues like as of fire." (Acts 2:3.) They had visions, participated in healings, and beheld wonders and signs. Then they were sent out to be witnesses throughout the earth. So it was in Kirtland: modern disciples took part in the same kinds of spiritual manifestations. The keys, or power and authority, of this dispensation had been committed into the hands of the priesthood leaders and holders; now, having received the endowment, they were empowered to take the gospel message into all the world. [^26]

Temple Rules and Regulations

The Saints regarded the Kirtland Temple as a sacred edifice that deserved reverence and respect by all who entered. To ensure reverence and proper conduct, rules and regulations were drawn up, in order, Joseph Smith said, "that due respect may be paid to the order of worship." [^27] The "Rules and Regulations to be Observed in the House of the Lord in Kirtland" included these:

1st. No man shall be interrupted who is appointed to speak by the Presidency of the Church, by any disorderly person or persons in the congregation, by whispering, by laughing, by talking, by menacing gestures, by getting up and running out in a disorderly manner, or by offering indignity to the manner of worship. . . .

2nd. An insult offered to the presiding Elder of said Church shall be considered an insult to the whole body. . . .

3rd. All persons are prohibited from going up the stairs in times of worship.

4th. All persons are prohibited from exploring the house, except waited upon by a person appointed for that purpose.

5th. All persons are prohibited from going into the several pulpits, except the officers who are appointed to officiate in the same.

6th. All persons are prohibited from cutting, marking or marring the inside or outside of the house with a knife, pencil, or any other instrument whatever, under pain of such penalty as the law shall inflict.

7th. All children are prohibited from assembling in the house, above or below, or any part of it, to play, or for recreation, at any time: and all parents, guardians, or masters, shall be amenable for all damage that shall accrue in consequence of their children's misconduct.

8th. All persons, whether believers or unbelievers, shall be treated with due respect by the authorities of the Church.

9th. No imposition shall be practiced upon any members of the Church, by depriving them of their rights in the house. [^28]

Meetings in the Temple

Once the temple was completed, it became the scene of many meetings. Records tell of meetings of the First Presidency, Council of the Twelve, bishop's councils, high councils, seventies' councils, and elders' councils being held in the temple. These many meetings prompted Caroline Crosby, who came to Kirtland in 1836, to comment: "I enjoyed myself well with sister Thankful Pratt. . . . The brethren attended meetings almost every evening, which left us tog[e]ther considerably. When they all left us, she would look about her and say, "well it is you and I again, Sister Crosby." [^29]

Wilford Woodruff spoke about attending a meeting on December 20, 1836, in which the Third Quorum of Seventy was organized, and noted that every Tuesday evening through that winter, the three seventies quorums met, with about one hundred seventies present on each occasion. [^30]

Joseph Smith recorded: "On Monday evenings the quorum of High Priests meet in the west room of the attic story, where they transact the business of their particular quorum. On Tuesday evenings the Seventies occupy the same room. On Wednesday evenings the rooms are occupied by the quorum of Elders. . . . The Twelve, the High Council and other quorums, generallymeet each week to transact business. [^31]

On Sundays, meetings were held in the morning and afternoon, and sometimes special Sunday evening services were held in the temple. Fast and testimony meetings, held on the first Thursday of each month, began at ten o'clock in the morning and continued until four o'clock in the afternoon. Curtains divided the main floor of the temple into four compartments so small, simultaneous sessions could be held. Usually about three o'clock the curtains were raised, and all in attendance continued to worship together. In 1837, the Prophet's father presided over the fast and testimony meetings.

Music played an important role in the temple meetings with both congregational singing and choirs to perform special numbers. Caroline Barnes Crosby recalled: "The brethren had meetings of some kind almost every evening in the week. Besides singing schools in which all ages took a part, from the young adult to the old gray heads. Consequently we also took a part with them, and met two evenings in a week. The choir was large." [^32]

On Monday, January 4, 1836, Joseph Smith wrote in his journal that he "met this evening at the Temple, to make arrangements for a singing school. After some discussion, a judicious arrangement was made, a committee of six was chosen to take charge of the singing department." [^33]

An early journal describes congregational singing and the need for singing instruction:

Church music was taught at singing schools. No one ever thought of taking his song book to church. After the reading of the hymn the leader pitched the tune and started off. The congregation—all that could sing—would join in, some a note or two too high, others as much too low, and most of them a little behind the leader. Uncultivated people did not mind the discord, and the congregation dispersed feeling spiritually refreshed. They had heard a good sermon, taken part in the worship, and were ready for the week's labors, anticipating a good time next Sabbath in airing their musical talents. [^34]

Christ's words, "the fame of this house shall spread" (D&C 110:10), were fulfilled as Saints and nonmembers alike came to realize the monumental accomplishment of the Church in building the Kirtland Temple and the spiritual significance of it. It became a rallying point for the Saints from far and near. Some came from Missouri, where they were facing great hardships of their own, making great sacrifices and enduring a very difficult journey in order to visit the temple, which had much the same significance as the temple of old in Jerusalem. Oliver B. Huntington's feelings as his company arrived in Kirtland and caught sight of the magnificent building express what so many felt:

"O, what joy again came over every one of us as we came in sight of the temple. The Lords House, Solemnly exclaimed every one, as we were trudging along in a confused flock. It makes me think of tribes going up to Jerusalem to worship, [as] anciently." [^35]

All this was in fulfillment of the earnest entreaty of the Prophet Joseph Smith as he offered the prayer of dedication for the temple:

"O hear us, O Lord! And answer these petitions, and accept the dedication of this house unto thee, the work of our hands, which we have built unto thy name; and also this church, to put upon it thy name. And help us by the power of thy Spirit, that we may mingle our voices with those bright, shining seraphs around thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing Hosanna to God and the Lamb!" (D&C 109:78-79.)

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
