Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

18

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCThe Kirtland Safety Society Bank

"It seemed as though all the powers of earth and hell were combining their influence . . . to overthrow the Church at once." (Joseph Smith.)

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCNear the end of the Kirtland period, Joseph Smith and other Church leaders founded the Kirtland Safety Society Bank, which sold its first stock in October 1836. One year later, in November 1837, the bank closed. Some two hundred shareholders who had bought stock in the bank suffered losses, as did merchants, farmers and others in the community who had accepted the printed bank notes.

Placing in perspective the events that led to the bank's failure, it becomes evident that Joseph Smith had no control over those factors. The records show that he struggled to maintain his integrity throughout this difficult episode. Enemies of the Church used the bank in their efforts to force the Church out of Kirtland, destroying confidence in the bank and causing a run on its currency. Supposed friends and trusted associates fell to the temptations of overnight wealth and turned against the Prophet. Also, the bank was unfortunately spawned during a period of runaway inflation nationwide, which resulted in economic collapse and numerous bank failures.

Founding a bank in Kirtland in 1836 was a logical business decision. Other communities in the area, such as Ashtabula, Warren, and Ravenna, while not as large as Kirtland, had banks. A successful Church bank in Kirtland, it was believed, would encourage community development, keep money in the area, contribute to friendlier community relationships, and make funds more readily available than banks in other communities and/or nearby states.

Extreme financial needs and pressures also contributed toward the decision. In 1837 the Church's debt probably exceeded fifty thousand dollars. Sidney Rigdon estimated that thirteen thousand dollars were still owed for temple debts; six thousand dollars for aid to Missouri members; and an unspecified amount for the purchase of land. [^1] Recent research indicates that the land-acquisition debt was perhaps as much as forty-six thousand dollars. [^2] In April 1837 Joseph Smith wrote about the financial pressure:

There are many causes of embarrassment, of a pecuniary nature now pressing upon the heads of the Church. They began poor; were needy, destitute, and were truly afflicted by their enemies; yet the Lord commanded them to go forth and preach the Gospel, to sacrifice their time, their talents, their good name, and jeopardize their lives; and in addition to this, they were to build a house for the Lord, and prepare for the gathering of the Saints. Thus it is easy to see this must [have] involved them [in financial difficulties]. They had no temporal means in the beginning commensurate with such an undertaking; but this work must be done; this place [Kirtland] had to be built up. Large contracts have been entered into for lands on all sides, where our enemies have signed away their rights. We are indebted to them. [^3]

In a letter to the Church that year, the bishopric reviewed the financial plight, discussed the "heavy burden" placed upon the Kirtland Saints "in order that the foundation of the kingdom of God might be laid," and pointed out that when the Saints had no more money to contribute, they were forced to resort to borrowing money and pledging property. The letter referred to the financial "embarrassments of the stake of Kirtland" and paid tribute to Saints who borrowed money and "have thus exposed themselves to financial ruin in order that the work of the gathering might not fail." [^4]

Following is an overview of key events in the Kirtland Safety Society Bank from its inception until its closure.

July-August 1836: Engraving sources are investigated.

On July 25, 1836, Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, Oliver Cowdery, and Sidney Rigdon went to New York and Boston to investigate sources for plates and dies for printing bank notes. They arrived in New York City on July 31 and remained there for three days.

October 1836: A safe is purchased.

In mid-October, Joseph Smith purchased an iron safe, apparently for the bank. The safe, measuring 25"x24"x29", had wheels attached to the bottom. It is now owned by the Western Reserve Historical Society.

October 18, 1836: Stock shares are sold.

Sidney Rigdon made the first stock purchase in the bank on this date, paying twelve dollars as an installment on two thousand shares of stock. [^5] The stock ledger shows that most stock was purchased in installments. Bank officers requested payment in gold or silver. In all, two hundred people invested, with an average investment of twelve dollars (which represented about one-week's income in 1840). About twenty thousand dollars was invested in the bank. [^6]

November 2, 1836: Articles of agreement are drawn up.

Articles of agreement were drawn for a banking institution, to be called the Kirtland Safety Society. [^7] The purpose of the bank was "for the promotion of our temporal interests, and for the better management of our different occupations, which consist in agriculture, mechanical arts, and merchandising." [^8] Sidney Rigdon was elected president and Joseph Smith, cashier.

November 1836: Oliver Cowdery goes to Philadelphia.

Shortly after the November 2 meeting, Oliver Cowdery went to Philadelphia to procure dies and plates for bank bills. He chose an engraving firm called Underwood, Bald, Spencer and Huffy. The Prophet Joseph Smith said that he "succeeded at a great expense in procuring the plates and bringing them to Kirtland." [^9] He returned about January 1 with printing plates and a supply of freshly printed bills. The name The Kirtland Safety Society Bank appeared on the notes because it was assumed that the state of Ohio would grant a charter.

December 1836: Petition for charter.

In early December, Orson Hyde went to Columbus, the Ohio state capital, with a petition for the legislature for an act of incorporation. "But because we were 'Mormons,'" he reported, "the legislature raised some frivolous excuse on which they refused to grant us those banking privileges." [^10]

January 2, 1837: Anti-banking company is formed.

Since the Church assumed that the state would grant the bank charter, plates had been engraved, money had been printed with the bank's name, and about 60 percent of the stock had been sold. The bank officers called a meeting on January 2 to decide on a new course. Two-thirds of the members present annulled the old articles of agreement, new articles were drawn up, and a new name was adopted: Kirtland Safety Society Anti-Banking Company.

Although forming a bank without a state charter may seem unusual to one today, it was not at all unusual in 1837. Accounts in newspapers in 1837 indicate that such institutions, often called "anti-banks," were operating not only in Ohio but also in surrounding states, including Michigan and Pennsylvania, and anti-bank conventions were held in counties near Kirtland.

With the name changed, the firm felt it could operate without a charter, as similar institutions were operating in Ohio in the 1830s. Even as late as 1843, a state auditor's report showed that nine concerns were operating without charters. In reviewing the banking industry in Ohio in the 1830s, one author concluded that "commercial firms were encouraged to conduct banklike business, even without state bank charters, by Whigs and people in the soft-money wing of the Democratic Party. Uniform opposition to these quasi banks did not appear until after most banking establishments in Ohio encountered serious financial problems as a result of the economic turmoil that began in 1837." [^11]

Despite choosing to operate without a charter, the Kirtland bank ran a legal risk. An 1816 Ohio law prohibited bank operations except for those duly incorporated by the legislature and imposed a thousand-dollar penalty on all persons with interest in such a bank. Attorneys, however, counseled Joseph Smith and other officers that the 1816 law had been implicitly repealed by the Ohio state legislature in 1824. [^12] Political groups and even newspapers publicly proclaimed that the 1816 law was invalid. One newspaper declared that the statute "has long since become obsolete and inoperative." [^13]

January 4, 1837: First bills reprinted.

The earliest date appearing on the Kirtland Safety Society Bank notes is January 4, 1837. On the notes, where possible, the word "Bank" was changed to "Anti-Banking Co." In the first few days of operation, bills in one, two, and three dollar denominations were issued, [^14] but the three dollar bill was the only one on which the phrase "Anti-Banking Co." was successfully stamped.

January 6, 1837: The bank opens under new name.

Four days after the Anti-Banking Company was formed, the bank opened for trading. On this day Wilford Woodruff wrote in his diary:

I visited the office of the Kirtland Safety Society & saw the first money that was issued by the Treasurer or Society[.] It was given to Brother Bump (in exchange for other notes) who was the first to Circulate it[.] I also he[a]rd President Joseph Smith jr. declare . . . that if we would give heed to the commandments the Lord had given this morning all would be well. May the Lord bless Brother Joseph with all the Saints & support the above named institution & Protect it so that every weap[o]n formed against it may be [broken] & come to nought while the Kirtland Safety Society shall become the greatest of all institutions on EARTH. [^15]

Holders of the bank bills, however, experienced difficulty circulating them, even in the first two weeks. One contemporary historical record reported:

Mr. D. B. Hart, of Mentor, informs us that he received the first Mormon bill that was placed in circulation by this bank. He happened to be in Kirtland the Saturday evening preceding the Monday morning on which the bank was first opened for business, and, having a debt against some of the chief Mormon worthies, was, upon requesting payment, [proferred] one of the new Mormon ten-dollar bank-bills. He received it, but the next Monday morning, finding it impossible to use it for any legitimate commercial ends, he presented it to the officers of the bank, demanding its redemption in something which should pass for a legal tender among his neighbors. They were very reluctant to oblige him, and, in fact, refused to do so until he threatened them with the law, when some one, not an officer of the bank, stepped up to him and [proferred] him a genuine ten-dollar bill in exchange for his spurious one. [^16]

A chain reaction began in which bills of the bank were discounted—and as soon as noteholders had trouble redeeming the discounted bills, the bills became even more heavily discounted.

January 21, 1837: Payments in specie are suspended.

Just two weeks after the bank opened for trading, the officers decided to suspend all payments in specie (gold, silver, or bills or notes from other institutions). One reason for this decision was described by Warren Cowdery in a report in the Messenger and Advocate:

Enemies . . . were willing to receive the bills, come and demand the specie on them, and when the notes become due that were given for bills at the bank, avail themselves of that clause of the statute which we have quoted to avoid payment, still the officers of the bank continued to redeem their paper when presented. Previously to the commencement of discounting by the bank, large debts had been contracted for merchandize in New York and other cities, and large contracts entered into for real estate in this town, and adjoining towns, some of them had fallen due and must be met or incur forfeitures of large sums.—These causes, we are bound to believe, operated to induce the officers of the bank to let out larger sums than their better judgements dictated, which almost invariably fell into, or passed through the hands of those who sought our ruin. . . . Hundreds who were enemies, either came or sent their agents and demanded specie till the officers thought best to refuse payment. This fact was soon rumored abroad as upon the wings of the wind; some returned their bills with curses, and some with entreaties for their redemption according to the character, temper and disposition of the holders. Some contended that the bank was down and refused to take its paper, others contended that it was yet good or would soon be made good, and continued to use it and buy land and all kinds of property with it. Holders of the bills from abroad came and purchased property of people, in this place and paid in bills of our own bank, while others residing here were actively engaged in recommending the paper, and purchasing property abroad. Speculators and others continued to trade in the bills without any fixed marketable value, sometimes at one rate of discount and sometimes at another, till there was no reasonable hope that it would ever be all returned to the bank. [^17]

Newspaper reports also warned the community that it was unlawful to trade the notes and that those trading them could be heavily fined. With heavy demand for specie payment for the bank notes, the bank's liquid reserves were wiped out. Although the estimated reserves were about fifteen thousand dollars, which should have been sufficient, there was a run on the bank, [^18] resulting in the suspension of the specie payments. On January 24, three days after the suspension, Wilford Woodruff recorded: "We [were] threatened by a mob from Pa[i]nesville to visit us that night & demolish our Bank & take our property but they did not [appear] but the wrath of our enemies appears to be kindled against us . . . may the Lord show us mercy & deliver us from the hand of our enemies for Christ sake." [^19]

Antagonism against the Church increased when merchants, farmers, and others in the community holding notes couldn't redeem them. However, still hoping to turn the situation around, Joseph Smith and other Church leaders asked members of the Church to buy stock in the bank. In the January Messenger and Advocate the Prophet said, "We invite the brethren from abroad, to call on us, and take stock in our Safety Society." [^20]

February 10, 1837: Second charter application.

Still hoping to salvage the bank operation, Church leaders decided to apply again for a charter from the Ohio legislature. In this application, they requested that capital stock be reduced from the previous million-dollar proposal to only $300,000. [^21] Though five influential non-Mormons supported this second application, it was rejected. Had a new charter been granted by the legislature, it would have accomplished at least two major purposes: it would have helped instill confidence in the bank notes, and it would have helped Joseph Smith and the Church avoid further legal problems.

February 1837: Lawsuits against leaders begin.

February 1837 marked the beginning of numerous lawsuits, arrests, and court appearances that lasted until Joseph Smith left Kirtland. Samuel D. Rounds, who filed the first lawsuits, was apparently acting in behalf of Grandison Newell, a wealthy Kirtland businessman and opponent of Joseph Smith and the Church. The first lawsuit filed by Rounds charged the bank officers with violating the 1816 Ohio statute, which prohibited banking except by authorized corporations. From February through July 1837, Joseph Smith was arrested six times and repeatedly appeared in court. Lawsuits against other bank officers ensued but eventually were dismissed except those against the chief officers of the bank, Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith.

May 1837: Nationwide banking panic.

A banking panic occurred not only in Kirtland but throughout the country in the spring of 1837, resulting in the collapse of many banks. Most banks in the country suspended payments in specie, just as the Kirtland Safety Society Bank did. Specie payments were suspended first by New York banks on May 10; northern city banks followed on May 11, and Ohio banks on May 17. [^22] Dale W. Adams, in researching bank failures, concluded that "a number of the banks in Ohio and virtually all of the banks in Michigan failed in the late 1830s." [^23]

Historian Samuel Eliot Morrison summarized the situation: "[Martin] Van Buren was no sooner seated in the White House than American mercantile houses and banks began to fail, and there were riots in New York over the high cost of flour. In May [1837], after almost every bank in the country had suspended specie payments, and the government had lost $9 million through the collapse of pet banks, the President summoned Congress for a special session. In the meantime, there was widespread suffering." [^24]

Church leaders did all they could to help those who suffered because of the bank failure. Jonathan Crosby recalled:

In the spring [1837] I went to work on a house for the Prophet Smith, there was several hands at work on the same building, we took Kirtland money for pay, but it would not pass only for a short time, and hard times came on, provisions high and the money would not [buy] it and the workmen all left, but myself, they went off in the country to get work, but I stayed and helped to work until everything was gone and we had nothing to eat. I then spent a day running about trying to [buy] with Kirtland money, but could get nothing. [I] went home sorrowful [and] sat down with my wife. Now what shall we do? Well, I said, in the morning I will go tell Sister Emma . . . how it is with us, and we won't starve in one night. It was then night.

Just at that time Pres. Joseph Young and Wm. Cahoon came in and learning our poverty offered to lend us some [flour] and potatoes for supper and breakfast. It was very thankfully received. The next morning I went back to work with a resolution to tell Sister Emma of our poverty and see if she would let us have some provision; well I went to work and did not go in to see her, but in about 2 or 3 hours she came in and brought a nice ham of bacon, and said I do not know how you are off for provision, but you have stopped and worked, while the others are all gone therefore I thought I would make a present of a ham of bacon. I thanked [her] very much, and told her of our destitute situation, well she said, I will let you have some [flour]. . . . Then, at night a company of 5 or 6 of the brethren with myself went down the [Chagrin] river 2 or 3 miles a fishing gone all night, catched a nice lot of fish, so we lived well again. [^25]

June 1837: Shareholders withdraw from bank.

Despite the setbacks in obtaining a state charter and in suspending specie payment, the Prophet hoped for the bank's rescue. He continued to encourage the Saints to invest in the bank, and twice in April he warned that the bank couldn't succeed unless they accepted bank notes. By June he and other officers concluded that the odds against the bank's succeeding were too great. On June 8, ten stockholders, including the Prophet, transferred their stock to Oliver Granger and Jared Carter and withdrew from the bank. Joseph wrote:

I resigned my office in the "Kirtland Safety Society," disposed of my interest therein, and withdrew from the institution; being fully aware, after so long an experiment, that no institution of the kind, established upon just and righteous principles for a blessing not only to the Church but the whole nation, would be suffered to continue its operations in such an age of darkness, speculation and wickedness. Almost all banks throughout the country, one after the other, have suspended specie payment, and gold and silver have risen in value in direct ratio with the depreciation of paper currency. The great pressure of the money market is felt in England as well as America, and bread stuffs are everywhere high. [^26]

By June 20, twenty-nine shareholders withdrew from the bank and transferred their stock to the new officers. [^27]

Joseph Smith suffered overwhelming financial losses and embarrassments from the bank's failure. He had personally borrowed money to keep the bank open, so when the bank closed, his financial losses were greater than those of most investors; in fact, he suffered more financial losses than all other investors except one. His personal investment in bank stock totaled $1360. He had also borrowed money, about $4250, from two banks. In early 1837, in an attempt to repay the loans, he sold $5100 worth of land within a three-month period of time. [^28]

August 1837: Joseph warns against bank bills.

Warren Cowdery, editor of the Church newspaper, wrote about the Church's management of the bank after the Prophet resigned and indicated that the financial mistakes made by Church leaders were unintentional:

Respecting the man[a]gement of our banking institution, much has been said, and various opinions and conjectures offered by friends and foes. We are not bankers, bank stock holders, or financiers. We believe that banking . . . is as much a regular science, trade or business, as those of law, physics. . . .

We are not prepared in our feelings to censure any man, we wish to extend that charity to others, which under similar circumstances we should claim at their hands. . . .Permit us also further to remark, that it is no more consistent with our feelings and our wishes, than our duty, to say who under the then existing circumstances would have done any better. Other men under far more propitious circumstances . . . have failed. . . . It is easy to see, when the deed is done, the die cast and the time gone by, where there were errors. . . . They may have been errors of the head and not of the heart. [^29]

After Joseph resigned from the bank, Frederick G. Williams was appointed president and Warren Parrish became cashier. Against the advice of Joseph, they issued more bills, which drove down the already low value of the original bills, further agitating the community. Though Parrish and other bank officers were accused of dishonesty, fraud, and counterfeit coin distribution, they proceeded to print more money. At that point, the Prophet himself issued a public caution in the Church newspaper that the bills were worthless:

To the brethren and friends of the Church of the Latter-day Saints: I am disposed to say a word relative to the bills of the "Kirtland Safety Society Bank." I hereby warn them to beware of speculators, renegades, and gamblers, who are duping the unwary and unsuspecting, by palming upon them those bills, which are of no worth here. I discountenance and disapprove of any and all such practices. I know them to be detrimental to the best interests of society, as well as to the principles of religion. [Signed] Joseph Smith, Jun. [^30]

Aware of spurious practices occurring in the bank itself, George A. Smith stated: "Warren Parrish was the teller of the bank, and a number of other men who apostatized were officers. They took out of its vault, unknown to the President or cashier, a hundred thousand dollars, and sent their agents around among the brethren to purchase their farms, wagons, cattle, horses and every thing they could get hold of. The brethren would gather up this money and put it into the bank, and those traitors would steal it and send it out to buy again, and they continued to do so until the plot was discovered and payment stopped." [^31]

Joseph Smith, suspecting that Parrish was embezzling bank funds, went to Frederick G. Williams—who was, in addition to a counselor in the First Presidency, a justice of the peace—for a warrant to search Parrish's trunk. According to Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother, the request "was flatly refused. 'I insist upon a warrant,' said Joseph, 'for if you will give me one, I can get the money, and if you do not, I will break you of your office.' 'Well, break it is, then,' said Williams, 'and we will strike hands upon it.' 'Very well,' said Joseph, 'from henceforth I drop you from my quorum, in the name of the Lord.'" [^32]

Many of those who were defrauding the bank later formed a secret group to depose Joseph.

October 1837: Joseph and Sidney go to trial.

Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were tried by jury in October 1837 on the February lawsuit by Samuel D. Rounds for having violated the 1816 law that prohibited banking except by authorized corporations. Evidence indicates the lawsuit was initiated by influential enemies of the Church. The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon felt they had a substantial legal case; nevertheless, each was found guilty and fined one thousand dollars plus costs. Joseph and Sidney appealed the fine.

November 1837: The bank closes its doors.

Although the last entry in the bank's stock ledger was made on July 2, 1837, the bank did not formally close until November. The new officers did not want to risk additional lawsuits. As a result of the closure, many persons lost their investments and left the Church. It has been estimated that the total losses were a little over forty thousand dollars. The average loss, therefore, would have been about one hundred dollars to two hundred dollars, or about one-fourth to one-half of an individual's yearly income in 1837 Kirtland. [^33] This was a considerable sum for families in Kirtland. Christopher Crary wrote, "The failure of the Kirtland Bank left them in destitute circumstances, and with very ill feelings with those who had placed their money in the bank. Many, not strong in the faith, seceded. Among them, some who were supposed to have joined the church out of speculative motives, hoping to make money out of the concern. The quarrel became quite serious, resulting in the burning of the printing office." [^34]

One faithful Kirtland Mormon, Oliver Huntington, described his father's entrapment in a mortgage held by Jacob Bump: "One year had not rolled away and brother Bump had denied the faith and refused to lift the mortgage, and father could not pay, having bestowed all his surplus money upon the bank and the poor, so when the bank broke we were broken and as poor as the best of the Mormons; well, we expected to become poor but not quite so quick." [^35]

Knowing that Joseph Smith's losses were great, the non-member community emphasized his financial difficulties and used them to discredit him and the Church, thus hurting the image of the Church not only in Kirtland but in surrounding communities as well.

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCAftermath of the Bank Failure

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCIn January 1838 the sheriff was about to arrest the Prophet and take him into custody. Luke Johnson, the local constable, learning of the sheriff's intention, immediately went to Joseph's home and arrested him on a fifty dollar charge for another judgment, explaining that he had done so in order to prevent Joseph's arrest on a more serious charge. [^36] This was the Prophet's final arrest in Kirtland.

Realizing that it was unsafe for him to remain in Kirtland, Joseph prepared to leave the area. Hepzibah Richards wrote to her brother Willard, "The lives of the Presidents have been seriously threatened. We do not dare to have Cousin B[righam Young] return to this place." [^37]

The Prophet would undoubtedly have suffered fewer losses and escaped the mounting abuse had he left earlier. And even after being forced to leave, he spent considerable effort, until his death, to repay notes and loans. The fact that he and other founders of the bank repaid the bulk of their debts, even when distant from Kirtland, points out their desire to maintain their integrity.

Before leaving Kirtland, Joseph appointed Oliver Granger to be his business agent and settle remaining debts. By October 1838, progress had been made. The Prophet wrote:

As I have been accused of "running away, cheating my creditors,["] etc., I will insert one of the many cards and letters I have received from gentlemen who have had the best opportunity of knowing my business transactions, and whose testimony comes unsolicited:

A Card.

Pain[e]sville, October 19, 1838.

We, the undersigned, being personal acquaintances of Oliver Granger, firmly believe that the course which he has pursued in settling the claims, accounts, etc., against the former citizens of Kirtland township, has done much credit to himself, and all others that committed to him the care of adjusting their business with this community, which also furnishes evidence that there was no intention on their part of defrauding their creditors.

[Signed] Thomas Griffith

John S. Seymour. [^38]

In a letter to Granger in 1841, the Prophet indicated concern for the "New York debts" for goods sold in the store and wrote, "I should be much pleased to hear that they were settled." By this time, the mortgage on the temple was paid off, which Joseph Smith acknowledged by adding, "I was very much gratified." [^39]

Perhaps the best summary of the banking operation is made by the Prophet himself, just before his resignation from the bank: "It seemed as though all the powers of earth and hell were combining their influence in an especial manner to overthrow the Church at once, and make a final end. Other banking institutions refused the 'Kirtland Safety Society's' notes. The enemy abroad, and apostates in our midst, united in their schemes, flour and provisions were turned towards other markets, and many became disaffected toward me as though I were the sole cause of those very evils I was most strenuously striving against, and which were actually brought upon us by the brethren not giving heed to my counsel." [^40]

In an overall perspective, the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society Bank was a refiner's fire for the Church. It was a test. No doubt sensing this dark time over a year earlier, Joseph Smith prophesied that "Satan's kingdom [will] be laid in ruins, with all his black designs; and the Saints will come forth like gold seven times tried in the fire, being made perfect through sufferings and temptations, and that the blessings of heaven and earth will be multiplied upon their heads." [^41]

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
