Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

19

Apostasy, Persecution, and Mobs

"A dreadful spirit reigns in . . . those who are opposed to this Church. . . . Their leading object seems to be to get all the property of the Church . . . and drive them out of the place." (Hepzibah Richards.)

In 1837-38, the final years of the Church in Kirtland, apostasy and persecution engulfed the Saints. Joseph Smith, in 1836, had prophesied of such severe trials: "Brethren, for some time Satan has not had power to tempt you. Some have thought that there would be no more temptation. But the opposite will come; and unless you draw near to the Lord you will be overcome and apostatize." [^1]

At least three things hastened the end of the Church era in Kirtland. One was economic: members were not able to survive rampaging speculation, debt, unemployment, economic problems, and the failure of the bank. The second was an indomitable dark spirit that consumed many of the members and leaders, causing them to leave. The third, organized persecution and violent mob action, came from older residents of the community and from bitter members who apostatized from the Church or were excommunicated.

Economic Factors

An inflationary economy raged in Kirtland from 1830 to 1837 with land prices rising from $6.54 to $44.48 per acre. [^2] The Painesville Telegraph reported steep inflation and land speculation in 1836:

For the last eight or ten days there has been rather an unusual degree of activity in buying and selling real estate at this place and Fairport. We are assured by gentlemen who have the means of knowing, that real estate to the amount of ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS has been sold during the last ten days and at a steady advance in prices from day to day. We would mention one instance among many others, in evidence of the rise. A certain piece of property which sold four or five weeks since for $10,000 was sold last Monday for $20,000. The present proprietor has refused $25,000. A large number of other lots, some of which sold for ten dollars per foot two or three months since are now selling for from $50 to $75 per foot. [^3]

In an editorial in the Messenger and Advocate in June 1837, Warren Cowdery wrote, "Real estate rose from one to eight hundred per cent[,] and in many cases more." He also referred to "every article of food rising nearly one hundred per cent" in one year. [^4] Many of the Saints speculated on rising property values by signing notes, borrowing money, or by loaning money to people who later could not pay. Heber C. Kimball, returning from a mission in October 1836, noted:

We were very much grieved . . . on our arrival in Kirtland, to see the spirit of speculation that was prevailing in the Church. Trade and traffic seemed to engross the time and attention of the Saints. When we left Kirtland [in May 1836] a city lot was worth about $150; but on our return, to our astonishment, the same lot was said to be worth from $500 to $1000, according to location; and some men, who, when I left, could hardly get food to eat, I found on my return to be men of supposed great wealth; in fact everything in the place seemed to be moving in great prosperity, and all seemed determined to become rich; in my feelings they were artificial or imaginary riches. This appearance of prosperity led many of the Saints to believe that the time had arrived for the Lord to enrich them with the treasures of the earth, and believing so, it stimulated them to great exertions. [^5]

Greed and the desire for riches led to individuals taking unfair advantage of others, resulting in misunderstanding and criticism. An article in the May 1837 issue of the Messenger and Advocate described some as "guilty of wild speculation and visionary dreams of wealth and worldly grandeur, as if gold and silver were their gods, and houses, farms and merchandize their only bliss or their passport to it." [^6] Members from other areas who were preparing to move to Kirtland were also warned: "Beware of such as attack you as soon as you enter this place, and begin to interrogate you about the amount of money you have, and to importune you for it, with assurances that you shall have it refunded with interest, and that the Lord shall bless you abundantly; yea, and multiply blessings upon you. Of such we say beware. They take advantage of your honest simplicity, obtain your available means, and then desert you." [^7]

As the economic problems multiplied, poverty prevailed. In her journal, Caroline Crosby tells of hard days her family had:

We became very short of provisions, several times ate the last we had and knew not where the next meal was coming from. We then had an opportunity to try the charity of the brethren, who were many of them in the same predicament as ourselves. I recollect that Wm Cahoon called into see us one night, as he was going home with a few quarts of corn meal, and enquired if we had any breadstuff on hand, we told him we had not. He said he would divide what he had with us, and if my husband would go home with him, he would also divide his potatoes and meat which bore the same proportion to his meal. Joseph Young also divided with us several times in the same way, and we with him. We had numerous opportunities of dividing almost our last loaf with the brethren. [^8]

While the members clamored for wealth in 1837-38, the Church needed additional financial resources. Loans for temple construction were still outstanding, and money was needed to buy land, print books, support missionaries, assist the needy, including families of men who were away on missions, and finance other operations. Persecution, including property destruction and lawsuits, drained the Saints emotionally and financially. And the bank failure imposed even greater hardships and pressures.

Persecution in OhioHCDark Spirit and Apostasy

A dark spirit seemed to immobilize the Church. Joseph Smith saw this spirit: "As the fruits of this spirit, evil surmisings, faultfinding, disunion, dissension, and apostasy followed in quick succession . . . it seemed as though all the powers of earth and hell were combining their influence in an especial manner to overthrow the Church at once, and make a final end. . . . No quorum in the Church was entirely exempt from the influence of those false spirits who are striving against me for the mastery; even some of the Twelve were so far lost to their high and responsible calling, as to begin to take sides, secretly, with the enemy." [^9]

Eliza R. Snow wrote:

A spirit of speculation had crept into the hearts of some of the Twelve, and nearly, if not every quorum was more or less infected. Most of the Saints were poor, and now prosperity was dawning upon them—the Temple was completed, and in it they had been recipients of marvelous blessings, and many who had been humble and faithful to the performance of every duty—ready to go and come at every call of the Priesthood, were getting haughty in their spirits, and lifted up in the pride of their hearts. As the Saints drank in the love and spirit of the world, the Spirit of the Lord withdrew from their hearts, and they were filled with pride and hatred toward those who maintained their integrity. They linked themselves together in an opposing party—pretended that they constituted the Church, and claimed that the Temple belonged to them, and even attempted to hold it. [^10]

Another diarist who described conditions in Kirtland was Mary Fielding, who wrote in the summer of 1837:

I do thank my heavenly Father for the comfort and peace of mind I now enjoy in the midst of all the confusion and perplexity, and rageing of the devil against the work of God in this place. For altho here is a great number of faithful precious souls, yea the Salt of the Earth is here, yet it may be truely called a place where Satan has his seat. He is frequently [stirring] up some of the People to strife & [contention] and dissatisfaction with things they do not understand. . . . I pray God to have mercy upon us all and preserve us from the power of the great enemy who knows he has but a short time to work in. . . . I believe the voice of prayer has sounded in the House of the Lord some days from morning till night and it has been by these means that we have hitherto prevail[e]d and it is by this means only that I for one expect to prevail. [^11]

Benjamin Johnson called this time in Kirtland "the first great apostasy" and regarded it as a test he had to pass. His sorrow and disappointment at leaders who failed the test is evident:

Brethren who had borne the highest priesthood and who had for years labored, traveled, ministered and suffered together, and even placed their lives upon the same altar, now were governed by a feeling of hate and a spirit to accuse each other, and all for the love of Accursed Mammon. All their former companionship in the holy anointing in the Temple of the Lord, where filled with the Holy Ghost, the heavens were opened, and in view of the glories before them they had together shouted "Hosanna to God and the Lamb," all was now forgotten by many, who were like Judas, ready to sell or destroy the Prophet Joseph and his followers. And it almost seemed to me that the brightest stars in our firmament had fallen. Many to whom I had in the past most loved to listen, their voices seemed now the most discordant and hateful to me. From the Quorum of the Twelve fell four of the brightest: Wm. E. McLellin, Luke and Lyman Johnson and John Boyington; of the First Presidency, F. G. Williams; the three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris. Of other very prominent elders were Sylvester Smith, Warren Cowdery, Warren Parrish, Joseph Coe and many others who apostatized or became enemies to the Prophet.

I was then nineteen years of age, and as I now look back through more than fifty years of subsequent experience, to that first great Apostasy, I regard it as the greatest sorrow, disappointment and test through which I have ever passed; the first real experience among false brethren, the greatest sorrow and test for the faithful. But with all my faults I did not forget the Lord nor His chosen servants. And in this day of great affliction and separation by apostasy, I felt to call mightily upon His name, that He would never leave me to follow these examples, but that He would keep me humble, even though in poverty and affliction, so only that I fail not. [^12]

Approximately one-third of the leaders appear to have succumbed to apostasy, and they drew many others away with them. Some formed churches of their own. One group of about thirty, led by Warren Parrish, called themselves the "Parrish Party." Two men formed "The Independent Church" in Kirtland. George A. Smith described their organization: "Persons who had apostatized from the Latter-day Saints could be admitted into their party upon the terms of entering the room, shaking hands with every member and consecrating their property. This church lasted some two or three months, when a difficulty occurred between the President and the Bishop. The Bishop accused the President of being too familiar with his meat barrel; the President, in turn, accused the Bishop of being too intimate with his sheets. The result was, a split took place between the two chief authorities, and the organization ceased to exist." [^13]

George A. Smith also described the direction taken by some other apostates: "One of the members of the first Presidency, some of the seven Presidents of the seventies, and a great many others were so darkened that they went astray in every direction. They boasted of the talent at their command, and what they would do. Their plan was to take the doctrines of the Church, such as repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, throw aside the Book of Mormon, the Prophet and Priesthood, and go and unite the whole Christian world under these doctrines." [^14]

Some who left the Church later sought to be reinstated. Luke Johnson, an apostle who left the Church in Kirtland and later rejoined it in Nauvoo, wrote: "Having partaken of the spirit of speculation, which at that time was possessed by many of the saints and Elders, my mind became darkened, and I was left to pursue my own course. I lost the spirit of God, and neglected my duty." [^15] He told the Nauvoo Saints that his heart was with them and that he now wanted to "go with them into the wilderness, and continue with them to the end." [^16]

Luke's brother, Lyman, who was the senior apostle, also apostatized in Kirtland. During a visit to Nauvoo, he visited Brigham Young and told him, "If I could believe 'Mormonism' as I did when I traveled with you and preached, if I possessed the world I would give it. I would give anything, I would suffer my right hand to be cut off, if I could believe it again. Then I was full of joy and gladness. My dreams were pleasant. When I awoke in the morning my spirit was cheerful. I was happy by day and by night, full of peace and joy and thanksgiving. But now it is darkness, pain, sorrow, misery in the extreme. I have never since seen a happy moment." [^17] His life ended in tragedy, in a drowning.

Brigham Young recalled attending a meeting during this oppressive period when the Prophet was being criticized:

I rose up, and in a plain and forcible manner told them that Joseph was a Prophet, and I knew it, and that they might rail and slander him as much as they pleased, they could not destroy the appointment of the Prophet of God, they could only destroy their own authority, cut the thread that bound them to the Prophet and to God and sink themselves to hell. Many were highly enraged at my decided opposition to their measures, and Jacob Bump (an old pugilist) was so exasperated that he could not be still. Some of the brethren near him put their hands on him, and requested him to be quiet; but he writhed and twisted his arms and body saying, "How can I keep my hands off that man?" I told him if he thought it would give him any relief he might lay them on. . . .

This was a crisis when earth and hell seemed leagued to overthrow the Prophet and Church of God. The knees of many of the strongest men in the Church faltered. During this seige of darkness I stood close by Joseph, and, with all the wisdom and power God bestowed upon me, put forth my utmost energies to sustain the servant of God and unite the Quorums of the Church. [^18]

At least two hundred to three hundred persons apostatized, representing a loss of 10 to 15 percent of the Kirtland membership. About one-third of the Church leaders were either excommunicated, disfellowshipped, or removed from their Church callings. Although almost half of the leaders later repented and returned, it took a heavy toll on the Church's administrative functioning. Heber C. Kimball described this sorrowful time: "A man's life was in danger the moment he spoke in defense of the Prophet of God. During this time I had many days of sorrow and mourning, for my heart sickened to see the awful extent that things were getting to. The only source of consolation I had, was in bending my knees continually before my Father in Heaven, and asking Him to sustain me and preserve me from falling into snares, and from betraying my brethren as others had done; for those who apostatized sought every means and opportunity to draw others after them. They also entered into combinations to obtain wealth by fraud and every means that was evil." [^19]

In a January 1838 letter, John Smith, a counselor in the First Presidency, described the time as "a pruning": "I called the High Council together last week . . . and laid before them the case of the Dissenters; 28 persons were, upon mature discussion, cut off from the Church. The leaders are Cyrus Smalling, Joseph Coe, Martin Harris, Luke S. Johnson, John F. Boynton, and W. W. Parrish. We have cut off between forty and fifty of the Church since you left. Thus you see the Church has taken a high and mighty pruning, and we think she will soon rise in the greatness of her strength." [^20]

One leader who temporarily succumbed to the evil influence was Parley P. Pratt. He tells how evil forces overcame him during the summer of 1837:

After I had returned from Canada, there were jarrings and discords in the Church at Kirtland, and many fell away and became enemies and apostates. . . . At one time, I also was overcome by the same spirit in a great measure, and it seemed as if the very powers of darkness which [were] against the Saints were let loose upon me. But the Lord knew my faith, my zeal, my integrity of purpose, and he gave me the victory.

I went to Brother Joseph in tears, and, with a broken heart and contrite spirit, confessed wherein I had erred in spirit, murmured, or done or said amiss. He frankly forgave me, prayed for me and blessed me. Thus, by experience, I learned more fully to discern and to contrast the two spirits, and to resist the one and cleave to the other. And, being tempted in all points, even as others, I learned how to bear with, and excuse, and succor those who are tempted. [^21]

When the evil spirit overtook Parley P. Pratt, he defamed the Church to his friend, John Taylor. This was particularly inconsistent, since he himself had converted John Taylor in Canada. Elder Taylor, who later became President of the Church, responded:

I am surprised to hear you speak so, Brother Parley. Before you left Canada you bore a strong testimony to Joseph Smith being a Prophet of God, and to the truth of the work he has inaugurated; and you said you knew these things by revelation, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. You gave to me a strict charge to the effect that though you or an angel from heaven was to declare anything else I was not to believe it. Now Brother Parley, it is not man that I am following, but the Lord. The principles you taught me led me to Him, and I now have the same testimony that you then rejoiced in. If the work was true six months ago, it is true today; if Joseph Smith was then a prophet, he is now a prophet. [^22]

Kirtland was so engulfed by the malignancy that the Prophet realized his and other leaders' lives were in danger. His mother reported that he alerted the brethren that the insidious spirit might turn them against him to the point where they would seek to take his life: "But, brethren, beware; for I tell you in the name of the Lord, that there is an evil in this very congregation, which, if not repented of, will result in setting many of you, who are here this day, so much at enmity against me, that you will have a desire to take my life; and you even would do it, if God should permit the deed. . . . [T]urn from those principles of death and dishonesty which you are harboring in your bosoms, before it is eternally too late." [^23]

Persecution in OhioHCPersecution Intensifies in Kirtland

Persecution of the Saints began intensifying in late 1837. Merchants stopped selling grain and other goods to them, mounting an economic boycott that strangled their ability to sustain themselves. Caroline Crosby wrote: "Times became very hard. . . . It seemed that our enemies were determined to drive us away if they could possibly, by starving us. None of the business men would employ a mormon scarcely, on any conditions. And our prophet was continually harassed with vexatious lawsuits. Besides the great [apostasy] in the church, added a [double] portion of distress and suffering to those who wished to abide in the faith, and keep the commandments." [^24]

Mob action also escalated in 1837-38. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were set upon near Kirtland in August 1837 as they returned from their five-week mission to Canada. In a letter to her sister, Mary Fielding described the confrontation:

They were to come home in Dr [Sampson] Avards carrage and expected to arrive about 10 O clock at night but to their great disappointment they were prevented in a most greavous manner. They had got within 4 miles of home after a very fatueging [fatiguing] journey . . . when they were surrounded with a Mob and taken back to Panesvill[e] and secured as was supposed in a Tavern where they intended to hold a mock trial. But to the disappointment of the wretches the Housekeeper was a Member of the Church who assisted our beloved Brethren in making their escape, but as J[oseph] S[mith] says not by a Basket let down through a Window, but by the Kitchen Door. . . .

The first step they took was to find the Woods as quick as possible where they thought they should be safe. But in order [to reach] thereto they had to lay down in a swamp or by an old log just w[h]ere they happened to be so determinately were they pursued by their mad enemy in every direction. Sometimes so closely that Br[other] J[oseph] was obliged to entreat Bro Rigdon, after his exertion in running, while lying by a log to breath[e] more softly if he meant to escape.

When they would run or walk they took each other by the hand and covenanted to live and die together. Owing to the darkness of the night their persuers had to carry lighted torches which was one means of the escape of our beloved suffers as they could see them in every direction while they were clim[b]ing over fences or travling through brush or corn fields untill about 12 O clock. When after traveling as they suppose in this manner 5 or 6 miles they found the road which led homeward and saw no more of their persuers. After traveling on foot along muddy slippery roads till near 3 in the morning they arrived safe at home. . . . I suppose all these things will only add another gem to their Crown. [^25]

Some of the most impassioned persecutors were apostate Church members. Oliver Huntington, just fifteen years of age at the time, remembers apostate-inflicted persecution:

It was the life and glory of the apostates to hatch up vexatious lawsuits and strip the brethren of their property and means of removing. It seemed as though all power was given them to torment the saints. The real Mormons were designated by the appelation of Lick skillets, and every Lick skillet had to suffer; the princip[al] ones left were hunted like rab[b]its and foxes who sculk and hide in holes, and so did they. Numbers lay concealed in our house day after day, until their families could be got out of the place, one after another would come and go until we had served a variety with the best we had, and was glad of the privilege of showing favor to the righteous . . . and even the mummies were secreted there to keep them from being destroyed. [^26]

Violence perpetrated by apostates even broke out in the temple. Oliver B. Huntington describes such fighting:

Many who turned away and denied the faith . . . became the most bitter enemies of the church, and used to try every means to make a disturbance among the brethren, every day of the week, Sundays not excepted. I remember one Sunday of seeing men jumping out of the windows, I ran to see what the fuss was, and found the apostates had tried to make a real muss, as they had frequently tried before, but on this occasion I saw a dagger, the door keeper held, that was wrenched from one of their hands whilst making his way to the stand. I heard the women scream and saw the men jump out of the windows, them that had chickens hearts, and I shall always remember the sensation that came over me. [^27]

The Prophet's mother told of a similar occurrence in a Sunday service in the temple. Her husband, Joseph Smith Sr., in addressing the congregation, became critical of Warren Parrish, who earlier had been accused of issuing bank notes without authorization:

Parrish was highly incensed and made an attempt to drag him [Joseph Smith Sr.] out of the stand. My husband appealed to Oliver Cowdery, who was justice of the peace, to have him brought to order, but Oliver never moved from his seat. William, seeing the abuse which his father was receiving, sprang forward and caught Parrish, and carried him in his arms nearly out of the house. At this John Boynton stepped forward, and drawing a sword from his cane, presented it to William's breast, and said, "if you advance one step further, I will run you through." Before William had time to turn himself, several gathered around him, threatening to handle him severely, if he should lay the weight of his finger upon Parrish again. At this juncture of affairs, I left the house, not only terrified at the scene, but likewise sick at heart, to see that the apostasy of which Joseph had prophesied was so near at hand. [^28]

Incredibly, the next day Father Smith and sixteen others were charged by the apostates and arrested for rioting in the temple. Eliza R. Snow, subpoenaed as a witness, wrote: "I found the court scene as amusing as the Temple scene was appalling. The idea of such a man as Father Smith—so patriarchal in appearance—so circumspect in deportment and dignified in his manners, being guilty of riot, was at once ludicrous and farcical to all sane-minded persons. And after the four Gentile lawyers (two for each party) had expended their stock of wit, the court dismissed the case with 'no cause for action,' and Father Smith and his associates came off triumphant." [^29]

Lucy Mack Smith described clandestine meetings where many apostates congregated. David Whitmer, the Prophet's former confidant, was involved in these meetings and claimed "power to raise Joseph Smith to the highest heavens, or sink him down to the lowest hell." She recalled: "They made a standing appointment for meetings to be held every Thursday, by the pure church in the house of the Lord. They also circulated a paper in order to ascertain how many would follow them, and it was found that a large number of the Church were disaffected. In this spirit some went to Missouri and contaminated the minds of many of the brethren against Joseph, in order to destroy his influence. This made it more necessary than ever to keep a strict guard at the houses of those who were the chief objects of their vengeance." [^30]

Hepzibah Richards wrote to her brother Willard in January 1838: "A large number have dissented from the body of the church and are very violent in their opposition to the Presiden[cy] and all who uphold them. They have organized a church and appointed a meeting in the [Kirtland Temple] next sabbath. Say they will have it, if it is by the shedding of blood. They have the keys already." [^31]

The persecution climaxed shortly after midnight on January 16, 1838, when an arsonist set fire to the schoolhouse/printing office. The temple and other buildings, including the Methodist meetinghouse next to the temple, were reportedly scorched. The contents of the printing establishment burned, including many copies of the Book of Mormon. Caroline Crosby gave the following account:

About the 15th of Jan., I was awakened one night near the middle of the night, by sister Sherwood calling to me and Jane, crying fire. I awoke and as I lay near the window I looked out, and beheld the ground as light as day, while the sky was as black as a thundercloud. A deep solemnity pervaded my mind, and a very strange sensation ran through my whole system. We arose immediately, and opened the door, and beheld the printing office all in flames, and men assembling from every direction in great haste. But they were all too late, they merely threw out a few books, and some of them were scorched. The sparks and shingles were carried to an immense distance. It was the nearest building to the temple but the wind was favorable in protecting it from the flames. [^32]

About four months later an attempt was made to burn the temple when a bundle of straw with "a fire brand in it" was thrown through one of the windows. [^33]

On one occasion, a constable entered a Mormon home, seized various household items, and then publicly auctioned off the goods. His excuse was that the articles belonged to Joseph Smith and were sold to liquidate debts. When Daniel Wood learned that this constable planned to confiscate his wagon, he took it apart, placed the pieces in the back of his sled, and then covered the parts with hay. The wagon parts, transported by sled out-of-town, were hidden until the wagon could be rebuilt without the constable's knowledge.

Hepzibah Richards wrote a letter about the hostility: "A dreadful spirit reigns in the breasts of those who are opposed to this Church. They are above law and beneath whatever is laudable. Their leading object seems to be to get all the property of the Church for little or nothing, and drive them out of the place. The house of our nearest neighbor has been entered by a mob and ransacked from the top to the bottom under pretense of finding goods which it is thought they had stolen themselves. An attempt has since been made to set the same house on fire while the family were sleeping in bed." [^34]

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
