Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

20

The Prophet at the Helm

"If I obtain the glory which I have in view, I expect to wade through much tribulation." (Joseph Smith.)

The persecution and trials of 1837-38 jolted the Church. Orson F. Whitney, a grandson of Newel K. Whitney and Heber C. Kimball, described the Church at that time as "the good ship Zion, storm-tossed and tempest-driven, her sails rent, her timbers sprung, a portion of her officers and crew in open mutiny, . . . drifting with fearful rapidity toward the rocks and breakers of destruction." [^1]

Joseph, facing the storm's fury, guided the Saints and intensified his efforts to unite the faithful. This period constituted one of his severest trials. Pursued by enemies, physically weakened by earlier mob-inflicted injuries, disappointed by friends and trusted companions who tried to overthrow him, disheartened over beloved leaders and Saints who forsook him and the Church, and wearied by lawsuits and the seeming success of his adversaries, he drew even closer to the Lord. As problems mounted, he wrote to the Church in Far West: "Brethren, we have waded through affliction and sorrow thus far for the will of God, that language is inadequate to describe. Pray ye therefore with more earnestness for our redemption." [^2]

Despite the severe trials, he proceeded to do the work of God. During this time, he fulfilled a mission to Canada. And when the persecution and trials increased, he went to Far West, Missouri, to organize stakes, purchase land, hold conferences, lay out the town, and prepare to move the Church there. He also struggled to settle his affairs in Kirtland and to repay his debts. An 1838 letter to the Presidency of the Church in Kirtland indicates his intentions: "My business was so deranged that I was not able to leave it in so good a situation as I had anticipated; but if there are any wrongs, they shall all be noticed, so far as the Lord gives me ability and power to do so." [^3]

The Prophet maintained his leadership even though some denounced him as fallen and many of his closest friends and associates turned against him. His knowledge of truth received from revelations and visions, combined with his companionship with the Spirit, gave him enough spiritual and temporal stamina to withstand the buffetings of Satan. He knew he couldn't avoid problems; in fact, he told the Saints in a sermon at the end of 1837, "If I obtain the glory which I have in view, I expect to wade through much tribulation." [^4] With clarity of purpose and a vision of the future he left Kirtland, his home. But a prophet of God was still at the helm of the Church.

Joseph Smith's Ordeals and Leadership

George A. Smith said that Joseph Smith asked nothing of anyone that he would not be willing to do himself. In writing of Zion's Camp, he told how "most of the men" complained to Joseph of "sore toes, blistered feet . . . poor quality of bread. . . strong honey," and other problems, adding that "even a dog could not bark at some men without their murmuring at Joseph." But, he explained, "the Prophet Joseph took full share to the fatigues of the journey, in addition to the care of providing for the Camp and presiding over it. He walked most of the time and had a full share of blistered, bloody and sore feet, which was the natural result of walking twenty-five to forty miles a day in a hot season of the year. But, during the entire trip he never uttered a murmur or complaint . . . and many of us were careless[,] thoughtless, heedless, foolish or devilish, and yet we did not know it. Joseph had to bear with us and tutor us like children." [^5]

Levi Hancock, a loyal member of the presidency of the First Quorum of Seventy, gave further insight into the Prophet's personal trials: "The Prophet Joseph was often in trouble. If his friends gave him money, he [was] stripped of it all by his enemies. I know for I did all I could to hold up that good man. My heart would ache for him. He had to stand against thousands of his pretended friends seeking to overthrow him. It was terrible the abuse he suffered." [^6]

Joseph also had to endure petty criticism from Saints who had their own ideas as to how a prophet should act or what he should be. His cousin, George A. Smith, said that one reason a certain family left the Church was "that they had actually seen the Prophet come down out of the translating room and play with his children." [^7] And at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, he said, "when the dedication prayer was read by Joseph, it was read from a printed copy. This was a great trial of faith to many. 'How can it be that the prophet should read a prayer?' What an awful trial it was, for the Prophet to read a prayer!" [^8]

Those who stood by and defended the Prophet often received abuse themselves. Levi Hancock said that Newel K. Whitney "was cursed by some when he did his best to hold up Joseph. He would suffer himself to be slandered to save the Prophet from trouble." [^9]

Brigham Young was forced to leave Kirtland on December 22, 1837, because he defended and stood by the Prophet. The Prophet Joseph Smith said that apostates "had threatened to destroy [Brigham] because he would proclaim publicly and privately that he knew by the power of the Holy Ghost that I was a Prophet of the Most High God, that I had not transgressed and fallen as the apostates declared." [^10]

William E. McLellin, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, became one of the embittered apostates. He had previously been very close to the Prophet, and at a conference in October 1831 in Orange, Ohio, he had requested that the Prophet seek a revelation for him so he could know "the will of the Lord" concerning him. The revelation known as section 66 of the Doctrine and Covenants was given as a result of that request. McLellin wrote: "General peace and harmony pervaded the conference and much instruction to me. From thence I went home with Jos[eph] and lived with him about three weeks; and from my acquaintance then and until now I can truely say I believe him to be a man of God. A Prophet, a Seer and Revelator to the church of christ." [^11]

After the Church left Kirtland, McLellin happened to meet Heber C. Kimball, with whom he had served in the Quorum of the Twelve and who had been a missionary companion. Elder Kimball's daughter, Helen Mar Whitney, wrote about their conversation at that unexpected meeting. McLellin asked, "Brother Heber, what do you think of Joseph Smith the fallen prophet now? Has he not led you blindfolded long enough; look and see yourself, poor, your family stripped and robbed and your brethren in the same fix, are you satisfied with Joseph?" Heber replied, "Yes, I am more satisfied with him, a hundred fold, than ever I was before, for I see you in the very position that he foretold you would be in; a Judas to betray your brethren, if you did not forsake your adultery, lying and abominations. Where are you and Hinkle and scores of others; have you not betrayed Joseph and his brethren into the hands of the mob, as Judas did Jesus? Yes, verily you have; I tell you Mormonism is true, and Joseph is a true prophet of the living God." [^12]

Elder Kimball gained a deep, personal testimony of the Prophet's inspired leadership. Joseph Smith called him to go on a mission to England in June 1837, even though it might not have been a logical thing to do. Though it might seem that Joseph needed his strongest and most stalwart leaders and supporters close to him, he called two of the Twelve, Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde, as well as the soon-to-be apostle Willard Richards and other faithful brethren to go to England to establish the Church there. Within a year, when three of the missionaries returned to Kirtland, twenty-six branches were established and thirteen hundred persons baptized. The next year Elder Kimball returned to England on another mission, which produced forty-seven hundred converts.

The influx of converts more than made up for the loss of Kirtland Saints who left the Church. By 1851, there were more than forty-two thousand Church members and 642 congregations in England, and many thousands more had already immigrated to the United States. By 1856, the number of immigrants reached some twenty-four thousand.

Witnesses of Joseph's Divine Calling

Although some persons apostatized in Kirtland, most of the Saints remained stalwart and valiant, and many bore testimony to Joseph Smith's divine calling and his leadership through that difficult period.

Amasa Lyman, who walked seven hundred miles to join with the Saints, said that upon meeting the Prophet for the first time, "serenity and peace of heaven pervaded my soul, and the still small voice of the Spirit whispered its living testimony in the depths of my soul, where it has ever remained, that he was the man of God." [^13]

Daniel Tyler recalled one particularly poignant experience:

I attended a meeting "on the flats," where "Joseph" presided. Entering the school-house a little before meeting opened, and gazing upon the man of God, I perceived sadness in his countenance and tears trickling down his cheeks. . . . A few moments later a hymn was sung and he opened the meeting by prayer. Instead, however, of facing the audience, he turned his back and bowed upon his knees, facing the wall. This I suppose, was done to hide his sorrow and tears.

I had heard men and women pray—especially the former—from the most ignorant, both as to letters and intellect, to the most learned and eloquent, but never until then had I heard a man address his Maker as though He was present listening as a kind father would listen to the sorrows of a dutiful child. Joseph was at that time unlearned, but that prayer, which was to a considerable extent in behalf of those who accused him of having gone astray and fallen into sin, that the Lord would forgive them and open their eyes that they might see aright—that prayer, I say, to my humble mind, partook of the learning and eloquence of heaven. There was no ostentation, no raising of the voice as by enthusiasm, but a plain conversational tone, as a man would address a present friend. It appeared to me as though, in case the [veil] were taken away, I could see the Lord standing facing His humblest of all servants I had ever seen. . . . It was the crowning, so to speak, of all the prayers I ever heard. [^14]

Daniel McArthur, a workman in Kirtland, said, "To me he [Joseph] seemed to possess more power and force of character than any ordinary man. . . . My testimony is that he was a true Prophet of the living God, and the more I heard his sayings and saw his doings the more I was convinced that he had of a truth seen God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ, as also the holy angels of God. I cannot call to mind that I ever had a doubt enter my heart, since I first heard the gospel preached, which was in the spring of 1832, as to his being a true Prophet. It always seemed to me that if I ever did know anything on this earth I surely knew that he was a Prophet." [^15]

When the Prophet lived for a short time on the Morley farm, Lucy Diantha Morley Allen had an opportunity to observe him closely. She declared: "In all that he did he was manly and almost godlike. . . . The only words that express his looks and actions are: 'Surely he was a man of God.'" [^16]

Marinda Johnson associated with Joseph and Emma Smith daily when they lived in her parents' home for one year. She said: "During the whole year that Joseph was an inmate of my father's house I never saw aught in his daily life or conversation to make me doubt his divine mission." [^17]

Eliza R. Snow, who taught children in Joseph and Emma's home in Kirtland, testified:

I had ample opportunity of judging of his daily walk and conversation, and the more I made his acquaintance, the more cause I found to appreciate him in his divine calling. His lips ever flowed with instruction and kindness; but, although very forgiving, indulgent and affectionate in his nature, when his godlike intuition suggested that the good of his brethren, or the interests of the kingdom of God demanded it, no fear of censure, no love of approbation, could prevent his severe and cutting rebukes.

His expansive mind grasped the great plan of salvation, and solved the mystic problem of man's destiny; he was in possession of keys that unlocked the past and the future, with its successions of eternities; yet in his devotions he was as humble as a little child. Three times a day he had family worship; and these precious seasons of sacred household service truly seemed a foretaste of celestial happiness. [^18]

Eliza's brother, Lorenzo Snow, investigated the Church for about five years before joining:

I became perfectly acquainted with Joseph Smith the Prophet, I sat at his table frequently, and had many conversations with him. . . . I listened to the teaching of the Gospel and received these truths with an open heart. I was determined not to rest there. I was exceedingly anxious to know without doubt that Joseph Smith was a true prophet. . . .

I heard the Prophet discourse upon the grandest of subjects. At times he was filled with the Holy Ghost, speaking as with the voice of an archangel and filled with the power of God, his whole person shone and his face was lightened until it appeared as the whiteness of the driven snow. . . . As soon as I became perfectly convinced and satisfied in relation to truth of Mormonism[,] everything that I had thought about in a religious way was changed; every part of my system became convinced, through the power of the Holy Ghost, that God is my Father, that Jesus Christ is my elder Brother, and that Joseph Smith is His Prophet. [^19]

At the height of the Kirtland problems, when many were apostatizing, Wilford Woodruff bore fervent testimony: "I say such evidences presented in such a forcible manner ought to drive into oblivion every particle of unbelief & dubiety from the mind of the hearers, for such language[,] sentiment[,] principle[,] & spirit cannot flow from darkness. Joseph Smith jr is a prophet of God r[a]ised up for the deliverance of Israel as true as my heart now burns within me while I am penning thes[e] lines which is as true as truth itself." [^20]

Orson Pratt testified of personal knowledge of the Prophet's divine calling:

I . . . became intimately acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and continued intimately acquainted with him until the day of his death. I had the great privilege . . . of boarding . . . at his house, so that I not only knew him as a public teacher, but as a private citizen, as a husband and father. I witnessed his earnest and humble devotions both morning and evening in his family. I heard the words of eternal life flowing from his mouth, nourishing, soothing, and comforting his family, neighbours, and friends. I saw his countenance lighted up as the inspiration of the Holy Ghost rested upon him, dictating the great and most precious revelations now printed for our guide. I saw him translating, by inspiration, the Old and New Testaments, and the inspired Book of Abraham from Egyptian papyrus. . . .

I knew that he was a man of God. It was not a matter of opinion with me, for I received a testimony from the heavens concerning that matter. [^21]

And finally, "Who can justly say aught against Joseph Smith?" asked Brigham Young. "I was as well acquainted with him, as any man. I do not believe that his father and mother knew him any better than I did. I do not think that a man lives on the earth that knew him any better than I did; and I am bold to say that, Jesus Christ excepted, no better man ever lived or does live upon this earth. I am his witness. . . . I feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet whom the Lord raised up and ordained, and to whom He gave keys and power to build up the kingdom of God on earth." [^22]

Joseph's Record and Accomplishments

Myriads of journals, letters, and other documents attest to the remarkable leadership of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Among his accomplishments while the Saints were in Kirtland are these:

Â He received eighty-four revelations from God that contain clear instruction about major principles of the gospel. Many persons who were present when the revelations were received recorded their testimonies. In one case, at the Johnson home, ten men signed a document bearing testimony to all the world "that these commandments were given by inspiration of God."

Â He witnessed, with others, at least eight visions or appearances of the Father and/or the Son. He presided over meetings where many people witnessed divine manifestations that remain unparalleled in our dispensation. He saw in vision, with his counselors, the pattern for the first latter-day temple. He and Oliver Cowdery received priesthood keys of authority from Moses, Elias, and Elijah.

Â He organized, through revelation and vision, the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods. He also provided through divine revelation a full organization for the Church, including such restored offices as twelve apostles and quorums of seventies.

Â He gave the world additional scriptures, including an inspired translation of the Bible and new records of Moses and Abraham.

Â He organized missionary work and set the example himself as a missionary. He also directed that the gospel be taken to many parts of the United States, Canada, and the British Isles.

Â He directed the Saints in constructing such buildings as the Kirtland Temple and the schoolhouse/printing office.

Â He established an economic order for the Church and its members.

Â He established printing operations so that the gospel might be spread through periodicals and books, including the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants.

Â He suffered severe persecution, hardship, and personal trials. But though his own life was often in jeopardy, he continued to organize the Church, teach and comfort the Saints, and select and train leaders to ensure that the Church would continue.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Evening and Morning Star.
[^2] The Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.
[^3] The first Church hymnal.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
