Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

21

The Church Leaves Kirtland

"We turned the key and locked the door of our homes, leaving our property and all we possessed in the hands of enemies and strangers." (William F. Cahoon.)

First Presidency Moves to MissouriHCAs violence against the Saints and their leaders escalated, it was finally no longer safe for them to remain in Kirtland. The Prophet, whose life was in gravest danger, was "warned by the Spirit" [^1] and decided to move immediately to Missouri. Masses of people followed, leaving behind them their cherished family possessions and comfortable homes. In the first seven months of 1838, more than sixteen hundred Latter-day Saints left the city and headed west, most to travel to Far West, Missouri. By 1839 only about one hundred Church members remained in Kirtland.

Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother, wrote of her son's final instructions to the brethren in Kirtland: "One evening, before finishing his preparations for the contemplated journey, he sat in council with the brethren at our house. After giving them directions as to what he desired them to do, while he was absent from them, and, as he was about leaving the room, he said, 'Well, brethren, I do not recollect anything more, but one thing, brethren, is certain, I shall see you again, let what will happen, for I have a promise of life five years, and they cannot kill me until that time is expired.'" [^2]

The Prophet described the circumstances surrounding his departure:

A new year [1838] dawned upon the Church in Kirtland in all the bitterness of the spirit of apostate mobocracy; which continued to rage and grow hotter and hotter, until Elder Rigdon and myself were obliged to flee from its deadly influence, as did the Apostles and Prophets of old, and as Jesus said, "when they persecute you in one city, flee to another."

On the evening of the 12th of January, about ten o'clock, we left Kirtland, on horseback, to escape mob violence, which was about to burst upon us under the color of legal process to cover the hellish designs of our enemies, and to save themselves from the just judgment of the law.

We continued our travels during the night, and at eight o'clock on the morning of the 13th, arrived among the brethren in Norton Township, Medina county, Ohio, a distance of sixty miles from Kirtland. Here we tarried about thirty-six hours, when our families arrived; and on the 16th we pursued our journey with our families, in covered wagons towards the city of Far West, in Missouri. . . .

The weather was extremely cold, we were obliged to secrete ourselves in our wagons, sometimes, to elude the grasp of our pursuers, who continued their pursuit of us more than two hundred miles from Kirtland, armed with pistols and guns, seeking our lives. They frequently crossed our track, twice they were in the houses where we stopped, once we tarried all night in the same house with them, with only a partition between us and them; and heard their oaths and imprecations, and threats concerning us, if they could catch us; and late in the evening they came into our room and examined us, but decided we were not the men. At other times we passed them in the streets, and gazed upon them, and they on us, but they knew us not. [^3]

The Exodus: Persecution Persists

After Joseph left for Missouri, persecution of those close to him in Kirtland increased. A "vexatious" writ was filed by John C. White against Joseph Smith Sr. for "his manner of solemnizing marriages." Luke Johnson, a local constable and a former member of the Twelve, was sympathetic to the Prophet's father. He recalled:

I begged the priv[i]lege of serving the writ, and arrested the old gentleman [Joseph Smith Sr.], and took him to the magistrate's office. The court not being ready to attend to the case, I put him in a small room adjoining the entrance from the office. I also allowed his son Hyrum to accompany him. I took a nail out from over the window sash, left the room and locked the door, and commenced telling stories in the court room, to raise a laugh, for I was afraid they would hear father Smith getting out of the window; when the court called for the prisoner, I stepped into the room in the dark and slipped the nail into its place in the window, and went back and told the court that the prisoner had made his escape. White and others rushed into the room, and examined the fastenings and found them all secure, which created much surprise how the prisoner had got out. [^4]

Eliza R. Snow recalled that "the constable, who manifested the greatest astonishment of all present, finally settled the question by saying, 'It is another Mormon miracle.'" [^5]

Most families with sufficient means and equipment escaped the threatening mobs—though not without a great deal of fear and trepidation. Hepzibah Richards wrote in January 1838, "We feel we are in jeopardy every hour." [^6] Two months later she wrote, "We suffer from fear, but we hope these days of suffering will not always last." [^7]

Luman Shurtliff found Kirtland in early 1838 to be "a hell to all Saints," with fires "laid by the dozens in the basements, windows of the Saints." In their effort to cause the Saints to leave Kirtland, Luman wrote, "the apostates and mobocrats had control of the law in Kirtland, and many of our good Saints were accused of crimes and thefts that they never committed, were tried and convicted and had to pay a big sum of money or get out of town." [^8]

Many Latter-day Saints simply abandoned homes and property as they fled Kirtland. William F. Cahoon wrote of his anguish: "I left a good house & rooms in it well finished & furnished of my own," he wrote, "and also a good lot all paid for, which I had labored hard to get. I could not dispose of it, so I turned the key & locked the door and left it & from that day to this I have not received anything for my property. It is now in the hands of strangers, however we left it, and went on our journey to Missouri." [^9]

Typical of Saints who faced the uncertainties of the exodus from Kirtland with little or no money or means was Truman O. Angell, the skilled temple carpenter. He and his wife and two small children left in a one-horse wagon. Their first day out of Kirtland, he had to spend his last money to repair the wagon, leaving him with "a rickety wagon, a balky horse, not a penny in my pocket, a family to feed and a thousand miles to go." [^10]

Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother, described her family's experience:

Sometimes we lay in our tents, through driving storms; at other times we were traveling on foot through marshes and quagmires. Once in particular, we lay all night exposed to the rain, which fell in torrents, so that when I arose in the morning, I found that my clothing was perfectly saturated with the rain. However, I could not mend the matter by a change of dress, for the rain was still falling rapidly, and I wore my clothes in this situation, three days; in consequence of which I took a severe cold, so that when we arrived at the Mississippi river, I was unable to walk or sit up. After crossing this river, we stopped at a hut, a most unlovely place, yet the best shelter we could find. This hut was the birth-place of Catharine's son Alvin. The next day my husband succeeded in getting a comfortable place, about four miles distant, for Catharine and her infant, and they were carried thither on a lumber wagon, the same day. [^11]

Kirtland Camp

One effort to see that the Saints traveled to Missouri in safety was the organization of "Kirtland Camp," which was initiated by the seventies. Elias Smith, seventies quorum clerk and historian, described a meeting of the quorum in the temple on March 10, 1838:

The Spirit of the Lord came down in mighty power, and some of the Elders began to prophesy that if the quorum would go up in a body together, and go according to the commandments and revelations of God, pitching their tents by the way, that they should not want for anything on the journey that would be necessary for them to have; and further that there should be nothing wanting towards removing the whole quorum of Seventies that would go in a body, but that there should be a sufficiency of all things for carrying such an expedition into effect. [^12]

James Foster, a president of the quorum, saw in vision a company of about five hundred persons, "moving in order, encamping in order by the way." [^13]

Zerah Pulsipher also testified of divine direction to the brethren: "One evening, while we were in the attic story of the Lord's House, and while Joseph Young, I think, was at prayer, I saw a Heavenly messenger, who appeared to be a very tall man dressed in a white robe from head to foot. He cast his eyes on me and on the rest of the Council and said, 'Be one, and you shall have enough,' and soon after the way was opened before us, so that we received money and means for clothing for the poor and to prepare for our removal. James Foster and Jonathan Dunham also saw the angel at the same time I did." [^14]

Benjamin Johnson described the company, which had originally been organized to assist needy members of the seventies in their journey to Missouri, as the "Kirtland Poor Camp." "The wealthy had apostatized," he said, "and those who had means enough got an early start; while the poor, by all journeying together could make an outfit and travel with much less expense." [^15] Those who could not afford to contribute toward the expenses were told they could pay later. As Zerah Pulsipher said, 'We could not neglect them for all there was against them was that they were poor and could not help themselves," adding, "They wanted to join us and get out of that hell of persecution." [^16]

Hepzibah Richards contemplated leaving with Kirtland Camp. In a letter to her sister in Massachusetts, she described the camp's plans:

Probably an hundred and 25 families or more remain [in Kirtland]. They will go in large wagons covered square on the top with canvas or something that will turn water. Will take their clothing, beds, and cooking utensils and tent by the way. Fifty [yards] of common sheeting will make a tent that will accommodate eighteen persons. Women and children will sleep in the wagons. Some will take along light crick bedsteads, and other measures will be taken to prevent sleeping on the ground as much as possible. They will have runners to go before and lay up provisions, that the inhabitants may not take advantage of their necessities to increase their prices. They will travel five days in a week; stop on Saturdays to bake and wash. Sabbath hold meetings. Will be eight or ten weeks on the road. They design to take along the poor and the lame, deeming it wrong to leave those who have a desire to go but have no means. It will be required of them to refund it as fast as they are able. This will probably be accomplished, but it must be by mighty effort. Duck will be preferred for tent cloth—will turn rain better. The camp will move but slowly. The men will walk much of the way. [^17]

Christopher Crary, a non-Mormon resident of Kirtland, described the Saints' pathetic plight as they left Kirtland:

When their bank failed, all their imaginary wealth vanished; their money was gone; their teams were gone; their provisions were gone; their credit was gone; their stores of goods disappeared. No community could be left in more destitute circumstances, and the only alternative was for them to leave—leave their Temple, their homes, all that they had held dear, and go to, they knew not where. And how to go was a serious question. . . . In 1838 the camp was ready to start, and left in a body, making a string of teams more than a mile long. [^18]

The Kirtland Camp left on July 5, 1838, with 515 members—249 males and 266 females; 97 horses, 22 oxen, 69 cows, and 1 bull. Heads of families signed a camp constitution in which they agreed to certain regulations that would ensure an orderly journey to Far West. The camp was generally awakened at 4:00 each morning. At 4:20 the three or four families in each of the twenty-seven tents joined together for prayers. By seven or eight o'clock, the Saints were on their way, usually traveling from twelve to twenty miles a day.

Although the journey was hard, the Lord watched over the Saints. As they passed near Bellefontaine, Ohio, a wagon wheel ran over a boy's leg. Elias Smith recorded what happened: "As the Lord would have it, and to the astonishment of all—considering the weight of the load on the wagon—[the boy] received no particular injury, although the wheel ran over [his] leg on a hard road without any obstruction whatever. The wheel made a deep cut in the limb, but after hands were laid on him in the name of the Lord, the boy was able to walk considerable in the course of the afternoon. This was one, but not the first, of the wonderful manifestations of God's power unto us on the journey." [^19]

Near Dayton, Ohio, the camp faced severe drought. Zerah Pulsipher wrote: "It was then very dry and the wells so low that it was difficult to get water for our animals in the dry part of the country if we should go on. But we inquired of the Lord for what was best and we were impressed to go on, not knowing what we should do for drink but the day following there fell such a flood of water that the low places in the country were full and we got along very well." [^20]

With the help of the Lord and the combined faith and strength of each other, the members of Kirtland Camp traveled 870 miles in about three months, arriving in Far West on October 2, 1838. There they were greeted by the First Presidency and others "with open arms, and escorted . . . into the city." For those who had made the long journey, it was truly a day "long to be remembered." [^21]

---
Notas:
[^1] The scourge came when the body of the Saints left Kirtland, with the gospel and its blessings withdrawn from the community. In past gospel dispensations, the Lord placed scourges upon a land by withdrawing the prophets. It seems reasonable to conclude that one aspect of the scourge was that the Prophet Joseph Smith had left from Kirtland. Some of those who remained in Kirtland eventually joined other churches or religious movements.
[^2] A second possibility might be Kirtland's continual decline in population. At the time the Saints were there in the 1830s, it was one of the largest towns in northern Ohio, with an estimated population of 3,230. Kirtland and a neighboring town, Cleveland, had about equal populations. But by 1890 Kirtland's population dwindled to 909 while Cleveland's mushroomed to 261,000.
[^3] Not only did the population of Kirtland dwindle, but commerce and industry also declined after the Saints left, while other areas in northeastern Ohio, such as Cleveland, Youngstown, and Akron, became major industrial centers.
[^4] The Northern Times.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] The Book of Mormon.
[^7] The Elders' Journal.
[^8] August 1835, Michigan; visit members and preach.
[^9] July to September 1836, New York, bank business; Boston, preach.
[^10] February 1837, Michigan; bank business.
[^11] July and August 1837, Canada; preach, baptize, and bless the Saints and strengthen the branches.
[^12] September to December 1837, Far West, Missouri; organize stakes, purchase land, and survey the town.
