Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts ( 1989)

22

The Church Returns to Kirtland

"The scourge that was placed upon the people . . . is being lifted today. We have a new day here." (Ezra Taft Benson.)

After the Saints had moved to Missouri and then Illinois, the Lord declared that Kirtland would be reestablished and would again be a stronghold of the Church. In 1841, he declared, "I, the Lord, will build up Kirtland." "But," he added, "I, the Lord, have a scourge prepared for the inhabitants thereof." (D&C 124:83.) In his writings and talks, Joseph Smith referred at least nine times to Kirtland's future, particularly in view of this prophecy. The night before his death at the hands of an angry mob in a jail in Carthage, Illinois, in 1844, he reported a "dream or vision" in which he felt he "was back in Kirtland, Ohio . . . and was contemplating how it might be recovered from the curse upon it." [^1]

Earlier he had made prophecies to the Saints in Kirtland. For instance, he told Joseph Young that a future "stake at Kirtland . . . will be one of the princip[al] ones of Zion." Then, apparently referring to the faithful Saints who comprised the early Kirtland stake, he said that their posterity would be those who would be involved in reestablishing the stake there. Joseph Young reported that he also heard his brother, Brigham Young, make similar statements. [^2]

In a letter to members in Kirtland in October 1841, Hyrum Smith, as "Patriarch for the whole Church," also said that while the Saints must leave their land and property in Kirtland, "yet your children may possess them, but not until many years shall pass away. . . . Thus saith the Lord, . . . and then I will send forth and build up Kirtland, and it shall be polished and refined according to my word." [^3]

Two things are clear from Hyrum's letter and from other statements, revelations, and prophecies: a "curse" or "scourge" was to come upon Kirtland, and Kirtland would eventually be built up again.

What was that curse or scourge? There are three possibilities.

New Growth for the Church in Ohio

The Church began to rebuild in northeastern Ohio in the early 1950s, when property was purchased in Cleveland for a chapel, the first LDS meetinghouse to be built in that area since the 1830s. The Cleveland Press editorialized: "If Joseph Smith, the dedicated and courageous founder of the Mormon Church, were living today, he would take special pride in the news that a new Mormon Chapel shortly will be built on Lake Avenue near Edgewater Park. The building would, for him, undoubtedly be the confirmation of his own faith, once shared by too few in northern Ohio, that the Church had the spiritual strength and economic substance to live and grow." [^4]

President David O. McKay dedicated the building on May 2, 1954. At that time the Church's membership in the Cleveland area was about one thousand. President McKay subsequently directed that the Church purchase the historic John Johnson home in Hiram. This first purchase of historic property in the Kirtland area was completed March 23, 1956.

Another landmark occasion brought President Spencer W. Kimball to northeastern Ohio on January 28, 1976, for a meeting to commemorate the 143rd anniversary of the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom, which was received in Kirtland in 1833. About nineteen thousand people attended the missionary-oriented session in the Cleveland Coliseum, and it has been estimated that nearly one thousand baptisms resulted from the meeting. President Kimball made initiatives after this visit that resulted in acquisition of the Whitney store and other properties in Kirtland.

The first ward in Kirtland since the 1830s was created on June 5, 1977. Jack Davis, who was called as the bishop, is a latter-day witness that the Lord is building up Kirtland. Reflecting on his move to the area, he told members of his ward, "I was in another area and working in a job unrelated to the job I have here in Kirtland. For the first time in the history of our company, an individual was assigned to a job in which he was not experienced and given new responsibilities. People wondered why it was done—I wondered why it was done. Little did I know. But in the 38th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, we are given a clue as to why I—and many of you—came here: 'Wherefore, for this cause I gave unto you the commandment that ye should go to the Ohio.' There is no doubt in my mind that the Saints who have now gathered in the Ohio were directed to be here by the Lord for the building up of this area." [^5]

The year 1979 was a significant one for the Saints in northern Ohio. On August 7, the stakes there, with a membership of some ten thousand, were organized into the Cleveland Region. And on October 14, while serving as president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Ezra Taft Benson broke ground for a meetinghouse in Kirtland, the first building of the Church to be built there since the temple was completed in 1836.

The Scourge Is Lifted

While in Kirtland, President Benson declared, "The scourge that was placed upon the people in that prophecy [D&C 124:83] is being lifted today." He then added, "Our prophecy said that yet your children may possess the Kirtland lands, but not until many years shall pass away. Those many years have, I feel, passed away, and now is the time. Now is the time to arise and shine and look forward to great progress in this part of the Lord's vineyard." [^6]

Those who heard President Benson will never forget this day. Stake President Gordon Watts, a descendent of early Kirtland pioneer Israel Barlow, described his feelings as the scourge was lifted, saying, "It was as if a light broke through the heavens. Kirtland would never be the same." Joseph H. Young, mission president and a descendant of Brigham Young, wrote in his journal that night that "a great spirit was felt by all." He compared the singing of the closing hymn, "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning," to how it must have been at the Kirtland Temple dedication when the same hymn was sung. "We were all so moved that the building rocked with the sound of our singing," he wrote.

Three years later, on October 17, 1981, President Benson returned to dedicate the new meetinghouse. "I feel that I have been walking on sacred ground," he commented, "and my soul is subdued and my feelings rather tender. . . . As long as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints endures, and that will be forever, Kirtland, Ohio, will have great significance." [^7]

Many persons at the dedication testified that they felt the presence of the early Kirtland Saints. Zane F. Lee, architect of the meetinghouse, is a descendant of Levi Hancock, who was present at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. He reported that "when the choir and congregation sang the hymn 'The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning,' I felt the same spirit of exultation that has been described in the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. . . . I felt at that moment that angels were singing with us and many beyond the veil rejoiced in the renewal of this work so long delayed." [^8]

Another significant milestone in Kirtland was the organization of a stake there on October 16, 1983. President Benson, who presided on that occasion, reiterated that the Church in Kirtland would continue to grow and that the prophecies of rebuilding were coming to pass. "We have barely scratched the surface of missionary work in the Kirtland area," he said. [^9]

Zane F. Lee, who was called to serve as stake president, wrote: "During the conference in which the Kirtland Stake was organized, I felt very close to Joseph Smith, who was president of the Kirtland Stake some 150 years before. I felt that he was present and approved of the proceedings. The feelings I had were such that I considered him as a very dear friend. I had never felt that way about Joseph before. I felt that he wanted me to continue or renew the work of saving souls in the area of the Kirtland Stake that he had started in the 1830s. My heart was filled to overflowing." [^10]

A Mission Is Created

The first mission in northern Ohio, the Cleveland Ohio Mission, was established by the Church on July 1, 1977, with Donald S. Brewer as the president. He had originally received a call to serve a Spanish-speaking mission in South America, but the call was subsequently changed to Ohio.

President Brewer recalled a dream that he had before he went to Ohio. "I saw myself standing in front of the Kirtland Temple speaking with a stranger," he said. "I looked up at the temple and marveled at its beautiful simplicity. Details of stone, glass, size, and surrounding shrubbery were indelibly stamped on my memory. It was not until the next morning that I became aware that I had been dreaming. It had been so real that I actually felt I could describe every detail of the temple and the surrounding area."

When he arrived in Kirtland, President Brewer went immediately to the temple, which he had not previously seen. He recorded his impression: "Now here I was in Ohio, standing in front of the Kirtland Temple on the exact spot I had been standing on in my dream some two months earlier. Was it the same as I had seen in my dream? Indeed it was—every detail was there, even to the proper direction—facing east. The vacant lot through the shrubbery and the two-story block building down the street were exactly as I had seen them in my dream, and yet this was the first time that I had ever been to Kirtland!" [^11]

The first missionaries assigned to Kirtland since the 1840s arrived on January 5, 1978. They lived in the later-to-be-restored Newel K. Whitney store, which had been purchased over twenty years earlier by the late Wilford C. Wood, whose family was holding it until the Church could use it.

There had been some concern about the Church's assigning missionaries to Kirtland, since the community had an ordinance forbidding door-to-door soliciting. There was also concern that the missionary efforts would be misunderstood by officials of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS), which had been organized after Joseph Smith was martyred and the main body of the Saints left Nauvoo, Illinois, for the Rocky Mountains. The RLDS church now owned the Kirtland Temple. To resolve the first problem, President Brewer decided to invite the citizens of Kirtland to the Whitney store building to a series of lectures on the Church, which would allow the missionaries to make appointments with those who were interested in hearing more about the Church. To resolve the second problem, he met with the local presiding official of the RLDS congregation and explained what the LDS church's plans were. The only thing the RLDS representative asked was that the missionaries make it clear that they represented "the church out in Utah." [^12]

Soon after the missionaries arrived in Kirtland, the ban on proselyting in the community was removed.

On July 1, 1984, the stakes in Akron and Kirtland were assigned to the newly created Akron Ohio Mission, which would also contain the major Church history sites in Ohio. Stanley Smoot, president of the mission, relates: "A few months after our arrival, a mission president's seminar was held in Kirtland. . . . We visited the genealogical library and heard of the great posterity program then being initiated and launched in the Kirtland Stake and in that region. We were thrilled beyond our ability to express when both I and Mary Ellen found that we had roots in Kirtland. Abraham Owen Smoot was my great-grandfather. He joined the Church in 1835. . . . Mary Ellen's great-grandfather, Daniel Wood, was also a resident of Kirtland. . . . In June of 1838, because of the persecution of the Saints, he was obliged to sell all his holdings at a discount and leave with the Saints. . . . His descendant, Wilford Wood, purchased the Whitney store [for the Church]. . . . The experiences that we enjoyed in Kirtland and Ohio are second to none in our life." [^13]

The Newel K. Whitney store was restored, and under President Gordon B. Hinckley's direction, President Benson dedicated it on August 25, 1984. In his prayer, he called the store "a hallowed place of glorious revelation." He later said, "I'm satisfied that the growth and progress in Kirtland is most satisfying to the Lord." [^14]

The Church in Hiram and Chardon

Hiram, Ohio, site of one of the largest branches of the Church in 1832, has participated in the prophesied rebuilding of the Church. A branch was organized there on April 15, 1984, and began meeting in the John Johnson home. Less than two years later, on March 22, 1986, President Benson, who had recently been sustained as President of the Church, broke ground for a meetinghouse on the historic John Johnson farm. The building was dedicated and the Hiram Ward organized in a historic meeting on March 29, 1987. Ordained as bishop was Joseph Nelson, a descendant of Omer Call, who lived in the area in the 1830s. "It has been made clear to me by Heavenly Father that Hiram is still a chosen area," Bishop Nelson said, "and there is a great work that must go forward. Satan is still working hard as he did in the 1830s to keep very special and growth experiences from taking place. But I know that his influence will be overcome and a continuation of miracles in Hiram will be a reality." [^15]

Chardon, the county seat where Joseph Smith visited frequently, is central to the Chardon Ward, created from a division of the Kirtland Ward on April 29, 1984. Richard L. McClellan, first bishop of the Chardon Ward, is a descendant of John P. Greene, president of the 1830s Parkman Branch, which covered much of the same area as the new ward. Bishop McClellan talked about his Kirtland ancestors: "Susan Kent was one of only two members of her family to leave Kirtland with the Church. Her father, Daniel Kent, lived and died on the land where my children's soccer league now plays. He is buried not far from our home. Russell King Homer visited the Prophet in Kirtland, assisted the Church, and was told his posterity would be blessed. Other ancestors, John P. Greene and his son Evan, both labored on the Kirtland Temple. John P. Greene was a major investor in the Kirtland Safety Society Bank. I can imagine their heartbreak at losing everything and fleeing west. I can also imagine the comfort they felt with the prophecy that Kirtland would someday be a land of inheritance for their descendants. One hundred and fifty years later, my family is here, beneficiaries of these prophecies. The members of the Church in northeastern Ohio enjoy a profound awareness of the unique role of the Kirtland period in the history of the Church. A special sense of dedication lingers still." [^16]

Searching for Lost Descendants

In his diary, under the date of November 19, 1832, Joseph Smith wrote a blessing for Sidney Rigdon. Referring to Sidney's posterity, he indicated that "one shall hunt after them" the way one would hunt after an animal that "hath strayed in the wilderness, & straitway findeth him and bringeth him into the fold." He then promised that "thus shall the Lord watch over his generation that they may be saved." [^17] In October 1835, the Prophet and other leaders united in prayer for several blessings: to be delivered from their afflictions; for solution to the Missouri problems; for protection against the mob; and for their posterity to be preserved and not fall. [^18]

Kirtland is the only site of early Mormon history where large numbers of members and relatives were left behind when the Church moved out. Those leaving expressed great concern for their loved ones, many of whom left the Church and remained in Kirtland. The prophecies of Joseph and Hyrum Smith connecting the rebuilding of Kirtland with descendants of those early families are now being fulfilled. When the Kirtland Stake was organized again in 1983, a substantial portion of the members were descendants of the earlier Kirtland Saints.

President Ezra Taft Benson has been an instrument in fulfilling these prophecies. From 1979 to 1986 he made five trips to the Kirtland area and met each time with nonmember descendants. During these trips he hosted receptions, visited the dairy farm of a descendant of John Johnson, and met in reunions with Whitney and Johnson families. In 1986, he met with many persons who were baptized after his trip in 1979, including families surnamed Young, Woodruff, Kimball, Rigdon, Whitney, Rich, Dudley, Ormsby, and Wood. His efforts spurred a search for other descendants of early Kirtland residents. "There is a new generation, and we love them," he said. "They are our Father's children." [^19] As a result of these efforts, members of the Kirtland Stake began a special effort to find descendants of early members who still remained in the area. Family organizations in the West were also asked to reunite families by identifying and locating long-lost cousins.

One of the first families to reestablish ties between the eastern and western family branches was the posterity of John and Elsa Johnson. A descendant, Grant Johnson of Ogden, Utah, was called with his wife on a mission to the Kirtland area. Convinced that all of John and Elsa's children were known to the western family organization, Grant was not prepared for the surprise he received upon being assigned to labor in Hiram. There he met distant cousins who showed him an old family Bible that identified five additional children not previously known. A highlight of his mission came when a busload of the western Johnsons journeyed to Ohio and were introduced to many previously unknown eastern cousins.

The Whitney family had a similar experience. Fred Whitney Rockwood, president of the Whitney family organization, reported, "As a result of the challenge of President Benson, we organized the Samuel and Suzanna Whitney family organization to include these nonmembers parts of our family in Kirtland who didn't come west with the Church. We have identified about 1,500 descendant records we didn't have. . . . We have seen relationships develop between different branches of the family that heretofore haven't know each other. We have pictures and history never known before." [^20]

Stanley Smoot related the following story:

At a Kirtland Stake conference . . . Karl Anderson, regional representative, asked the Saints to call their kin names in the phone book to see if they were related. . . .Sister Smoot started calling all of the Smoots in the phone book, and one day in Canton, Ohio, she ran across a couple who said their roots extended to the Smoots of Maryland. We visited with them in their home and were shown a book written by Vera Abston of Texas. It included eight generations of Smoots. . . . We located the branch from North Carolina, and through this experience and subsequent miracle events, . . . the Smoot family was able to begin the temple work for this Smoot family. On June 9, 1988, 485 were baptized, . . . with the potential of that many more soon to follow. [^21]

Mormons in Modern Kirtland

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints returned to Kirtland and is part of the community again. A spirit of warmth, love, and acceptance exists between the Church and the community. No longer a small frontier community, however, Kirtland now has six thousand residents, and over five million people live in a radius of seventy-five miles.

When President Gordon B. Hinckley of the First Presidency presided at the dedication of the restored Newel K. Whitney store in August 1984, the event received local and state attention from the city of Kirtland, the county of Geauga, and the state of Ohio. Edna Davis, who represented Geauga County, referred to the early Kirtland settlers and said, "We would like to show The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints that we're a lot more friendly folk right now than we were in the 1830s." [^22] A proclamation from the state of Ohio paid tribute to "the industrious and courageous pioneers of the Western Reserve who gave Kirtland a prominent place in Ohio history." [^23]

Mayor Mario V. Marcopoli of Kirtland proclaimed the week surrounding the dedication as "Heritage Days" to focus attention on the early Kirtland settlers.

A tragic event, reminiscent of the night when flames consumed the schoolhouse/printing office, occurred on the morning of May 4, 1986, when an arsonist set fire to the newly built Kirtland meetinghouse. In contrast to the earlier event, however, which resulted from malice toward the Church, the modern-day burning was attributed to someone who selected random targets, and was not directed at the Church. After the fire, hundreds of townspeople visited the charred remains and offered sympathy and support. Fire fighters were especially touched when a small girl placed a bunch of flowers in front of the smoldering building. Other churches in the community immediately offered assistance, and many persons offered to help rebuild the structure and to contribute to the reconstruction. "This is not the Mormon Church that burned," one resident commented. "It is our church." [^24]

In a unique way, the Church had finally become an accepted part of the community. The "rebuilding of Kirtland," progressing in both spiritual and physical dimensions, is testimony to the words of President Benson: "We have a new day here and a great opportunity and a great day ahead of us." Joseph Smith's Kirtland, once relegated to the role of forgotten history, is literally fulfilling the words of the Lord, that it shall be built up and "polished and refined according to my word."

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Vera Morley Anderson, "History and Travels of the Life of Isaac Morley Sr.," in Richard Henrie Morley, "The Life and Contributions of Isaac Morley" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1965), 3.
[^2] 2. History of Geauga and Lake Counties, Ohio (Philadelphia, 1878), 246.
[^3] 3. Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1950), 27.
[^4] 4. Ibid., 37.
[^5] 5. "History of Joseph Smith," Times and Seasons 4 (August 15, 1832): 289.
[^6] 6. John W. Rigdon, "Lecture on the Early History of the Mormon Church," MS., Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (hereafter cited as LDS Archives).
[^7] 7. A. W. Cowles, Moore's Rural New Yorker 23 (January 23, 1843): 61.
[^8] 8."History of Joseph Smith," Times and Seasons 4 (September 1, 1843): 304.
[^9] 9. Ibid.
[^10] 10. Ibid., 289-90.
[^11] 11. Saints' Herald 29:192.
[^12] 12. Ibid.
[^13] 13. John Murdock, "A Brief Synopsis of the Life of John Murdock, Taken from an Abridged Record of His Journal," MS. in possession of author, 9-11.
[^14] 14. "Philo Dibble's Narrative," in Early Scenes in Church History (Salt Lake City, 1882), 75.
[^15] 15. Painesville Telegraph, November 16, 1830.
[^16] 16. Extracts from Lydia Partridge's Writings, Family History of Edward Partridge Jr., in Richard L. Anderson, "The Impact of the First Preaching in Ohio," Brigham Young University Studies 11 (Summer 1971): 489.
[^17] 17. "Philo Dibble's Narrative," 77.
[^18] 18. Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), 41-43.
[^19] 19. "A Leaf from an Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 7 (August 15, 1878): 51.
[^20] 20. Orson F. Whitney, Conference Report, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, April 1912, 50 (hereafter cited as Conference Report).
[^21] 21. "A Leaf from an Autobiography," op. cit.
[^22] 22. Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1960), 1:145-46 (hereafter cited as History of the Church).
[^23] 1. Oliver B. Huntington, Diary, 1842-1847, pt. 1, 6-27, photocopy, Manuscript Collection, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^24] 2. Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: George Q. Cannon, 1855-1886), 11:295.
