In addition to publishing the First Presidency’s Message, the Liahona (Spanish) magazine includes true stories by members who have received strength through experiences with the Spirit. The magazine greatly increases our testimony.

Thanks for the work you do in spreading the wonderful gospel news. You have our support and encouragement.

Elder Vélex González, José Ulises
Mexico Monterrey South Mission

I want to thank you for L‘Etoile (French) magazine. It is a great source of support and comfort in my life.

I had the great blessing of attending a session of the rededication of the Swiss Temple. It was wonderful to hear the talks given by members of the First Presidency and other General Authorities. The Brethren were inspired by the Lord. I felt the Lord’s Spirit as I had never done before. Tears of love and gratitude for my Heavenly Father filled my eyes.

I have a testimony that the temple is the house of the Lord and that I should be truly worthy before entering it. As I left the temple, I had a desire to change and to follow the Lord. I was looking for spiritual strength when I went to the temple, and I received it.

Elaine Delescaut
Forbach Branch, Nancy Stake
France

I feel happy to be part of the growing number of missionaries who are preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ all over the world.

The Liahona (Spanish) magazine has helped me reach the hearts of many people on my mission. The messages in the magazine help people to be converted and baptized into the Church. I’m grateful to my Heavenly Father for the Liahona. It allows me to share the gospel with people I visit.

Elder Jorge Merino
Perú Arequipa Mission

I want to express my gratitude for the Liahona (Spanish) magazine. My family and I are the only ones who speak Spanish in our Canadian ward, and we eagerly await this Spanish edition of the Church magazines, just as thirsty plants await rainstorms.

Because my English is so poor, my participation in the ward has not always been as good as it could be. But when I read the Liahona, the messages in it strengthen me a great deal. The counsel of the Brethren, as well as the testimonies of brothers and sisters from around the world, renew my spirit. I wish every member of the Church could have a copy of the Church magazines every month.

J. Ernesto Merino
Trenton Ward, Oshawa Ontario Stake
Canada
