Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

PRINCIPLES AND PREFERENCES

Bruce C. Hafen

Bruce C. Hafen was sustained as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy on 6 April 1996. A native of St. George, Utah, he earned a juris doctor degree from the University of Utah. He has served as president of Ricks College, dean of Brigham Young University Law School, and provost at BYU. He and his wife, Marie K. Hafen, are the parents of seven children and the grandparents of ten.

The gospel teaches all of us to develop a strong sense of the difference between right and wrong and to pay attention to that difference when making choices. We can learn right from wrong through our blessed access to scriptures, revelation, and prophetic guidance. These sources of truth give us an incalculable advantage over the masses of modern society, who are drifting ever more aimlessly in a sea of moral and intellectual confusion. Moreover, many people today compound the harm of this general aimlessness by insisting that no one should sit in judgment on anyone else's "lifestyle." Being tolerant—leaving other people alone—has become for some not only the highest virtue but the only virtue. These people are forgetting or do not know Elder Neal A. Maxwell's insight that a "society that permits anything will eventually lose everything." [^1]

Some of us in the Church, however, have the opposite problem: we aren't tolerant enough of other people. Our very confidence in the correctness of the Church's positions on numerous lifestyle issues leads some of us to become opinionated and judgmental about other people's choices. As we resist the permissiveness in the world around us, we sometimes have difficulty sensing where our religious principles end and our personal preferences begin. When that happens, we might unintentionally defend our personal interpretations in such narrow, dogmatic ways that we assume anyone who disagrees with us or doesn't do things our way not only is wrong but is rejecting the Lord's will. At that point, we may wrongly assume that our personal perspective is also the Lord's perspective and that our preferences reflect his principles.

The kind of self-righteousness this attitude can produce reminds me of a cartoon I saw on the Brigham Young University campus some years ago. A gaunt, long-haired, and bearded young man in sloppy clothing stood, all scratched and beaten, amid a pile of rocks in a BYU campus street. Talking to a campus police officer who was writing down his statement, the beaten-up young man said, "Officer, all I said was, let him who is without sin cast the first stone."

Sometimes we sit in harsh judgment on those closest to us, such as our spouses, family members, or fellow Church members. Precisely because these are the people who typically share our convictions about lifestyle principles, we may think they need our unsolicited advice when their ideas and preferences differ from ours.

The very intimacy of family bonds can make us be tough on each other when we differ on choices ranging all the way from the teams we cheer for and the cars or clothes we buy to our choices about careers, colleges, and companions. One man I knew admitted he got downright angry with his son when they disagreed about which route along the city streets was the quickest way to drive downtown from their house.

Young married couples may encounter such friction when they discover differences in the lifestyle traditions of their two families, whether in their approach to vocations or vacations. I have recently seen instances in which differences in personal approach between a husband and a wife led to harsh judgments that needlessly damaged a relationship. In one case, the young husband is a fanatic about avoiding fatty foods; his wife is more pragmatic, eating what she feels like eating, subject to her quite mature instincts about moderation. She is healthy and looks fine, but he is so nervous about her becoming overweight that his constant complaining about her eating habits has rubbed their relationship raw.

In a more serious case, a woman in the midst of a divorce told me how her husband's continual criticism of her choices ultimately destroyed not only their marriage but her fundamental sense of self-worth. Increasingly over several years, he complained about her cooking, her housecleaning, how she used her time, how she talked, looked, and reasoned. This torrent of criticism escalated until, as she told me through her tears, she became convinced that she was utterly inept and dysfunctional, unable to do anything right. Obviously, the reverse is equally possible: a wife may also inflict serious emotional abuse on a husband.

I have learned from a variety of Latter-day Saint women that this tendency to judge other people's choices can become emotional and ugly among LDS women. A woman who writes for a Church-owned publication reports that no matter what feature stories her publication runs on LDS women, she receives angry mail from women readers who disapprove of the messages they think are hidden in the stories. Stories about women doing professional work may prompt the complaint that such features undermine the Church's counsel that a woman's first priority is her family. Stories about women doing domestic work provoke the response that such features improperly exclude all LDS women from higher education and meaningful careers. According to this woman, the people who are hardest on LDS women are other LDS women.

One experienced LDS woman writer I know believes that this tendency reflects the adversary's attempt to neutralize women, isolating and alienating them from one another. The evil one tempts them to compete with each other rather than connect with each other, because women's interconnectedness is such a force for good that it undermines his work.

LDS men can be equally judgmental. I remember my astonishment as dean of the BYU law school when I learned that some male law students were leaving hate mail in the carrels of women law students, telling them they ought to leave the law school and make room for a man, who, they said, would need the education more than they did.

Family size is another subject about which women or men in the Church occasionally but unfairly judge others, simply because the number of children in a home is so visible. I know of a young LDS couple who sought prayerfully for five years to have a child. They wanted a whole houseful of children but were unable to conceive. Then one day an LDS neighbor left in their mailbox a copy of a Church leader's talk encouraging couples to begin having children early in their marriage. This thoughtless act only compounded the disappointment and frustration the young husband and wife had long been feeling.

I've been grateful for women who have with skill, love, and gentle humor tried to awaken their sisters to the perils of forcing all LDS women into the same mold of personality and preference. For example, a few years ago Sister Patricia Holland expressed her concern that women are "getting away from that sense of community and sisterhood that has sustained us." She said, "There seems to be an increase in our competitiveness and a decrease in our generosity with one another." She spoke of women who "can their fruit and vegetables" and then "look down their noses at those who buy their peaches, or who don't like zucchini in any of the thirty-five ways there are to disguise it, or who have simply made a conscious choice to use their time and energy in some other purposeful way."

Sister Holland then confessed her own lack of interest in sewing: "Imagine my burden over the last twenty-five or thirty years, faking it in Relief Society sessions and trying to smile when six little girls walk into Church all pinafored and laced and ribboned and petticoated—identical, hand sewn—all trooping ahead of their mother, who has on the same immaculate outfit. Competitive? I wanted to pull their pleats out. . . . I have grown up a little since those days in at least two ways—I now genuinely admire a mother who can do that for her children, and I have ceased feeling guilty that sewing is not particularly rewarding to me. We simply cannot call ourselves Christian and continue to judge one another—or ourselves—so harshly. No Mason jar of Bing cherries is worth a confrontation that robs us of our compassion and our sisterhood." [^2]

That does not mean, of course, that there is no place for needed advice shared in the right spirit between people who depend on each other. Good marriages, for example, thrive on a couple's ability to share gentle and loving correction with each other when it is needed. I can think of a few husbands—and wives—who are innately insensitive to the way they affect other people. These people need help to see how they come across to others, what they're forgetting or missing. Each of us needs corrective vision for our blind spots, especially when the correction is given with affection and humor. Single men and women can sometimes find this blessing in a close friend or family member.

Our son Jon's wife, Joy, has learned this skill of giving sweet counsel. On a bitterly cold day last winter, she hauled pail after pail of hot water from the house to the driveway, where she melted a pile of ice and snow to free her husband's car from a frozen curb. When she called him at work to report that he could now drive his car, he said, "Thanks, Joy—I owe you one." She replied with her gentle laugh, "Jon, you know why we're married for eternity, don't you?" He asked, "Why are we?" Said she, "Because that's how long it will take for you to pay me back all the ones you owe me."

Against the background of these examples, I'd like to offer four ideas on the general problem of our trying to judge how other people apply the gospel to their lives. Some of these ideas also apply to the related issue of judging ourselves. First, some choices are matters of principle, but others are matters of preference; and when dealing with the legitimate realm of personal preference, we should not expect everyone to like the same things we do. I'm glad we don't all have the same favorite color! In an essay entitled "Decisions of Principle and of Preference," Elder Richard L. Evans once wrote: "As to decisions of principle, we shouldn't really waste much time on clear-cut questions of right and wrong," such as stealing, lying, or adultery. Our decisions about such things should be "more or less automatic." He continued, "And now as to decisions of preference—as to what suit we should select, or what course we should study, what job we should take: For such decisions we have to consider ourselves, our qualifications, our personal preferences, and those of others." [^3]

Elder Boyd K. Packer once talked about the interaction between our preferences and the Lord's direction when he discussed with BYU students the topic of spiritual self-reliance. In one example, he described the process of building a house. He said suppose you pray endlessly whether to build "early American style, a ranch style, Modern style architecture, or perhaps Mediterranean style. Has it ever occurred to you that perhaps the Lord just plain doesn't care? . . . Build what [you] want to build. . . . In many things we can do just what we want." What the Lord does care about is that when you "build that house, then be honest and pay for the material that goes into it and do a decent job of building it. . . . [Then] live righteously in it." Elder Packer added: "On occasions I've had to counsel people that the Lord would probably quite willingly approve the thing they intend to do even when they want to. It's strange when they come and almost feel guilty about doing something because they want to, even when it's righteous." [^4]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie once gave BYU students similar advice about choosing a marriage partner. In choosing his own wife, he said,["[I] went out and found the girl I wanted. . . . All I did was pray to the Lord and ask for some guidance and direction in connection with the decision that I'd reached. A more perfect thing to have done would have been to counsel with him relative to the decision and get a spiritual confirmation that the conclusion, which I by my agency and faculties had arrived at, was the right one." [^5] The application of principle in choosing houses or marriage partners is fundamental, but there is considerable room for differences in taste and style.

These insights about agency and spiritual self-reliance call to mind the uplifting promise found in many patriarchal blessings that if we are faithful, the Lord will grant us our righteous desires. We do not, nor need we, all desire the same things. D&C 7 describes the differing but righteous desires of Peter and John at the close of the Lord's earthly ministry. John desired to remain on the earth that he might live to bring souls unto Christ. Peter preferred to be in heaven with the risen Lord, but he seemed to feel guilty that perhaps he wasn't as brave as John. Apparently sensing that, the Savior said to Peter: "If I will that [John] tarry till I come, what is that to thee? For he desired of me that he might bring souls unto me, but thou desirest that thou mightest speedily come unto me in my kingdom. I say unto thee, Peter, this was a good desire. . . . Ye shall both have according to your desires, for ye both joy in that which ye have desired" (D&C 7:4Â5, 8).

Second, even when we apply true principles to our lives, variables of personality, circumstances, and needs can lead different people to different outcomes. As a missionary, I had three different mission presidents, with three widely varying personalities and approaches to Church leadership. I wondered which was the correct approach. Then I discovered the wonderful news that the Lord has more than one cookie cutter. I recently sought counsel about my new Church assignment from one of the senior Brethren. I was feeling, and still feel, enormous inadequacy in contemplating responsibilities that often seem overwhelmingly out of reach for me. Listening to my feelings, this wise leader said, "Bruce, the Lord didn't call you to this position so that you'd go try to be like Elder So-and-so. He called you to be you—your best self. Trust your own best instincts." I once heard this same leader quote these verses: "Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. . . . But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things . . . ye shall abide in him" (1 Jn. 2:20, 27). I understood him to mean that all of us who are called to positions of responsibility in the Church, men and women, are entitled to personal revelation to fit the unique needs we encounter. Such inspiration comes only after we follow faithfully every true principle. But when it comes, inspiration can be very personal, as the Lord "teaches" us in a firsthand way.

D&C 46 makes clear that the Lord gives every person a spiritual gift. We all have different gifts, interests, and backgrounds. The Lord is likely to give us what we uniquely need. Other people can't and won't know our needs. We ourselves often won't know what challenges and trials would stretch us in the most needful way. Paul's analogy between the Church and the body is an eloquent reminder that some of us function best as eyes and others as hands or feet or ears (see 1 Cor. 12).

For writer Louise Plummer, the difference is between ants—who are task oriented and well-organized—and grasshoppers—who are spontaneous, creative, and sometimes chaotic. As a grasshopper, she wondered if there was room for her in a church of ants. Her fear was that the ants would not accept her unless she was just like them. Then she realized—it isn't that ants work harder than grasshoppers; it's just that grasshoppers work differently from ants. [^6]

I once saw how much Church members can differ when I interviewed two couples for a temple marriage one evening in a BYU stake. Following my interview with the first prospective bride, a quiet and thoughtful person, I asked if she had any questions about going to the temple or becoming married. She expressed honest concerns about the whole subject of marital intimacy, and I felt prompted to encourage her warmly about the naturalness, the goodness, and the sacredness of that dimension of marriage. When the second couple sat down in my office, they remained so literally wrapped up in each other that I felt like an intruder even to say hello. I soon found myself giving them very different premarital advice from what I'd given the first young woman.

Third, even when we eliminate differences of preference, personality, and circumstance so that we're talking only about principles, all situations will not yield the same results because of the natural and often unavoidable paradox of competing true principles. When Joseph Smith was asked in Nauvoo how he could govern so many people and preserve such perfect order, he replied, "I teach them correct principles, and they govern themselves." [^7] His response clearly implies that people must exercise some judgment in governing themselves by the application of correct principles—in part because true principles are often in tension with one another. Think of married LDS students trying to finish school in four years while avoiding debt, having their children early, and having the mother stay home if children have already come. Talk about competing principles! But is this so unusual? The gospel is full of paradoxes that arise from tension between true principles.

For example, the Lord said he cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance. Yet elsewhere he said to the adulteress, "Where are those thine accusers? . . . Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more" (John 8:10Â11). Justice and mercy are both correct principles.

The Savior once said, "Do not your alms [to the poor] before men to be seen of them" (3 Ne. 13:1). But he also said, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works" (Matt. 5:16). Further, on one occasion he said, "In me ye might have peace" (John 16:33). And the angels who announced his birth sang, Peace on earth (see Luke 2:14). Yet elsewhere he said, "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword" (Matt. 10:34).

Each of these statements expresses a true principle. But together, the statements can seem inconsistent until we assume the responsibility of governing ourselves by prayerful, diligent application of the principles to a given situation. Think of priesthood leaders who hear confessions of wrongdoing. Some bishops say they always seek justice; others may think mercy the more important principle. The fact is that every truly faithful bishop is committed to both justice and mercy. And the Brethren don't tell local leaders how to apply those principles to specific situations precisely because the judgment must be made by a judge in Israel who sees all the circumstances, knows the people, feels their hearts, discerns the depth of their repentance, and seeks pure revelation in accordance with the higher principle of the Atonement, which reconciles mercy and justice as particular needs require.

President Harold B. Lee loved to quote the Lord's words: "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence" (D&C 107:99). And he would always put the emphasis on "let," as he encouraged Church leaders to "let" or allow people to learn their duty as they act in the particular office of their appointment. How equally essential it is for us to "let" people govern themselves and be themselves in circumstances in which they apply competing principles and consider appropriate matters of preference.

Fourth, consider how we judge ourselves. The more we learn to distinguish principles from preferences and the more we appreciate the delicate process of applying competing principles to life circumstances, the more reluctant we will be to judge another person's righteousness. These perspectives also inform the process of self-judgment, because we often judge others as part of pulling ourselves up, or putting others down, by comparing ourselves with other people. So all of the arguments against judging others also apply to judging ourselves by making comparisons with others. At the same time, freedom from self-judgment and comparisons allows us to study out in our minds our own righteous desires and preferences; then we are fully entitled to the inspiration of heaven to reconcile competing principles as we seek to govern ourselves.

We must resist the natural urge to take too seriously both the positive and the negative judgments others make about us. When those who love us choose not to condemn us, even though we're doing something wrong, we must be careful not to infer from this silence that our behavior is acceptable. Sometimes our loved ones, the Church, and even the Lord expect more than they require of us, which means they may tolerate conduct they would never encourage. This approach leaves upon our shoulders the heavy burden of agency—and the Lord expects us to self-correct. If we make corrections only when we're required to, or coerced, we are slothful servants who refuse to grow spiritually (see D&C 58:26).

In a more general sense, someone said we wouldn't worry so much about what others think of us if we realized how seldom they do think of us. Popular opinion is too fickle and fleeting to be a reliable guide for measuring our self-worth or the soundness of our self-judgments—again, whether positive or negative. Others cannot know enough about our circumstances and our hearts to judge us fairly. Other people also lack the perspective on our nature and character that only the Lord has. The Holy One of Israel is our judge, and for better or worse, we cannot deceive him. But most significantly of all, the Savior's grace made possible by his atonement compensates for all our failings, as Nephi put it so clearly, "after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23). When we have in good faith done all within our power to do, there is a success that compensates for all our failures—the infinite and eternal success of Christ's holy atonement. Our self-judgments must not underestimate that part of our self-worth.

When we sit in judgment on other people, even if their lives aren't fully in order, we are violating the Lord's commandment against judging others. "Judge not, that ye be not judged," the Savior taught (Matt. 7:1). The point here is not that those we might judge aren't doing anything wrong, nor is it that wrongdoers won't be judged. Rather, the question is, Who has the right to judge, and why do we lack the capacity to judge? Most historical uses of the verb "to judge" in the English language link judging with condemning, sentencing, pronouncing judgment upon, or otherwise acting with special judicial authority. These terms imply that a true judge must be authorized to affect another person's life with a costly sentence of judgment. As Eliza R. Snow wrote in "Truth Reflects upon Our Senses,"

Jesus said, "Be meek and lowly,"

For 'tis high to be a judge. [^8]

That is why those whom the Lord appoints as judges, such as bishops, have such a high and holy calling.

In addition, our human limitations render our judgments inherently unfair. Eliza R. Snow echoed this point, based on the Savior's teachings against judging:

Once I said unto another,

"In thine eye there is a mote;

If thou art a friend, a brother,

Hold, and let me pull it out."

But I could not see it fairly,

For my sight was very dim.

When I came to search more clearly,

In mine eye there was a beam.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Others I have oft reproved,

For an object like a mote,

Now I wish [my] beam removed,

Oh, that tears would wash it out! [^9]

An old Indian proverb states, Don't judge another until you have walked a mile in his moccasins. As the Lord has said, "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:10). Thus in all of our relationships with other people, we must rise above the temptation to compete, to criticize, and to condemn.

The Lord himself is the ultimate judge of our transgressions, and he personally will meet us at the gate to his kingdom. Said the prophet Jacob, "The keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name" (2 Ne. 9:41). How sublimely reassuring—and for some, how terrifying—to know that we will finally be judged by the impartial fairness of him who cannot be deceived, who expects more than he requires, and who gives us more than we could ever earn without him.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Each stone in each course, or layer, was listed on an order sheet by a number and size specification and often included scale drawings illustrating the patterns for the more difficult cuts. When the stones were sent down the mountain to the temple site, the architect noted the number engraved in each stone and knew immediately where that stone would fit in the overall temple construction (Wallace Alan Raynor, The Everlasting Spires: A Story of the Salt Lake Temple [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965], 65; Paul Smith Collection, University of Utah Institute of Religion, slides).
[^2] Catherine Corman Parry, "'Simon, I Have Somewhat to Say unto Thee': Judgment and Condemnation in the Parables of Jesus," in Brigham Young University 1990Â91 Devotional and Fireside Speeches (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1991), 116.
[^3] Dallin H. Oaks, BYU 9th and 17th Stake Conference, Provo, Utah, 24 March 1996; notes in possession of author; used by permission.
[^4] Chieko Okazaki, "Rowing Your Boat," Ensign, November 1994, 92Â93.
[^5] Bruce R. McConkie, "Agency or Inspiration?" New Era, January 1975, 40.
[^6] Louise Plummer, "Thoughts of a Grasshopper," in Heritage of Faith, 185Â91; or Louise Plummer, Thoughts of a Grasshopper (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 7Â15.
[^7] Joseph Smith, Millennial Star 13 (15 November 1851): 339.
[^8] "Truth Reflects upon Our Senses," Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 273.
[^9] Ibid.
