Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

FITLY FRAMED AND BUILDED TOGETHER

Camille Fronk

Camille Fronk is an assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University and a Relief Society teacher in her ward. She has served as a member of the Young Women General Board, as dean of students at LDS Business College, and as a seminary and institute instructor.

In his epistle to the Ephesians, Paul described the collective membership of the Church of Jesus Christ as a temple built on a sure foundation: "the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit" (Eph. 2:20Â22).

Individual Church members in the analogy make up the stones which are "builded together" to form the walls of this "holy temple" of believers. The stones reflect unity of purpose, although individual expression, creativity, and varied application of gospel principles add dimension and character to the whole. For illustration, consider the stones of the Salt Lake Temple. They were cut from huge boulders of granite in Little Cottonwood Canyon some twenty miles from the temple site. The temple architect sent specific instructions to the quarry superintendent describing the various sizes and shapes of stones required for the temple walls. [^1] Each stone's unique characteristics and strengths—in both the Salt Lake Temple and the metaphorical temple composed of a Zion people—were "fitly joined together" with other unique stones "and compacted by that which every joint supplieth" (Eph. 4:16) to eventually contribute to the enduring beauty of the whole.

Critics would try to convince us that any population built on a single foundation is bound to promote cookie-cutter dimensions among its individual members. They would say that the stones or bricks that make up the walls of this "temple" must surely come from the same mold and allow for little or no individuality or agency.

But recall the familiar account of Mary and Martha when Jesus came to visit at Martha's house (Luke 10:38Â42). While Martha is occupied in serving her guest, perhaps preparing a meal, Mary is at Jesus' feet, feasting on his word. The account depicts a lovely scene, doesn't it? But who is uncomfortable with this situation. Who feels something is not right? Is it Jesus? Certainly Jesus cautions Martha, but he does so only after Martha first objects to the situation? Catherine Corman Parry, a professor of English at Brigham Young University, examines the Savior's words from a new perspective. She says: "Those of us with more of Martha than of Mary in us have long felt that this rebuke is unjust. While we do not doubt the overriding importance of listening to the Lord, does the listening have to be done during dinner preparations? Would it have hurt Mary to have joined us in serving, then we all could have sat down to hear the Lord together? And furthermore, what about the value of our work in the world? If it weren't for us Marthas cleaning whatever we see and fussing over meals, there would be a lot of dirty, hungry people in this world. . . . Why, oh why couldn't the Lord have said, 'You're absolutely right, Martha. What are we thinking of to let you do all this work alone? We'll all help, and by the way, that centerpiece looks lovely'?

"What he did say is difficult to bear, but perhaps somewhat less difficult if we examine its context. . . . The Lord acknowledges Martha's care: 'Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things' (v. 41). Then he delivers the gentle but clear rebuke. But the rebuke would not have come had Martha not prompted it. The Lord did not go into the kitchen and tell Martha to stop cooking and come listen. Apparently he was content to let her serve him however she cared to, until she judged another person's service: 'Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me' (v. 40). Martha's self-importance, expressed through her judgment of her sister, occasioned the Lord's rebuke, not her busyness with the meal." [^2]

Sister Parry's suggestion increases in merit as we note that, first, the Savior's final recorded words on the occasion do not compare the acts of service of the two sisters; rather, he points out that what Mary is doing is service and should not be discounted. His words are not, "Mary hath chosen the better part" or even "Mary hath chosen the good part." Rather, the scripture reads, "Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her" (Luke 10:42). There is no measure of comparison in the Lord's statement, only validation of Mary's service.

Second, consider these two sisters on a later occasion, again in association with the Savior. This time, they are not at Martha's house but at the home of Simon the leper. Notice what Mary and Martha are doing. "Then Jesus . . . came to Bethany, where Lazarus was . . . whom he raised from the dead. There they made him a supper; and Martha served . . . Then . . . Mary . . . anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment" (John 12:1Â3). Even when the gathering is not at her house, Martha is still serving the food, and Mary is at the feet of Jesus. Their roles are exactly the same as before. The difference this time is that no one seems to be upset about the manner in which the other has selected to serve the Lord. We would do well to learn what Martha apparently discovered—that each of us offers service, to each other and to the Lord, in a variety of ways, using our diverse talents and gifts. The Lord in turn accepts our devotions in the spirit in which they are offered.

In reality, it is not the Lord but Satan who entices us to be carbon copies of those around us. Elder Dallin H. Oaks suggested that when Jesus warned Peter, "Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat" (Luke 22:31), he was telling Peter that the adversary's goal was to make Peter common. Satan wants to make us just like everyone else in the world in much the same way that particles of wheat are so uniform that they can be sifted and exchanged for one another without distinction. [^3]

If Satan cannot make us common, he will try to divide us, to use our uniqueness against us. Consider this tactic employed among the Corinthian Saints. These early Christians appear to have been ranking each other according to each one's gift of the Spirit. In his first epistle to them, Paul taught the futility of such comparisons because all the gifts come from the same Spirit (1 Cor. 12:4). None of us serves in the same Church calling and, as Paul points out, no Church calling is more important than any other because all rely on the same Spirit for fulfillment. Certainly the Lord doesn't deem one who serves as Beehive advisor to be less worthy than the Young Women president. That is ridiculous! And yet, often without intention, we assume the importance of an individual to be directly related to her current Church calling.

Similarly, different individuals will appropriately magnify the same Church calling in diverse ways. Hundreds of members of the Church are called to teach the fourteen-year-olds in Sunday School, and hundreds of others conduct singing practice in Relief Society; yet no two perform either of these services exactly alike, and all may have the Spirit to sustain their efforts. We are given guidelines, but individually we have the privilege of receiving inspiration to use our God-given gifts and talents to bless the lives of those we are called to serve. Simply because someone else leads the music in sacrament meeting differently from the way we would lead it does not mean the Spirit is offended or that the message of the hymns is lost.

Sister Chieko Okazaki has reminded us that our differences of culture, race, marital status, or place of employment should strengthen our unity rather than encourage us to find fault with each other. "The ideal family for raising children, we believe, is a stable, loving, two-parent family where young children receive full-time parenting. But not all situations are ideal. Not all women are mothers, and not all mothers have children at home. Furthermore, not all mothers can make the choice to be home with their children all of the time. . . . Let us trust the Lord, trust ourselves, and trust each other that we are trying to do the best we can. We need all the strength we can find for our daily trials. Let us not add our disapproval to a sister's burdens. And as we struggle with our own burdens, let us not diminish our strength by accepting the perhaps thoughtless judgments of others." [^4] As we learn to appreciate the challenges that others face, it is suddenly easier to see life from their perspective and refrain from judging their manner of coping. In most cases, we gain increased respect for their faith and endurance.

Think of the temple again. Does your eye focus on its sturdy foundation? the angle of its walls? the diverse colors and shapes of each stone? Or are you more likely to stand back and exclaim over the beautiful appearance of the temple as a whole? We can see that the whole becomes more important than any of its parts. And the parts become stronger and more dynamic as part of the whole than they are when seen in isolation.

We have covenanted to remain grounded and rooted on a firm foundation whose cornerstone is Christ's perfect atonement. What a reason to rejoice, to be of good cheer! Truly the Redeemer of Israel has overcome the world. He is our cornerstone. He restored his everlasting gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith. He speaks to a prophet today, namely our beloved President Gordon B. Hinckley. What a sacred foundation we share. Let us therefore press on, reaching out to our brothers and sisters throughout the world, secure in our testimony of Christ and the restored gospel. I bear witness that as we remain true to covenants made with him who is our Father, ever anchored on that sure foundation, we truly have no need to fear. This is his Church, we are his children, and his promises will not fail.

NOTES

This selection has been excerpted from "Anchored in Sacred Ground: Building Unity amid Diversity," the closing address of the BYUÂRelief Society Women's Conference, 3 May 1996.

---
Notas:
[^1] Each stone in each course, or layer, was listed on an order sheet by a number and size specification and often included scale drawings illustrating the patterns for the more difficult cuts. When the stones were sent down the mountain to the temple site, the architect noted the number engraved in each stone and knew immediately where that stone would fit in the overall temple construction (Wallace Alan Raynor, The Everlasting Spires: A Story of the Salt Lake Temple [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965], 65; Paul Smith Collection, University of Utah Institute of Religion, slides).
[^2] Catherine Corman Parry, "'Simon, I Have Somewhat to Say unto Thee': Judgment and Condemnation in the Parables of Jesus," in Brigham Young University 1990Â91 Devotional and Fireside Speeches (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1991), 116.
[^3] Dallin H. Oaks, BYU 9th and 17th Stake Conference, Provo, Utah, 24 March 1996; notes in possession of author; used by permission.
[^4] Chieko Okazaki, "Rowing Your Boat," Ensign, November 1994, 92Â93.
