Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

THE WIDOW'S MITE FROM RUSSIA

Nina Bazarskaya

Nina Bazarskaya serves as Relief Society president of the Voronezh branch of the Russia Moscow Mission. She was baptized in Moscow by a visiting Brigham Young University student on 15 December 1992, a month before Voronezh was officially opened to missionary work.

I am a humble Russian woman who feels blessed and privileged to communicate with you on behalf of my Russian sisters. I come from Voronezh, a city of about a million people in central Russia. When in January 1993 the first three missionaries came to open my city for missionary work, only three Latter-day Saints met them at the railway station. They were the only three members in the city. Now, three years later, there are about one hundred families. I was baptized in December 1992, and two months later those first missionaries who came to Voronezh baptized my son. A year after that, my son baptized his father, my husband. It was very hard for my husband to join the Church. His way was from being a committed atheist to becoming the branch president. I just thank the Lord for the blessings of a baptized family.

Every Russian sister has one great priority: missionary work in our families. Russia is deeply troubled right now. We are in the bottom of deep economic depression. Our political situation is also very unstable. A terrible war continues in Chechnya, but even worse, we have lost our moral bearings. The old Communist ideology has passed away, but we don't have a new one to replace it. People are searching for moral integrity. Russian women are the first who come to the gospel. Shortly after they find this narrow road that leads to the tree of wisdom and to the tree of life, their primary concern becomes bringing their family to the Church. I can't tell you how happy we are when we see our husbands and our children sitting side by side with us in Church meetings.

The traditions of sisterhood are very young in my city. We sense the tremendous opportunity available to us through sisterhood and are making fledgling efforts guided by the words of Jesus Christ: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:34Â35). Following this commandment, we use the very modest financial resources of our Relief Society to support families who are in need, to make Christmas gifts for our children, to visit our orphanage, to cook Easter food for the soldiers who are wounded in Chechnya and for those in the local hospitals, and to support the many missions of our younger members. These are, of course, very modest projects.

I asked the sisters of my Relief Society to think of at least one episode in their lives when this sisterhood helped them. Their answers differed. One sister remembered how happy she was to find a food package on the doorstep of her house when her family didn't have money. Another remembered medication brought to her to relieve her fever. The third remembered a funny birthday gift that made her smile. One story, however, touched me by its simplicity. It happened because many sisters remembered that moral support is perhaps the best help we can offer each other.

Valentina is a very nice, pretty, twenty-nine-year-old woman in our branch. She is also terribly sick. While she was in the hospital, her husband divorced her. Both her disease and her divorce broke her down completely, because the dream of her life was to have a baby. She loved her husband very much, and his betrayal nearly killed her. When she was released from the hospital, her doctors sent her to a distant resort to recuperate. There she felt lonely and homesick. Surrounded only by sick women, whose constant talk was only about her disease and its terrible consequences for her health, she cried day and night, and very soon the people in the resort started to call her not "Valentina" but "the woman who is always crying." This very difficult period in her life tried both her patience and her faith.

One day she wrote to me, sharing her doubts and her disappointments. I knew she needed help. I contacted sisters who cared about her in the Relief Society, and we responded immediately. She received our letters regularly for the remainder of the four months she stayed in the resort. We shared with her our love, our hope in her recovery. We tried to strengthen her. We wrote to her our city news, our branch news, and tried to support her in every possible way. One day she realized that these four months were not a trial for her but rather a great blessing given to her so she could concentrate, think about her life, read the scriptures, and be a missionary to the other women who hadn't heard anything about the gospel. The day she realized this, her life changed completely. When she returned home, she was a totally different person with a very strong testimony.

Missionaries who come to Voronezh often say that we have a special branch. Many of our members are young—girls and boys. That's not a great surprise because the gospel was first brought to us by young people, young ambassadors, young teachers from Brigham Young University who came to Voronezh to teach English in our nurseries. We see how the seeds planted by these young people grow. Now we have our own missionaries, five from just our branch. Two of them have already returned, and three are still teaching in different cities of our country. A young and new generation of young people is growing up before our eyes—one reared on the principles of the Word of Wisdom, of eternal love, of faith, and of following the commandments of our Heavenly Father. Though our branch is not very large by American standards, we feel ourselves a community, a family in which everybody loves each other and tries to support each other. And we also feel ourselves under the protection of our Heavenly Father. We are not lost in this world; by a million ties, we are connected with the sisters throughout the world. We receive letters from America, from the United Kingdom, from Switzerland, and from Lithuania, where our missionaries serve right now.

Often mothers of the missionaries who serve in Voronezh write to us, even after their children return home, and we become good friends for the rest of our lives. These women send us materials necessary for our Relief Society activities, for our homemaking activities. Sister Jeppsen, the mother of one of our first and one of our most respected and most beloved branch presidents, came to Voronezh and got acquainted with Valentina, our sick sister. Back in America, Sister Jeppsen started a charity project, seeking donations to provide her with special treatment in a Utah hospital. We know that such things do not happen very quickly or easily, but we pray and hope that one day our sister will come to America, receive this special treatment, recover, and the dream of her life—having a baby—will still come true.

"And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much. And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing. And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury: for all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living" (Mark 12:41Â44). As I read this scripture, I suddenly thought about Russian women, Russian sisters. Our input into the treasury of international sisterhood is very humble, very small, but it's all we can cast in. What we give is our respect to your historical heritage, our appreciation for all your achievements, for your wonderful example for us. It's our love for you and our faith in our Heavenly Father, in the truthfulness of our Church and the Book of Mormon. It's our faith that Jesus Christ is alive and that he brought the gospel into our country to make us happy and to make our families happy. As I think about each Latter-day Saint woman united in sisterhood, worldwide, I realize that yes, we are a great strength. The international sisterhood is a great strength. We can make miracles if we unite and share love with one another.
