Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

FROM CRITICISM TO COOPERATION TO CHARITY

Marie K. Hafen

Marie Kartchner Hafen has served on the Young Women General Board and on the board of the Deseret News. She holds a master's degree in English from Brigham Young University and has taught courses at Ricks and at BYU in composition and Shakespeare. She and her husband, Bruce C. Hafen, a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, are the parents of seven children and the grandparents of ten.

A well-informed Latter-day Saint woman asked me, "I guess you know who's the hardest on Mormon women, don't you?"

I shook my head.

"It's other Mormon women. They often judge each other, and sometimes they're not very nice about it."

Surprised by that response, I began thinking of my own experience. Yes, I thought, but we also sing gratefully "Each Life That Touches Ours for Good," which includes the lines:

What greater goodness can we know

Than Christlike friends, whose gentle ways

Strengthen our faith, enrich our days. [^1]

If we believe the words of this song, why do some of us gossip judgmentally about each other? What drives us to pick at and on each other? Isn't it ironic that sometimes the relationships that could most enliven us are the very ones we undercut with negative criticism?

Further, we don't fully satisfy Christ's injunction to "judge not" (Luke 6:37) by simply not judging. Refraining from harsh judgment is a step in the right direction, but being neutral and tolerant is not enough.

In a recent dinner-table conversation, for example, a young woman's parents were trying to teach her to use her judgment skills to decide which of the diverse young men who showed interest in her she should get to know better. When asked what she saw as distinctions between young men who chose to serve missions and those who chose not to, the young woman indignantly squared her shoulders. "I don't judge people! I don't compare guys. That's not Christian. I should go out with anyone who asks me." For her, the idea of judging carried only negative connotations; there was no difference between discerning judgment and harsh judgment. In her mind, the choice was either to be overly critical and hurtful or to accept everything and everybody regardless of any personal risk involved.

Rightful judgment is necessary. Mormon cautioned, however, "And now, . . . seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully" (Moro. 7:18; emphasis added). One way to judge "rightfully" I will call "cooperation." Cooperation in this sense is using rightful judgment to work with another person for everyone's benefit—for hers, for mine, for both—asking for heaven's help along the way.

How can we move from judging wrongfully, to not judging at all, and then to judging with enough discernment to cooperate with others? What about a major leap beyond that—to becoming not only cooperative, but even charitable toward others?

Three short examples will show this progression from criticism (wrongful judgment), to cooperation (rightful judgment), to charity (Christ's pure love).

First, consider a young wife who consciously decides not to criticize but to cooperate in her marriage. Picture her leaving Provo to drive thirteen hundred miles to her new home in Chicago. In the back of the family station wagon, along with the usual luggage, is a huge box filled with her husband's aquarium equipment. The box is so large that it pushes her seat as far forward as it will go. Her knees are crunched up under the steering column, her shoulders hunched over the steering wheel, and her back scrunched through the seat against the sharp corner of the aquarium box. She has no real interest in aquariums or saltwater fish herself but is willing to cart the huge apparatus all the way across the country. Why? For her it's simple: "Because it means so much to him." She knows that bringing the aquarium along will make him happy, so she never says anything about the weight, the smell, or the discomfort. Is she just being naive? Shouldn't she stand up to him and point out the negative aspects of hauling the fish tank, perhaps putting her foot down and flat-out refusing? Of course, she shouldn't just submit to his every whim; but when love and a desire to cooperate motivate action, then both partners benefit.

The second example is a husband whose cooperation in a marriage helped his wife to love and respect herself in new ways. Recently a BYU student was killed in an accident. In her talk at the funeral, the young widow, Tiffany, told how her husband had radically changed the way she lived by changing the way she looked at herself. For her whole life before her marriage, Tiffany had judged herself harshly.

"When Tyler and I got married," she said, "I didn't have a very high opinion of myself. But Tyler had confidence in me. He believed in me. We were married only three years, but in that short time I began to believe in myself. I began to know that I could do things and do them well. Now, he's gone; but the confidence that he gave me will always be with me. Nobody can take that away from me."

Her relationship with Tyler had lightened her countenance and demeanor. Where before she was timid and shy, she now stood erect, confident, and looked people in the eye. Through giving specific, deserved appreciation, he helped her to erase her wrongful judgments of herself and encouraged her to catch glimpses of the woman she could be. Tyler saw her with a cooperative vision. Because he loved her and actively supported her, she began to see how she could love herself. More than that, she began to understand how much God loved her. Tyler's encouragement and her trust in God caused Tiffany to become "lighter" until she could say, "Nobody can take that away from me." [^2]

Third, I know a couple whose marriage completely changed when one partner ceased a long-standing pattern of wrongful judgment and allowed God more deeply and more intensely into her life. This woman longed for love in her marriage, yet she found herself judging her husband, and being judged by him, in ways that chilled their marriage. Rather than feeling appreciated, she felt both judged and emotionally neglected by the man she had married.

In her anger and frustration, she decided to "pour it all out" in a letter for her husband to read—all her intense longing for love, all of her emotional deprivation. She said, "The longer I wrote, the more I began to have a feeling come over me that what I was writing was false. The feeling continued growing until I could no longer squelch it, and I knew intuitively that the feeling was coming from God, that He was telling me that what I was writing was false. 'How could it be false?' I asked angrily. . . . But the feeling became so powerful and overwhelming that I could no longer deny it or fight against it. So I tore up the pages I had written, threw myself down on my knees and began to pray, saying, 'If it is false, show me how it could be false.' And then a voice spoke to my mind and said, 'If you had come unto Me, it all would have been different.'

"I was astounded. I went to church; I read the scriptures often; I prayed pretty regularly; I tried to obey the commandments. 'What do you mean, "Come unto You?"' I wondered. And then into my mind flashed pictures of me wanting to do things my own way, of holding grudges, of not forgiving, of not loving as God had loved us. I had wanted my husband to 'pay' for my emotional suffering. I had not let go of the past and had not loved God with all my heart. I loved my own willful self more.

"I was aghast. I suddenly realized that I was responsible for my own suffering, for if I had really come unto Him, as I outwardly thought I had done, it all would have been different. . . . I . . . did not mention to my husband anything of what had transpired. But I gave up blaming. . . . And I tried to come unto God with full purpose of heart. I prayed more earnestly, and listened to His Spirit. I read my scriptures and tried to come to know Him better.

"Two months passed, and one morning my husband awoke and turned to me in bed and said, 'You know, we find fault too much with each other. I'm never going to find fault with my wife again.' I was flabbergasted, for he had never admitted he had done anything wrong in our relationship. He did stop finding fault, and he began to compliment me and to show sweet kindness. It was as if an icy glass wall between us had melted away. Almost overnight our relationship became warm and sweet. Three years have passed, and still it continues warmer and happier. We care deeply about one another and share ideas and thoughts and feelings, something we had not done for the first sixteen years of marriage." [^3]

After they stopped judging each other wrongfully, stopped "finding fault," this couple began to "share ideas and thoughts and feelings." In other words, they began to cooperate—to think and feel together. This woman had needed to connect her heart in her marriage to her heart in the Lord. Her own sense of stifled spiritual growth dissipated as she opened her heart to the Lord and then to her husband. When she formed bonds that went from the Lord through herself and then to her husband, both hearts were melted. The very moment she came to Christ "with full purpose of heart" was the same transforming moment that brought her closer to her husband (Mosiah 7:33). Because of her own strengthened relationship with the Savior, she began to reflect the spiritual gift of charity in her relationship with her husband. Christ's love flowed through her to her companion.

If in the midst of our own often-difficult, sometimes wrenching, maturing process, we make the Savior the center of our lives, we can leave behind frailties and imperfections—such as wrongfully judging others—and we can also have the Savior's love flow through us to others.

Making Christ the center of our lives reminds me of the flying saucer at Utah's Lagoon Amusement Park. As children, my friends and I would go to the Fun House and clamber onto the saucer, shaped like an upside down plate, crawling and scrambling to get to the middle so we wouldn't be thrown off as the saucer spun faster and faster. Often someone nearer the edge would grab a friend who was closer to the middle and pull her, sliding and sprawling, completely off the saucer. But if I could struggle and strain to make it to the very center, without getting shoved or pulled off, the centrifugal force didn't affect me. I could stay there solidly, even as the saucer spun. I discovered that the most fun was to help someone climb onto the center with me. Of course, I had to be vigilant to keep my place because stretching hands and feet were constantly trying to knock me from my secure perch. So it is with keeping the Savior in the center of our lives. We must be vigilant in holding on to the Savior and staying with him in the center. When Christ is the focus of our lives, we know he will help us if we have the spiritual maturity to stay with him no matter what is swirling around us. And when we are secure and watchful in the center, we can stretch out our hands to pull others, in charity, into the center with him, too.

When we have a secure relationship with Christ, we cannot help loving others: in our family, our ward, and beyond. Alma says to those at the waters of Mormon who are thinking about being baptized, "And now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, . . . and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places, . . . what have you against being baptized?" (Mosiah 18:8Â10).

Like those Nephites who "clapped their hands for joy" at this prospect, we consecrate ourselves when we are baptized, to "bear," to "mourn with," to "comfort," and to "stand as witnesses of God" with and for those who are part of the "body of Christ." At baptism we commit ourselves to become charitable.

A young mother in France was forced to confront her baptismal covenants—her call to charity—after experiencing frustration at the apparent disunity and lack of caring in her small branch. Collette and her family were the only members in their town. The branch, an hour away in another town, was composed primarily of members of the Poulet family. The branch president, the Relief Society president, the elders quorum president, and the Primary president were all part of the Poulet clan, a wonderful family who worked hard to keep the Church alive in that area.

Collette spent two days a week working with the sister missionaries—tracting, taking them to see her friends, even introducing them to people she knew only slightly, such as her baker. She tried to be obedient to her leaders but couldn't help feeling that the one dominant family made it difficult for new members to feel needed or included in the branch. She scarcely dared to speak about her feelings for fear of seeming disobedient or controversial, yet she wanted to serve in her branch and make a difference.

One day while talking about her baptismal covenants and Mosiah 18 with one of the sister missionaries, Collette burst out, "I look around the branch, and I don't see anyone who is truly willing to comfort those who stand in need of comfort or cry with those that cry. I don't see anyone coming to mourn with me when I'm mourning. How am I supposed to feel a part of a unified Church when no one will support me in my efforts? I know the Church is true, but it's almost impossible to live as I would like to in this branch." She sighed and threw her hands in the air in frustration.

The missionary looked at her sympathetically but asked some searching questions. "Wait a minute. You know that scripture you quoted in Mosiah 18? Let's look at it. I've never really noticed it before, but who does it say will 'bear,' and 'mourn,' and 'comfort,' and do all of those other wonderful things? It doesn't say, 'And you will be comforted; and you will be cried with; and you will be mourned with.' The scripture says that you will covenant to help them. Are these conditional or unconditional covenants?" Collette suddenly realized that she was so intent on keeping tabs on other people's covenants that she had almost lost sight of her own. [^4]

If we sit and wait for others to come and wipe our tears, we may miss the opportunity to wipe the tears of a neighbor or a friend. We can sit at home behind seemingly safe walls, or we can push beyond our comfort zones and break through our walls of judgment and criticism to someone else who needs us but who may also be hiding behind heavy bricks of negative thought. We can cooperate with others if they will let us; but if they will not, the only remedy that will heal our own hearts and the hearts of others is the gift of charity. As gifted at cooperating as Collette was, as willing to work and to contribute, she still had to progress until she could let the Lord influence her attitudes and motivations. It was at this point that she began the process of becoming charitable.

The Lord invites, even requires, us to keep growing up—even though we already think we are grown up—first in our marriage and family relationships and then in our relationships with others. Mere cooperation isn't enough; we must push ourselves to develop a dependence upon the Lord so that he can mold us spiritually into the kind of people we must become to "be like him" (Moro. 7:48). Whereas cooperation involves mostly our own power to love, charity is a combination of our own desires and energies coupled with the Spirit and the healing power of God. Whereas cooperation may be action- centered, charity is motive-centered.

With our covenant "to remember him always" comes the covenant to remember each other always, in the same way he remembers us, through charity. Even then, this charity is a "gift" to us, "which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ" (Moro. 7:48). I desire that gift. I am willing to be a "true follower." Instead of sprawling off the saucer from the centrifugal force of daily temptations and distractions, I desire to move myself more completely toward the center. I am finding that coming to Christ in the center and remaining steadfast in that focus requires constant vigilance—constant faith, constant prayer. Yet as I seek to love him more fervently, I feel myself loving others without constraint. "O to grace how great a debtor / Daily I'm constrained to be." [^5] I thank God daily for those who love me with charity.

Over the last few months, my faith in Christ's atonement has increased. I seek to understand his atonement through deeper faith, prayer, and study. I seek charity, "the pure love of Christ" (Moro. 7:47). I seek this gift, a gift that comes to us only because of the atonement of our Savior. Without his atonement, we would not have the power to love as he loves. "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray . . . with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, . . . that when he shall appear we shall be like him" (Moro. 7:48). I believe we will not have the capacity to see him or withstand his presence until, as our charity increases, we have begun to be like him.

When we come so fully to Christ that we have true charity, his pure love will flow through us into other people. We will become conduits for his grace and mercy. As Karen Lynn Davidson wrote:

Each life that touches ours for good

Reflects thine own great mercy, Lord;

Thou sendest blessings from above

Through words and deeds of those who love. [^6]

I pray that "we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moro. 7:48).

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] "Each Life That Touches Ours for Good," Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 293.
[^2] The names in this story have been changed to protect privacy.
[^3] As quoted in C. Terry Warner, "Honest, Simple, Solid, True," Brigham Young Magazine, June 1996, 36Â37.
[^4] The names in this story have been changed to protect privacy.
[^5] "Come, Thou Fount of Every Blessing," Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1948), no. 70.
[^6] Hymns, 1985, no. 293.
