Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

SPIRITUAL MATURITY

Elaine L. Jack

Elaine L. Jack grew up in Cardston, Alberta, Canada. She attended the University of Utah as an English major and is an avid reader. She and her husband, Joseph E. Jack, are the parents of four sons and have thirteen grandchildren. Sister Jack serves as general president of the Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

During the past six years as Relief Society General President, I have seen a strength in women—a charity almost beyond expression. I have seen the women of this Church "follow after charity" and receive spiritual gifts as they are needed (1 Cor. 14:1).

Some time ago we received a letter from Marilyn Smolka, a member of the Monument Park 20th Ward in Emigration Canyon in Salt Lake City, who told of a Relief Society meeting in which a sister rose to her feet to describe an incredibly difficult challenge. With tears streaming down her cheeks and her hands shaking, she asked the sisters to pray in her behalf. Another sister stood, walked over, and, putting her arms around the first sister, said, "We'll all join in prayer for you."

Marilyn's ward was small and newly formed at the time but richly blessed with some qualities that would make any ward effective. The ward members shared a high level of trust. Marilyn's description of her ward reveals some reasons why they have developed a distinct identity with feelings of love and unity among members:

"We had always been a part of a larger, more affluent ward in the midst of a thriving, active east bench stake, when an inspired stake president created a ward composed only of members living within our canyon. Many said, This will never work. We don't have enough active families to fill positions. Our ward budget won't be large enough to cover our activities. But to everyone's amazement, it did work.

"For almost ten years, from a nucleus of only about twenty-five active families, people jumped in feet first to respond to callings from the new bishop, who was my own husband. They accepted jobs they might never have filled in a larger ward. They developed skills and talents and matured spiritually because in a smaller setting they were willing to risk. Our young people, instead of becoming lost, found that they liked each other across age-group boundaries, unconcerned about whether they were Beehives or Mia Maids or Laurels. Activities were planned that included all ages. We welcomed new folks with open arms. No one could slip in unnoticed and sit on the back row. In fact, we were small enough that for many years we held activities in our home. We absolutely needed everyone.

"On Sunday mornings, Relief Society sometimes was a group of only ten or twelve sisters, including the presidency, but we developed a warm, supportive atmosphere. There was no judging. It was safe—safe to share, safe to be honest. And we found that when people are willing to share their innermost feelings, their fears, and their failings, a wonderful thing happens. People reach out to you from the reservoirs of their souls to fill you with strength and counsel and courage. I was deeply grateful for my share in the blessings of being in this loving ward.

"When a man is serving as bishop, there is no promise that his own family will be protected from problems. During this time we discovered that our fourteen-year-old son was heavily into drugs. I chose to be honest in Relief Society with what was going on in our family, with the pain, and the process. In response, I received hugs, encouragement, and acceptance as we worked through my son's rehabilitation with him. The spirit of honesty and love permeated the entire ward. It felt like family.

"An honest, supportive sisterhood is harder to accomplish in a larger setting, but it boils down to an individual willingness to risk and share. If one person reaches out, it spills over to others who want and need to share but are too timid to start the process. The reaching out eventually forms a circle that connects everyone. In 2 Cor. 4:6, Paul describes what that connection feels like and what its source is: 'God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.' It seems to me that we are all striving to reach out to each other with the light of Christ in our own faces."

The sisters in Marilyn's ward are close to each other and close to the Lord because they have sought the gift of charity—the pure love of Christ. Though a young ward, they are mature in their thinking. At the end of Paul's marvelous discussion of charity in 1 Cor. 13 is a compelling statement about maturity: "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things" (v. 11). To some, this passage may refer to maturing in the things of the Spirit. I think Paul is saying that maturity enhances his charity. Maturity anchors our lives to the important principles governing daily living.

I remember so clearly when Barbara Bush, wife of George Bush, spoke on national television at the time of her husband's inauguration as president of the United States. It was an auspicious occasion. "See this styled hair?" she said. "See this designer suit? Take a good look because you probably won't see them again." Women loved Barbara Bush because she was able to say, "There is no artificial standard. I am comfortable with myself as I am, and I want you to know it." That's maturity—the ability to happily face yourself.

Maturity allows us to accept ourselves even when we're not all we want to be. Maturity allows us to accept who we are and where we are. We should never abandon the quest for a better self, but neither should we allow ourselves to become immobilized, thinking we are nothing. Accepting ourselves, knowing we are progressing, frees us to reach out to others in charitable ways.

As you take stock of yourself and your situation, base your evaluation of where you are on your own criteria, not that of another person. In visualizing the maturing process, I think of it as comparing: checkers to chess; commentaries to the actual scriptures; short-term satisfaction to long-range goals; self- centered ego needs to bonding together for the good of the whole. Are you thinking and acting inclusively? Are you appreciating another's best efforts? It is so easy to notice what people do wrong and what we would do differently. Can you imagine how different our world would be if we concentrated instead on what all of us do right, on the positive acts of ourselves and others? That's maturity.

There are times when all of us are not at our best—perhaps we have different communication styles, or maybe we're just feeling cranky. Whatever the reason, we may, at times, give or take offense. If that happens, it is so helpful, even soothing, to consider the character of the woman who may have spoken impatiently or bluntly disagreed with you. When a friend whom I know and trust speaks a little harshly, first I think, "Maybe she is having a bad day. Maybe I misunderstood her. Maybe something is troubling her." I'm not easily offended. My advice is, "If people drop an offense, don't pick it up!" I always expect the best from people. In our dispensation, the Lord said, "And by their desires and their works you shall know them" (D&C 18:38). I rejoice when I work with women who have righteous desires and do good works. I can be very patient with them. In turn, I hope they will understand my desires and be patient with me. Charity, after all, "suffereth long, and is kind" (1 Cor. 13:4). That's maturity.

And we must recognize that becoming mature is a process. As we mature, we "put away childish things" and begin to recognize the Lord's hand in so many simple but significant ways. Charity is the ability to rejoice in the accomplishments and the gifts of others, to forget about competing—over money, house size, success of children, or anything else. Charity—mature, pure Christlike love—is an arm that reaches out to encircle and reassure; it is a willingness to forgive—and forget—an unkind remark; it is the faith that we can do what the Lord has asked; it is the humility to take direction and the strength to lead.

I don't think age is the key to maturity. We don't simply mature as we grow old. We have to work at it. I wonder how King Solomon became so wise. His startling judgment in the case of the squabbling mothers—"Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other" (1 Kgs. 3:25)—is recognized for its depth of wisdom and maturity. How did he reach such a level of maturity? As a young man he said to the Lord, "I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in" (1 Kgs. 3:7). He needed to grow. It wasn't the physical process that concerned him, however, but the maturity that refines the feelings of the heart. He turned to the Lord for guidance. We put away childish things as we use Christ as our guide, for he, too, had to "increase in wisdom and stature and in favour with God and man" (see Luke 2:52).

I firmly believe that "charity never faileth"—unless it is never tried. In Paul's letter to the Corinthians, he promises to tell the Saints of "a more excellent way" to be one in Christ. Then, in 1 Cor. 13, he describes the way of charity: "Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil . . . Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. . . . When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things. . . . And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity" (1 Cor. 13:4, 5, 7, 11, 13). These are the gifts of the Spirit I have seen demonstrated by the women of Relief Society. They provide the "more excellent way" that Paul promised.

Mature people, regardless of age, are able to face themselves and act in positive ways despite flaws they may see. We all have parts of our character we are working on. Mature people "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men" (2 Ne. 31:20). As we put away childish things, as we mature spiritually, as we develop charity, we understand what we see, we know who we are, and we act upon what we believe.
