Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

NOTHING EXCITING EVER HAPPENS TO ME—AND OTHER MYTHS

Carol Clark Ottesen

Carol Clark Ottesen, a writing instructor at Brigham Young University in the honors department, is a published poet and the author of a recently published nonfiction book. She and her husband, Sterling E. Ottesen, are the parents of six children. She serves as ward organist.

Speaking of myths, let me tell you right off about a monster named Moleman invented by my son Eric to keep his younger sister in bed when he was baby-sitting her. Luckily for him, I was ignorant of this story until they were all grown and I read of Moleman in my now-adult daughter's journal: "Moleman lived in the large bushes just below our bedroom window, and he only came out at night. Then, according to Eric, he'd scratch on the window to signal that he was starting to dig a hole to come up through the floor of our bedroom. When he got there he'd stare at you for a long time, so close you could feel his breath before he attacked. When we heard that scratching on the window, we were paralyzed and, of course, never, never got out of bed. The image was so vivid, that hot breath so real, I was scared until I went to college."

I bring up this journal entry for two reasons. One is to give you an example of reaching back in your life and recording those seemingly childish incidents that are certainly not a contributing factor to the spiritual giant you have become, yet which add color and interest to your story. The other reason is that Moleman also represents for me the false fears and myths that keep us from doing personal writing.

One of those myths is that we have nothing extraordinary to write about. The poet Rilke says, "If your daily life seems poor, do not blame it; blame yourself . . . [for you] must call forth its riches" (italics added). [^1] My father, who grew up in Mesa, Arizona, wrote a book of stories about his life for his grandchildren. One of the stories begins like this: "'NOTHING EXCITING EVER HAPPENS TO ME,' and especially to a nine-year-old boy in a small town like Mesa on a boring hot summer day—that's what I thought. Up on the roof of our house, two men were painting it green. . . . I had a piece of bread and butter and was walking under the eaves of the house. I heard a rattling sound like an empty bottle coming down the roof. 'Look out,' a man shouted. I took a bite of bread and looked up—then five gallons of green paint came over my head and eyes and ears. My muffled cry brought my mother running. She stripped all my clothes off and scraped, dug and wiped paint out of my ears, eyes and hair. When I could open my eyes, some neighbors were there including a girl I liked pretty well, so I closed my eyes quick for I was naked. I was glad I had paint all over me. I tried to imagine that she didn't recognize me. . . . In a week or so with my hair all cut off, . . . I thought about how I wished I could live in New York where exciting things happen. I thought exciting things happen in Mesa to a small boy if you're in the right place at the right time when someone says, 'Look out!'" [^2]

Even if your life does not spill over you greenly or may seem to be a mere waiting for that wonderful "New York day" to come, your inner life is full of fire and fascination. Writer Eudora Welty, who never married, never had children, never ventured more than a few miles from her hometown, says, "I am a writer who came of a sheltered life. A sheltered life can be a daring life as well. For all serious daring starts from within." [^3] And it is when we dare to write about the truth that we begin to enjoy writing. And then we begin to see meaning in the things that have happened to us.

A former student of mine at California State University, an African-American woman of about forty, walked into my office one day and sat down beside my desk with a great sigh. Her face was passive, her sweat suit had holes in it, and her corn-row braids were gray at the roots. Her assignment was to write a twenty-five-page autobiography, but she couldn't think of anything to write. "My life is boring," she said. I ventured some provocative questions, but she only shrugged her shoulders, and I began to believe her life was boring. Finally she said grudgingly, "I have three kids. I work. Why would anybody want to read about my life?" But ultimately she began to open up. It seems she was born in poverty in a little town in Georgia. Her mother went away to work and left her to live with her grandmother. "It isn't worth talking about. Lived in a shantytown, so poor I'm not going to tell you about it. Thirteen kids. I was in the middle. . . . Nothing more, really. I did leave, though, when I was thirteen . . . .

"Had to. I saw what I'd have to do. All my other sisters, well, my grandma gave them to white men for money. She came to get me one day when I was thirteen. Had a man for me in the barn. She nearly caught me, but I got away. She ripped my dress, but I started running and I never came back. No matter what, I wasn't about to do that. No way. I got a job working for folks and then I hitched a ride to California.

"I knew my daddy was there, and I wanted to see him. But I found he didn't want anything to do with me. I got a job working in a motel and met Leroy. First time anybody showed me any attention.

"Then we had this retarded daughter. She's both mentally and physically handicapped. And then had two more kids real quick. He couldn't take it and left. My mom called and said she didn't have anywhere to go and could she come and live with me. So I went to work to support all of us and got my high school diploma at night. I was the first one in all my family to graduate from high school. Now there'll be another first. I graduate from college in June." [^4]

I wanted to shout, to dance her around the room, to embrace her, but said more sedately than I would have liked, "LaWanda, you are the heroine of a great story." She wrote her story and received an overwhelming ovation after she read it to the class. She was shocked. Later she came to me with a new air of confidence, "You know, writing this made me see what I actually did." LaWanda did not write as a victim or as a heroine but merely documented without judgment the events of her life.

I read many such stories from students of culturally diverse backgrounds at California State University, and I noticed that as the students shared these stories with one another, the hostility between ethnic groups lessened; the groups began to mix, and the students began to realize what it's like to be inside a certain skin color, or to be forced into a gang, or to be handicapped. And though we may not have had those particular experiences, we have not been without our own struggles. We need to share our stories as parents and children, as husbands and wives, to be understood and to understand. Does your family really know you?

In workshops I have heard many women voice another fear: "Does my family really want to know me? Who will ever read this stuff?" We may feel as Mormon pioneer Margaret Judd Clawson felt: "And now that I have written this long, disconnected, rambling remembrance of the past, I Scarsly know what to do with it For who Can be interested in the little things of [the] Common, everyday life of another?" [^5] Let me share a personal experience that says to me graphically: someone will read with hunger what you record.

Because my mother died when I was a teenager, I didn't have the luxury of asking her all those questions you want to ask after you get married and have children. At age thirty-two she contracted cancer. As a mother of five little children, she seemed to be almost canonized for her courage and faith in the face of eight years of suffering. For years, I lived with the shadow that I could never be that loved, that beautiful, that good. Years later when my father was moving, he found in the bottom of an old trunk the diary she had written as a teenager up to age nineteen. I read it voraciously, puzzled at first by this new image of an immature, volatile, boy-crazy teenager. I was amazed at the depth of her down times, the sentimental ecstasy of her discovery of the physical, the absence of the spiritual impulse that so permeated her maturity. And the puzzlement turned to a redemptive weeping—here was a human being in process, a real person I could love and forgive—not an impossible icon of perfection that made me want to give up before I began. Did I love her less to discover her struggle? Just the opposite. I loved her—perhaps even more because she was now accessible to me, and suddenly we walked hand in hand, joining with that continuum of mothers and daughters who strive together to meet the challenges particular to being a woman. If only one person reads your story, honestly written, and finds in it a personal revelation, your time is well spent.

We have all written some hogwash—trying to make our lives more acceptable—but journal writing should not be fiction. My belief is that if we reach into those places in us that cannot lie, if we see clear to the bottom, truth will be there and our view will be wide and revelatory, like God's.

I'd like to share a revelatory experience from my history. When I was about twelve, I had a friend, an only child who had everything materially that any child could want. I came from a large family, and we did a lot of sharing. I loved to play at my friend's house because it was so quiet and her mother served us lunch on placemats. Besides all that, she was beautiful. I thought she was the luckiest girl in the world. One Sunday, we both had to speak for the first time in sacrament meeting. My mother made me a dress for the occasion, in the era when homemade was definitely second class. On that Sunday, I put the dress on, arrived early with my talk perfectly memorized, and was sitting on the stand when my friend walked in the door. I watched her as she floated up the aisle in the most beautiful yellow dress I had ever seen, definitely store-bought. Her curls bounced; a gold bracelet shone on her wrist; her black patent-leather Mary Janes shone. She sat down by me, and I became brown-gray against the floating yellow dress. I was first to speak and, consumed with the comparison, I forgot the end of my talk. I sat down humiliated. At the end of the meeting, I headed for the side door and ran to the car, jumped in the back seat, and burst into hot tears. My mother came to the car, slipped into the back seat, and put her arm around me. But I pulled away and lashed out, "Did you see her? The dress? She was so beautiful! Why do I have to wear homemade dresses—why are we so poor?" She could have told me how ungrateful I was, how superficial, but instead she turned to me with tears in her eyes. "You know, Carol, I would give you the world if I could." She embraced me, and I wept for my own folly. I knew then she had clothed me in love like a princess, and I have never forgotten the warmth of those arms, the sense of what is ultimately important.

Perhaps you can think of an incident in your life in which you were disappointed or shamed, in which perhaps you came to an awareness of what is truly important. You can begin by writing that one story. Time yourself to see how much you can record in just five minutes. Allowing yourself a limited time compresses your thinking and lends spontaneity and vigor. Don't take time for issues of grammar: Kick that impertinent Moleman! Don't let him keep you under the covers.

The poet May Sarton said, "The senses are the keys to the past." [^6] Give detail so the reader can see and feel your experience. Don't just say, "I went to the prom," but "I wore a rose chiffon dress with tatting on the collar and little pink rosebuds embroidered on the edge." Relax your body in the chair; let your muscles sag. Close your eyes; breathe deeply. Forget your present surroundings and enter this memory. Feel it. Remember colors, sounds, smells, impressions, and begin to write. Write without stopping, no matter what, for five minutes. You'll be amazed at what you can do. Ultimately you will have a collection and can piece these together into the complex quilt that is your life.

Another myth is that writing is what we do when we have completed all other tasks. But if we view writing as MaryJan Munger suggests, as a service—a "communal and spiritual action"—then writing becomes a more justifiable choice. [^7] Writing is not just the act of expressing ourselves but is an ultimate act of charity. I'm grateful that my mother, in the last days of her life, spent her limited energy writing with a shaky hand, propped with a pillow, only a few minutes at a time, recording the important stories of her life so that we might know her and that her written testimony might stand as a witness of God's goodness. I'm indebted to the young Alma, who heard Abinadi in the court of King Noah and, at the peril of his life, hid himself away to record the words for me to read as a model of fearlessness and consummate faith.

Sisters, do not respond to self-negation or false fears, but test the deeps from which your life takes rise. Write about your workaday world as well as your peak experiences to help those who come after you who may feel constricted, doubtful, lonely, misunderstood. Though you may feel like writer Virginia Woolf, that rather than write in a journal you'd like to "roll up the crumpled skin of the day . . . and cast it into the hedge," [^8] write to find that in exhaustive dailiness is power, courage, a bringing forth of the highest consciousness of what it is to be a woman. Write.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] "When I was younger I could remember anything, whether it happened or not; but I am getting old, and soon I shall remember only the latter." Albert Bigelow Paine, Mark Twain, A Biography (1912), quoted in Bartletts' Familiar Quotations, 16th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1992), 528.
[^2] Joan Didion, Slouching towards Bethlehem (New York: Noonday Press, 1990), 139.
[^3] Alice Walker, quoted in foreword to Their Eyes Were Watching God, by Zora Neale Hurston (Urbana: University of Illinois, 1978), viii.
[^4] World Book Encyclopedia, s.v. "seed."
[^5] Thomas Moore, Care of the Soul: A Guide for Cultivating Depth and Sacredness in Everyday Life (New York: HarperPerennial, 1992), 285, 303.
[^6] May Sarton, quoted in Barnet and Stubbs's Practical Guide to Writing, 4th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1983), 342.
[^7] MaryJan Gay Munger, "Creating Zion: Why Write in the Household of Faith," Annual of the Association for Mormon Letters, ed. Lavina Fielding Anderson (Provo, Utah: Association for Mormon Letters, 1996), 58.
[^8] Virginia Woolf, A Room of One's Own (San Diego, Calif.: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1929), 24.
