Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

SOUL STORIES

Natalie Curtis McCullough

Natalie Curtis McCullough and her husband, James R. McCullough, are the parents of four children, with whom they hike, boat, camp, and ski. Natalie enjoys public speaking and teaching writing projects in her children's classrooms. She volunteers as an English tutor for middle-school students taking English as a Second Language (ESL) courses and is a substitute seminary teacher.

I believe it was Mark Twain who gave my favorite reason for keeping a journal when he said something to this effect: The older I get, the more clearly I remember things that never happened. [^1] One of the things that never happened to me which I remember well, but have not told many people about, is that I grew up crossing the plains with Mormon pioneers in their exodus to the Salt Lake Valley. Night after exhilarating night, I battled rattlesnakes, recovered missing cattle before they required blessings for health, fought in Indian raids, and single-handedly delivered babies in rain-soaked tents.

All I needed to transform the end of my bed into a high-performance covered wagon on the Mormon Trail was a pillowcase. I needed a pillowcase because my mother had seven children and no interest in hair. Every several months, whether my hair needed attention or not, I was taken to Bob's Barbershop in Foothill Village to submit to Bob's shears for what my mother called "a cute little pixie haircut." In today's vernacular, a pixie would be a near miss with a buzz. Pioneer women did not wear pixies. So, I bobby-pinned my pillow case to my head each night after the lights went out. Suddenly, I had long blonde ringlets falling into golden tresses that I tossed from shoulder to shoulder. No sooner did the hair fall down my back than I could hear the lowing of oxen, the creaking of wagon wheels, and sometimes, the menacing hiss of a rattlesnake.

The stories of my childhood are more than valued bridges back to my children. They are pioneer pathways leading to my own emotional frontier. I want them recorded, in all their simplicity, because my experiences and stories become my history, and it is from my history that I form my identity.

I married a man with a list of goals as long as my arm. For every one checked off, he adds another. He has never left the house without a destination. He knows the date we were married. I, on the other hand, remember being moved out of my bedroom the night before my wedding to make way for another child, sleeping on the couch, bawling the entire night. My husband remembers the weight of our children at birth. I remember the sound of nursing babies in the night and learning to turn my rocker into the corner of the room so my scratchy lullabies would echo back sounding fuller and more soothing. I can close my eyes at any moment and feel the thrill of the sink and rise of cutting figure eights in wilderness powder, skiing with my sweetheart for my fortieth birthday. My sweetheart has calculated how big a profit percentage the helicopter pilot made and how many calories he burned per turn. Jim has always known where he is going. I know where I have been.

One of the compelling images of journal writing has its roots in the early Saints of the Restoration. These were pioneers in the literal and symbolic sense of the word. Theirs were the diaries and letters and journals to record the epic Latter-day Saint events from conversion to purification. They pushed the frontier in every conceivable way, from groundbreaking religious ideals to backbreaking temple building to heartbreaking exodus. Their stories have become our identity as a faithful people, a temple-worthy people, a missionary people. Their stories teach us where we have been and inspire us to continue onward. It is from the lives of Emma, Eliza, and Emmeline that we know to value our own Elaine.

My adult life has been shaped by my adolescent experience of watching my mother die from the metastasis of cancer over a period of seven years, from the time I was ten to the time I was seventeen. Many are the vague, sacred fears I have lived by that were cultivated in my mother's garden. At the time, I imagined my experience to be so rich and painful that I would never forget it. And yet, I have relatively few specific memories of my mother in all those days we shared around her sickbed. I have already lost touch with the teenage Natalie, pioneering the wilderness of a loved one's death, because I protected her pain, unexamined and unrecorded. When Joan Didion says in her book, Slouching towards Bethlehem, "I have already lost touch with a couple of people I used to be," her imagery haunts me. [^2]

Whether or not they blossom in the garden of our life's history, all our experiences enrich the soil. I have no words to tell my sorrow that my mother's thoughts and feelings went unrecorded. Because she did not keep a journal and she died young, I lost her twice. Writer Alice Walker said: "And when we go in search of our mother's gardens, it's not really to learn who trampled on them or how or even why—we usually know that already. Rather, it is to learn what our mothers planted there, what they thought as they sowed, and how they survived the blighting of so many fruits." [^3]

In other words, the stories and feelings recorded in our journals are about soul work. In that sense, maybe Star Trek has missed the mark, entirely overreaching: maybe our journals are the last great frontier. My mother's illness, my fear of her death, the actual loss of her, and the fear of my own early death have had singular impact on me. As I approach and then pass some of Mother's significant dates—her first mastectomy at age thirty-seven and so forth—I find myself reexperiencing the emotional trauma, which resurrects all my regrets for Mother and my fears for myself. My journal is the garden of refuge where I turn to have my heart really known, my cancerous fears validated, and my adolescent self understood and thus liberated. It is through my own midlife journal that I begin to understand "what my mother planted, what she may have thought as she sowed, and how she survived the blighting of so many fruits." In a very real sense, my journal acts as surrogate mother.

In the children's book Are You My Mother? by P. D. Eastman, a baby duck quacks around asking all the different farm animals, "Are you my mother?" No, the cow won't take responsibility for the little duckling, neither will the pig nor the dog, and so forth. I can't remember how the story ends. Maybe because I am still mired in asking the question of assorted women in my life, Will you be my mother? Will you take responsibility for knowing and loving me? So far, many women have blessed my life with significant nurturing. And through the arduous soul work of my journal, I slowly emerge as more able to love and value myself.

The bulbs along my front border blossomed early last spring. I worried over them in February when they burst from the earth too soon, fearful they would be crushed by the late spring snows. I anguished they would be shredded before Easter, and Mother's Day brought them into full bloom. My daughters daily reported the coming of the tender green shoots, while I wished they would retreat back into the safety of the earth's womb. We learn humility through the early blooming of late February and early March thaws. Who are we to schedule the moments most convenient to have our flowers bloom? Their motion is upward towards the sun and whatever fate awaits them. My job is to admire them, appreciate them when they come. I marvel that my bulbs risked coming forth in January to be loved by the sun.

Perhaps it is not so different with our creative, pioneering energies. I have spent fruitless energy repressing thoughts that appear at random, inconvenient, or emotionally unsafe times. A journal can be the welcoming garden where the heart's seeds come to fruition.

One summer, I preferred to spend time writing with my children rather than driving them frantically to lessons. The first week of summer found us working in the garden, so we naturally studied "seeds" as a writing concept.

We learned that every seed contains the beginnings of a root and the beginnings of a stem. A seed can weigh as much as the double coconut tree seed, which tips the scale at fifty pounds, or as little as orchid seeds, which require eight hundred thousand seeds to make an ounce. There is no apparent relationship between the size of the seed and the size of the plant that develops from it. We learned that seeds may remain dormant for varying periods of time until the most favorable conditions for germination occur. The general span for viability is from a few weeks to fifty years, but ten-thousand-year-old lotus seeds have germinated under the right conditions. [^4] With these facts in mind, my daughters set out to write about themselves as if they were a seed, soil-surrounded and ready to struggle for light and air and space.

Some cousins were staying with us on that particular morning. One of them, eleven-year-old Catherine, wrote, "I was finally pushing my way up through the soil. It was comforting to know that part of me was staying in the place I loved and part of me was going to somewhere new. I would expand, share my secret beauty, and offer my seeds."

Isn't that a lovely idea? A germinating seed feels both the pull of the womb, wanting to sink and stay soil-surrounded, and the hope of breaking into a new identity, experiencing change and hoping to bear seeds of its own. The metaphor is not too simple for us all to imagine that we are seeds, wanting to express rootedness and adventure. I always wanted to participate in the "roots and wings" idea, but for me it is awkward imagery. Roots and wings are not features of the same thing. But a root to push down and a stem pulsating up, that is an image to ponder. That is what writing in a journal feels like to me.

I understand myself as a seed with immature root and stem, a stored supply of food, and, unfortunately, a protective seed covering that often keeps me from exposing my real feelings. I write in my journal to shed the protective seed coat that holds me compressed and dormant. Sometimes it is a long stretch skyward. Writing, like gardening, is risky business. It is not only about cultivating the soil and planting seeds. It is about thinning, weeding, and the sometimes sickeningly successful bounty of harvest.

Not all our gardens have to be public. There is no answer to the question, "Why write in a journal?" that does not begin with the inestimable joy of seeing my name at the top of a piece of white, blank paper. There is no understanding the answer short of the metaphor of bulbs and blossoms. Seeds long buried and not intentionally nurtured come forth into ideas and stories of such presumptuous beauty that I must concede credit to the Spirit and congratulate myself, simultaneously. I keep a journal to discover what I know, how I know it, and why it matters. I write to unearth treasures and mysteries buried in my heart. Writing the tender stirrings of my heart is the act of spring on my subconscious. It is not always a blossom that rises up to be shown, but it is always important.

Most of what I write is not to share or show. Few are the flowers of my thoughts that are destined for a crystal vase on the piano. But the thoughts are vibrant, growing things and are welcomed in privacy as well as for public display. I keep a journal to witness the miracle of sitting to an empty page and watching the soul fill it.

Some people keep a journal for the factual accounting of their whereabouts. Others resist writing for the invasion of privacy they feel. Many complain that they have nothing to record. Maybe it is the little lost details of our lives that make the richest compost for our gardens. Thomas Moore said: "To live with a high degree of artfulness means to attend to the small things, . . . [for they are] the very heart of soul-making. From some grand overview of life, it may seem that only the big events are important. But to the soul, the most minute details and the most ordinary activities, carried out with mindfulness and art, have an effect far beyond their apparent insignificance. . . . Art is not about the expression of talent or the making of pretty things. It is about preservation and containment of the soul. It is about arresting life and making it available for contemplation." [^5]

Preservation of the soul is the point of journal writing. Nephi said, "Behold, I write the things of my soul" (2 Ne. 4:15). The Savior told Joseph Smith to "care for the soul and the life of the soul" (D&C 101:37). Journal writing is one way to record and remember your developing soul. A journal becomes personal scripture, in this sense.

If soul work is the point of journal keeping, why do we squander ourselves on things that diminish our spirit? Maybe the Lord is interested in what we have learned, what we hope, how large our soul has grown, and what we value.

In rereading my journals of many years, I see that I chose my life for the very privileges that overwhelm and discourage me. I treasure my children, but none of them self-clean. I'm grateful for a yard and garden, but they won't vacation when I do. I value friendships, but I am a largely interior personality. A journal gives me the perspective to embrace all of this.

Our family took a hike called "The Pioneer Register" in Capitol Reef National Park recently. My girls loved running up the sandstone and climbing into hollowed-out pockets of red rock, just their size, made by wind and rain. A short way into the walk we encountered the Pioneer Register on the steep, smooth canyon wall, where pioneers who traveled the then-treacherous road etched their names into the rock. The beautifully inscribed signatures with their curlicues and graceful lettering inspire belief in the nineteenth-century men and women who settled the harsh desert area, planting orchards that still produce fruit, nudging space from grudging sage, cedar, and cactus.

The next mile or so was filled with recent graffiti from those who read the register and felt the desire to leave their own name somewhere on the canyon walls. Of course, my children wished to leave their names, and it was no small task to explain why the signatures and symbols of the past were both artistically and historically significant, but alas, our names did not belong on the walls. They could not understand why their name would deface the rock, but the name of a passerby a century removed was a thing to treasure. Wouldn't someone a distant century from now value our names as we did the pioneers'—and the Anasazi markings a thousand years before that? they asked. I tried to reason that part of the wonder in reading the pioneer names came from the fact that they were first in their era to enter-to-stay in this remote area. They were first to build the road, to cultivate and value the harsh land. But we came later, by their fruits, and must have a higher vision for our names than so much graffiti on the walls of life. Then, children satisfied, I wondered if what I told them was true.

Implicit in the desire to etch our names is the belief that others will follow and find our lives as curious and interesting as we have found those of others who went before us. We learned on our petroglyph hike the day before that the Anasazi markings may have been not so much attempts at important messages as just a way of leaving their mark, of saying, "We were here and found deer," or "We worshiped here," or "This is our territory. Trespass and we will fight." Why were these messages of greater historical significance than the one which might read, "The McCulloughs passed this way and were happy" or "It is a pleasure to watch my daughters climb the red rock with grace and agility"?

Walking out of the canyon we noticed a wooden stand with a register and a sign inviting all park visitors to leave their name and comments. It doesn't matter that no one reads them. They are an attempt to replicate the park's bathroom stalls, pine signs, and historic canyon cliffs. Maybe that accounts in small part for the step from historic graffiti to spray paint on freeway signs and business buildings. The point is, the register was filled. It is the modern equivalent of the petroglyph.

Some intrinsic part of the human experience makes us want to communicate what we are feeling. We all experience some degree of desire, at some time, to leave our mark, telling the world that we accomplished something of note, that we passed by, that we were here.

Whether people sneak their names as a scrawled blemish on an obscure wall in a remote canyon in the central Utah desert, make pencil marks in a register no one will read, or sprawl them across the cover of Time magazine, our names belong somewhere.

By our interest in and preservation of a journal, we all place our names on our own "pioneer register." We have all felt the desire to leave our name, our story, our message to the next traveler. We enrich and enlarge our souls by the expression of our fear, hope, wonder. That truth best addresses my interest in journals. They are one more place where pioneers may come to see themselves in a larger context, one more register in which people may come to be valued. We write the things of our soul so that they may be called sacred records by our children and our children's children. We must write the things that have been, the things that are, and the things we hope for. In the great tradition of the early Saints who gathered to Zion, we can plant seeds for the next wagon train of pillowcase pioneers to harvest.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Matthew Green, The Spleen (1737), line 69, quoted in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 16th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1992), 307.
[^2] Joan Didion, Slouching towards Bethlehem (New York: Noonday Press, 1990), 139.
[^3] Alice Walker, quoted in foreword to Their Eyes Were Watching God, by Zora Neale Hurston (Urbana: University of Illinois, 1978), viii.
[^4] World Book Encyclopedia, s.v. "seed."
[^5] Thomas Moore, Care of the Soul: A Guide for Cultivating Depth and Sacredness in Everyday Life (New York: HarperPerennial, 1992), 285, 303.
