Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

THERE'S NO SUCH THING AS A MID-LAUGH CRISIS

Louise Durham

Louise Durham received her bachelor's degree from the University of Utah and teaches English at Timpview High School in Provo, Utah. A homemaker, she and her husband, W. Cole Durham Jr., are the parents of four children. She teaches the home and family lessons in her ward Relief Society.

I learned to laugh in the back seat of a Ford station wagon as a seven-year-old traveling to Denver with my nine brothers and sisters. At least two of us were carsick at any given moment. I remember looking from face to anxious face wondering who would need the bucket next. Only my older sister, Janice, seemed full of disdain rather than worry. Four years older than I but acknowledged by all as the ranking authority in the family, she looked on as each new victim succumbed and muttered, "That's disgusting." So when Janice's face finally whitened and then took on the familiar green around the eyes and nose, I couldn't restrain myself; I giggled. It was a chain reaction: nine of us in various stages of misery laughed out loud. And then, almost as instinctively, we bellowed in unison: "Ooh, that's disgusting." More laughter. That drew the attention of even my parents, who were in another country—the front seat.

"What's so funny?" they asked.

"Janice is throwing up." The poetic justice overrode sympathy. They laughed, too.

I suppose I had laughed a lot before this particular instance, but it is my earliest lasting impression. My family still laughs about that trip, although each of us remembers it differently.

Even though she doesn't admit it, my sister Janice needed our laughter. Without a word, we communicated valuable information to her. We told her, "Hey, Janice, nobody likes to be yelled at for something entirely out of their control when they don't feel well" and "Hey, Janice, watch out. What goes around comes around. Now take some of your own medicine."

Even more, we needed to laugh with each other. Packed together so tightly we stuck to each other's skin, our laughter said worlds to us: "We're all in this together. No one is exempt, but we can get through this."

As far as I'm concerned, humor is serious business. It is both a salve to heal wounds and an astringent that occasionally stings in the right places. It is instantaneous perception. Sometimes humor declares to the world, "I understand how little this matters." Laughing often clears vision and can put things back into focus. When my son was a baby, I worried about his drooling. Some mothers put bibs on their children when they eat. That's when I took Michael's bib off. It was the only time he didn't drool. I researched drooling in all the children's medical books I could find, but I unearthed remarkably little information. I asked my pediatrician about drooling. He only stared at me. Time didn't diminish the problem. Finally, I confided my worst fear to my husband: "He's going to drool at his missionary farewell," I lamented.

"We'll cross that bridge when we come to it," my husband replied.

Somebody should have laughed. I should have been shown right then—even in my pre-varicose-vein innocence—that my fears were foolish. Michael may even have drooled a bit at his missionary farewell; I don't know because I wasn't paying attention. I was absorbed in the gentleness of his spirit and the power of his testimony.

One of the most important things we can do for our children is to teach them what matters in life. Humor is an effective sorting tool, but we can't be effective teachers until we learn how to laugh at ourselves. Early in our marriage, my husband and I experienced one of those miscommunications that ends in disaster—or what seems like disaster before you know what real disaster is. As we attempted to sort things out, we found ourselves disagreeing hotly about who was at fault. Neither of us remembers what we were arguing about, but we were definitely angry with each other. I wanted to get to the bottom of the situation and lay the blame where it belonged—squarely in my husband's lap. But he's a lawyer. He kept finding ways to implicate me. Our discussion grew more heated. Finally, weary of the fight to be right, my husband looked at me kindly. "Louise, there's no question that this was my fault. In fact, let's just stipulate here and now that whatever happens in the future is also my fault. That way we won't have to fight about it." I accepted the offer. For years afterward, misunderstandings and disagreements melted away as we acknowledged Cole as the source of the problem and then burst out laughing. Our partnership has benefited from the shared belief that there's no such thing as a mid-laugh crisis.

Anna Tueller, a friend and master teacher, tells how her own mother conceded with flair to a superior opponent, her recalcitrant teenage daughter. In one exchange, the daughter blurted out angrily to her mother, "Go soak your head in the toilet." A few minutes later, Anna's mother appeared in the room with her long hair sopping wet. "Is this what you wanted?" she asked. The conflict was forgotten in the ensuing laughter.

My children have also helped in my education. One day I was fixing dinner when my high school senior walked in and said, "Hi, Gunther."

Gunther? What does that mean? Is it dirty? I tried to act nonchalant, knowing that if I appeared to be bothered by the name, it would stick.

"Why do you call me that?" I asked casually.

"I don't know," Emily said. "You just look like a Gunther."

Bethany walked in. "Who's Gunther."

"Mom is."

"Yeah, she looks like a Gunther."

I smiled and was particularly entertaining at dinner, hoping to deflect attention from my new name. I made it almost halfway through the meal when I made the mistake of asking for the peas. Emily boomed out: "Pass the peas to Gunther." I knew it was over.

"Who's Gunther?" This time it was my ten-year-old.

"Mom."

"Oh. Why?"

"It just fits her."

"Okay."

That was almost four years ago. Last night before I went to bed I left a note on the kitchen counter for Emily. "You got three phone calls. Dinner is in the fridge. Don't forget to lock the door. Love, Gunth."

My children love to hear the story of how I didn't get into Pep Club. It was the most important thing in my life, the symbol of all that matters when you're sixteen: acceptance, validation, popularity, attention, uniforms. After a week of marching, posters, skits, and interviews, the newly selected members were notified with signs and balloons decorating the fronts of their houses. At the appointed time, I went outside. Nothing. Not a balloon, not a note. It must have fallen down, I thought. I looked behind the bushes. Then I crawled behind the bushes. They were prickly bushes. Still nothing. I called my mother frantically: "Did anyone take down any signs from the front of the house?"

"Sorry."

I went back inside, heartbroken. Mother read my face. "I know why you didn't make Pep Club," she said. "The judges knew you are strong enough to take defeat. Some other girls wouldn't have been able to handle it as well."

Do you have any idea how much I wanted to believe my mother? I was looking for a way out of my humiliation. Now whenever any family member suffers horrendous, humiliating defeat or rejection, someone invariably says, "I know why you weren't chosen; it's because the judges know you can take it. Others might not be able to handle being a loser as well as you can." Then we laugh. I love sharing life with my children, the successes as well as the failures. My miscues make them laugh. They also carry a comforting message: If Mom can laugh at such losses, so can we.

With humor, our shortcomings are no longer debilitating weaknesses but common bonds that link us together. Think about it. The one trait we all share is imperfection. If we laugh at them, the flaws aren't threatening. My daughter Bethany is almost six feet tall, a fact that wouldn't bother her if she weren't convinced that boys by definition are 5'10'' or shorter. Bethany has lived all her life with tall jokes: "Bethany, what's the weather like up there? Any ships on the horizon?" She must have become immune to these barbs, because when she ran for junior class vice president, she came up with slogans that laughed at her height. "As Tall As a Tree, Only Nicer"; "As High As a Mountain, but Easier to Talk To"; "As Long As a River, Only Friendlier"; and so on. I loved the campaign. It was a big success. She lost the election. After a few tears, we laughed and kidded, "As tall as a tree, only less popular." Bethany's own joke allowed her to bridge the gap from realization of the loss to acceptance and also to understand how little the election mattered in the long run—or even the short. Our joking with Bethany said, "You haven't let anybody down. This loss doesn't diminish your worth. You don't have any reason for regret or reproach." Children need such messages in times of disappointment just as they need the disappointment. They must be able to recognize trivia so that it will not ultimately obscure what really matters.

Humor in a family says, "All is well—or it will be eventually. Even if times are tough, even if you messed up, even if pain is required, all is well. You don't have to face this alone." Humor is often a way of getting through an uncomfortable or disappointing experience, of coping with the adversity that threatens to break us.

My father-in-law had multiple sclerosis. In his final years, it was difficult and then impossible for him to speak. Although the disease was the source of much pain and frustration, one of my favorite memories is of him and my mother-in-law doubled over in laughter because no one could understand what he was trying to say. He made a series of attempts to articulate, each more ludicrous than the last. They laughed until the tears filled their eyes. Although tears in those days were close to the surface, it took laughter to release them.

Laughter brings a feeling of well-being to a family. My husband's grandfather used to ask, "Are you happy? Then notify your face." It's good advice.

One day my young daughter asked me, "Do you like being a mom?"

I was surprised. "Why do you ask?"

"You don't look happy," she said. Children are sensitive to slight changes in countenance, an important lesson I learned from a five-year-old who stopped me mid-chore and began rubbing the skin on my forehead.

"What are you doing?" I asked.

"I'm getting rid of your mad."

My "mad," as she called it, was a wrinkled forehead, which apparently is my unconscious reaction to stress. "Mommy, don't show your mad," my children used to plead when they were young. It has been a poignant reminder to me. Children ought to know that being a mother is a joyful experience. They deserve to hear it, too, but they ought to be able to read it on our faces as well. Laughing eyes or smiles say, "I'm happy. I like what I'm doing." If we're joyful mothers, we need to notify our faces. Our children will get the message either way.

I like the advice of British poet Matthew Green. "Fling but a stone, the giant dies. / Laugh and be well." [^1] Humor is such a stone. With so many giants confronting our children, we do well to make sure they don't leave home without it. We can be sure that the scorners, the mockers, and the scoffers will come. Those who can laugh at themselves will be impervious to the world's weapons.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Matthew Green, The Spleen (1737), line 69, quoted in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 16th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1992), 307.
