Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

ROLLER-COASTER PARENTING

Janene Wolsey Baadsgaard

Janene Wolsey Baadsgaard, a homemaker and freelance writer, is the author of several books on family matters. She has been a columnist for the Deseret News, written articles for the New Era and the Ensign, and taught at Utah Valley State College. She serves as the home and family education teacher in her ward Relief Society. She and her husband, Ross, are the parents of nine children.

Can you remember your first time on a roller-coaster ride? I remember too well, especially that first big hill. I clenched my teeth, held on so tight my knuckles went white, and wondered hysterically, "Why did I ever want to go on this ride? I must be crazy. I know I'm going to pass out, throw up, fall out, and die!"

I was terrified, and it must have shown, because my mother took one look at me and yelled, "Scream, Janene, scream!" I followed her advice and let out a blood-curdling scream. A strange thing happened. The ride didn't suddenly become any less scary, but I started having a good time because I quit trying to hide my fear. Family life is like that. You find yourself laughing one minute, screaming the next. Motherhood especially is one colossal, wild journey full of ups and downs, twists and turns. One of the important quests in life is to discover what frees us up to enjoy the ride.

Most of us are like my young son Joseph. One day after he had been caught punching his brother and I plastered him with a reprimand, he lowered his eyebrows and grumbled back at me, "Why did we have to come down from heaven anyway?"

"Why, Joseph," I answered, "when you were in heaven, you shouted for joy because you were so happy about the chance to come down to earth and get a body and experience everything here."

"Oh yeah?" Joseph answered. "Well, if I did, I was just teasing."

Joseph expresses well what many of us feel when we're faced with life on the uphill side. Like that first big hill on the roller-coaster ride, we find ourselves wondering, "Why did we have to come down from heaven anyway?" In 2 Ne. 2:25 we learn why: "Men are, that they might have joy." Do we really believe that? Do we really believe that the reason we exist—men, women, and children—is to have joy? Then why are all of us so serious so much of the time?

Feeling joy and finding humor can be learned, practiced, reinforced, and internalized just like any other skill. Humor is not just telling jokes but a way of looking at life and responding to it positively. When we decide to respond to life this way in spite of our circumstances, it's easier to find the silly or absurd around us. Take, for example, the church bulletin board notice announcing: "There will be meetings in the north and south ends of the church. Children will be baptized on both ends." Or the sign on a hospital bulletin board: "Research shows that the first five minutes of life can be the most risky." Someone alert to absurdity had penciled underneath: "The last five minutes are pretty risky, too."

Humor's lenses allow us not only to see what's funny around us but to deflate a bit of life's very real troubles. One concentration camp survivor advised her daughter: "Take life lightly. . . . Pain is inevitable, but suffering is optional." That is a profound thought. We can't control what happens to us, but we can choose how to respond. I think of the well-known athlete being carried off the football field with a serious injury. The newspapers reported that through clenched teeth he quipped to the stretcher-bearers, "My mother was right. I'm so glad I have on clean underwear."

To keep healthy we not only have to exercise and eat right, we have to laugh regularly and think right. People who treat a stress or a threat as a challenge rather than as a negative event generally have more fun and energy to cope with everyday difficulties. With our families or on the job, humor can break a conflict cycle and foster cooperative solutions to problems. One wife tells of a time when she and her husband had started arguing and couldn't stop the cycle. Because they were both being dramatic anyway, she decided to play out the scene to the hilt. She clutched her heart and threw herself on the floor, yelling, "Oh you're so right it's killing me!" Her sudden burst of insanity drained the steam out of the conflict. Another wife released her resentment over her husband's too-frequent hunting trips by placing a classified advertisement: "Husband for sale cheap. Comes complete with hunting and fishing equipment, one pair of jeans, two shirts, boots, black Labrador retriever, and too many pounds of venison. Pretty good guy, but not home much from October to December and from April to October. Will consider trade." After approximately sixty-six phone calls, some of them serious, the wife placed another ad: "Retraction of husband for sale cheap. Everybody wants the dog, not the husband." Being able to laugh—instead of bemoaning our fate or resenting other people—is mentally healthy.

I admit it isn't always easy to reverse a bad mood. When I'm having a bad day or dark thoughts, I can usually change the way I feel by changing the way I think. I start that mental process by mentally finishing this thought: "I am so grateful for . . ." Joy comes when I pay attention to all the things I'm grateful for instead of all my problems. While I was in bed because of premature labor a few years ago, I became telephone buddies with Blanche, a woman who was confined to bed because of a stroke. Before her stroke, Blanche had been wheelchair bound for thirty years because of a doctor's devastating error in surgery. Her husband, unable to face the trauma, left her to raise their four children alone. Now bedridden, she had every reason to focus on what she had lost. Instead, in our telephone conversations she chose to focus on what she had retained. From her bedroom window, Blanche could see a single tree. During our conversations, she would describe in detail the intricate changes the seasons brought to her tree. "It's such a miracle to be able to see," Blanche said one day. "I have so much to live for. I am so grateful I can see."

Blanche spoke with the same detail of her grandchildren. Unable to walk, often alone, Blanche could have been miserable. Instead she chose gratitude. And her grateful heart showered her with beauty and blessings everywhere she looked, even when her entire landscape was limited to a tiny bedroom.

Over the weeks of waiting for my baby to reach end of term, I took prenatal lessons from Blanche on celebrating life: I am the only one who can give my children a mother who loves life, no matter what. I learned from watching her to see life as it really is. Life as it really is—even not at its best—is downright amazing.

I sometimes forget, however, that I don't experience true joy on a smooth celestial highway. To experience joy, I have to experience its opposite. Without sorrow and pain, like the uphill climb on the roller coaster, there is no hill to descend, no thrill or reward, no true joy.

Before I met Blanche, I had learned this lesson the hard way. One evening, soon after my husband and I moved into our first new home, we seeded our front yard with grass. The next morning my husband told me it was important to keep the dirt wet or the grass seeds wouldn't sprout. Then he kissed me on the cheek and left for work.

Since it was the middle of a hot July, this wet-dirt assignment was a full-time job. On top of that, I was pregnant and had two baby daughters to care for. I remember standing out on the front porch, feeling lightheaded and nauseated, squirting the dirt for hours while my one- and two-year-old daughters tumbled down the steps, threw their shoes in the ditch, and stuffed tiny rocks up their noses. After days and days of constant watering, our front yard began growing the biggest, greenest weeds in the whole neighborhood.

"This is my life," I remember mumbling as I sprayed the dirt. "All I do is water weeds. I feed one end of the girls and clean up the other. Nothing I do really matters. All I do is water weeds."

A few days later, I started having serious complications with my pregnancy, and late one night I began hemorrhaging. My husband quickly called a neighbor to watch our children and raced me to the emergency room of the nearest hospital. After the doctor arrived at the hospital and slowed the bleeding, he told us that our baby had died.

Leaving the hospital that night with empty arms was one of the hardest things I've ever done. When we arrived home, we found our two baby daughters asleep on our bed. Now, I'd always loved my daughters but never quite as I did at that moment.

"Thank you, God," I whispered. "They are alive. It is such a miracle to have a child who is alive."

Several days later when I went out to check on our front lawn of weeds, I found something I hope I never forget. If I got down on my hands and knees and took out a magnifying glass, I could see tiny green blades of grass so fine they looked like green sewing thread. All my watering was starting to pay off. It occurred to me that perhaps all the work involved in caring for a family was like our newly seeded lawn. It seems to be all work and weeds at first. It's hard to see the tender seedlings or take joy in their growing. But in time my children, like the lawn, will not require my constant care, and our mutual growing season in my home will have passed all too quickly.

So let's not put off living and loving and laughing. The joy of life is in the ride. So stop waiting. Eat more ice cream, go barefoot, watch more sunsets, laugh more, cry less, let out a few screams, and get into the adventure of it. Let's quit viewing life as a long, hard, uphill ride to the ultimate destination of heaven. I'm sure heaven will be wonderful, but so is life right now. There is more joy and wonder right here in our own lives than we are willing or able to enjoy. Just think . . . all this and heaven, too!
