Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

LOOSEN UP AND LAUGH

Lori Boyer

Lori Duncan Boyer received her bachelor's degree in elementary education and special education at the University of Utah. A homemaker, she and her husband, Richard Boyer, have eight children. Lori serves as Relief Society president in her ward.

For me, humor is the WD40(TM) in the grind of everyday life. Humor rescues me from friction in countless crucial ways. First, I find humor can diffuse the tension and douse the sparks in very volatile situations. My husband will always be grateful to a man who saved him with humor from a terribly embarrassing incident. Richard had been invited to his high school girlfriend's home for a formal, no-holds-barred, linen-and-fine-china Sunday dinner. For a teenage boy, fathers and fine china are unwelcome prospects. But he really liked this girl and recognized the significance of the invitation. He wanted to make a good impression, so he dressed up, sought a briefing from his mother on dinner etiquette, and arrived at his girlfriend's house reasonably well prepared.

The whole family was there, a large family. He was the only guest. After the blessing on the food, the girl's father turned to my husband and said, "Richard, please pass the salt and pepper."

Richard, praying that no one would notice his hand was shaking, picked up the crystal salt and pepper shakers, reached out to hand them to the father, but instead dropped them in a goblet of ice water. To his horror, the goblet shattered, spilling water everywhere.

A long painful silence ensued during which Richard fervently wished to disappear. Then the father said amiably, "Richard, please pass the salt water."

Everyone doubled over with laughter, and the tension was broken. The father's gentle joke was a way of saying, "It's okay, Richard; we always shatter the goblets and spill our water. You'll fit right in here."

What could have been a humiliating experience is instead a funny memory. Although the daughter relinquished Richard to me, he is still very good friends with her whole family.

My brother-in-law is also a master at turning potential fiascos into fun. When he and my sister were first married, she was nervously getting ready for her first back-to-school night as a high school history teacher. She was much closer in age to the students than to the parents. Thoughts of presenting to them her teaching plan for the year thoroughly intimidated her.

For dinner she put some chicken pot pies in the oven. When her husband came home from work, she asked him to listen for the timer, get the pies out, and call her in from the other room where she would be getting dressed. After a bit, she heard the creak of the oven door, followed by a crash and resounding clatter. Already tense, she snapped, "That better not have been the pot pies!"

When there was no answer from the kitchen, she assumed Jim had knocked a pan off the counter or dropped a lid or something. She returned to mental rehearsals and distracted hair combings. When Jim called, she headed to the kitchen. On the floor in front of the oven was a modest mound of chicken pot pies. Surrounding the pies on the floor were place mats, silverware, and Jim, looking eager to eat. Not only did she laugh, but she joined him on the floor and went off to back-to-school night fortified by chicken pot pie Ã la linoleum and the thought that, really, very few things in life are worth getting uptight over.

Second, humor is a great attention-getter. As a parent of eight, I find myself repeating lectures so often even I get bored with them. Often my kids are bored, too. In fact, they even have numbers for the lectures. When I begin the discourse on the dangers of leaving backpacks by the door so that a mother trips over them, they have been known to nudge each other and say, "Here goes lecture number 6." Sometimes my lectures are so memorable they can even recite them with me. I try to convince them that I give the same lectures day after day because things just don't get done. But sometimes a fresh approach gets the point across better. For example, one night at dinner everyone had forgotten their table manners. Eight hungry, grabby, gabby children proved oblivious to lecture number 3 on what napkins and silverware are for and number 11 on transporting food without injuring others at the table. By the end of the meal my husband and I knew we had to try a new tactic. The next night, dinner began as usual, but as soon as he heard the amen on the blessing, my husband yelled, "Lori, the casserole!"

I scooped out a huge blob of casserole and catapulted it down to Richard's end of the table with an overhand shot. About one-third landed on his plate, one-third on his lap, and one-third on the dog's head. Richard immediately frisbeed a tortilla to my end of the table and then dived ravenously into the Mexicali casserole on his lap. I, meantime, was shoveling food into my mouth as fast as I could and elbowing everyone around me. The children froze in horror. Then they started laughing. It was the funniest lecture they had ever seen.

Without knowing whether this tactic would prove effective in changing their behavior, we at least held their attention. They would remember what it is like to sit next to someone who chews open-mouthed. They would remember what it's like to get an elbow in the jaw as someone dives for the salad. They would remember the appetite-suppressing experience of watching food vacuumed from plate to mouth without the interference of utensils. They would remember getting tackled from behind as they reached for the salsa. Gross as we were, they recognized some similarities to their own table manners, and it shocked them a little. We noted enough improvement that we haven't yet felt a need for an encore.

In many ways, humor rescues me from insanity. In Parenting Isn't for Cowards, James Dobson says, "Laughter is the key to survival during the special stresses of the child- rearing years. If you can see the delightful side of your assignment, you can also deal with the difficult." [^1] Humor can also soothe anxiety. It can be an important coping mechanism not only for us but for our children. Humor helps them cope with genuine fears. Halloween is a very important holiday for this reason. In an education class I took, the instructor confirmed that it is healthy for children to drag out costumes of monsters, grotesquely deformed bogeymen, and frightening spooks. Laughing at them helps keep fears manageable. If children are never allowed to face their fears and make light of them or talk about them, they become much bigger and more bothersome.

Understanding humor's role in calming anxiety guides me in handling my children's sometimes inappropriate joking. Sometimes children laugh at people who are handicapped or look different. Though this must not be tolerated, realizing that it's a way of dealing with their own fears of being injured or different helps me respond patiently. When children laugh at someone tripping or someone provoking the teacher, they may be dealing with anxieties about getting hurt or their own worries about authority.

Crude humor and bathroom talk also need not be tolerated, but it helps us correct the problem without overreacting if we understand that children are expressing concerns about bodily functions. Laughter distances children from situations and feelings that disturb them. It is a form of self-comfort.

My children are exposed to plenty of cruel, crude, and inappropriate humor away from home. I want to prepare them to distinguish between what is really funny and what is not. A loving home is a safe place to teach the difference between teasing and ridicule. Good-natured kidding can be a way of acknowledging people, letting them know they are okay. But tender personal struggles such as bed-wetting, thumb-sucking, stuttering, or size are never safe to kid about. There is often a fine line between kidding and hurtful teasing or ridicule. When a child wants the joke to end, respect that wish, because the child is the best barometer of when the line has been crossed.

And finally, humor can teach humility. In fact, my parting advice on mothering is, Loosen up and laugh. If the home isn't a safe place to make mistakes, no place will be.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] James C. Dobson, Parenting Isn't for Cowards: Dealing Confidently with the Frustrations of Child-Rearing (Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1987), 101.
