Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

PRAY WITH ALL ENERGY OF HEART

Ann N. Madsen

Ann N. Madsen is the mother of four, including an Indian foster son, and the grandmother of sixteen. She teaches in the Department of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University and has taught at the BYU Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies, where her husband, Truman G. Madsen, was director. She teaches the Gospel Doctrine class in her Provo ward Sunday School.

I met fourteen-year-old Julie Wang twenty-three years ago in K'Liau, Taiwan. She was a new convert to Mormonism. We corresponded, and later she came to visit America and stayed with us. I asked her to teach my Mia Maid class about prayer. She said shyly, "What can I teach them?" I said, "Just tell them how you pray." So she did. "I pray like this," she said. "I say, 'Hello, God, this is Julie Wang,' then I wait, and he says, 'Hello, Julie.'" My class and I were taken off-guard by her simple faith in a God who is alive, listening, and ready to respond. She taught all of us that day. One thing I have learned is that there are as many ways to pray as there are people. The one prerequisite is that we "pray . . . with all . . . energy of heart" (Moro. 7:48).

How does prayer work? I don't presume to offer you a paradigm, a perfect pattern for everyone. Instead, I want to examine my own prayer life, beginning with my earliest memory of my sweet father saying in our family prayers, "We come to thee on the bended knees of our body, Father." How humble that made me feel.

Today, I love to pray. Ask my husband. I'm always poking him and saying, "Shouldn't we pray now?" But I didn't always love to pray. Nine milestones in my own prayer history will illustrate how this process unfolded in me. I hope these will bring similar moments to your mind.

I've continued to learn in the fifty-plus years since my baptism. I have learned to say I'm sorry when I pray, to take my shame humbly before the Lord, to take responsibility for my actions. During the sacrament is an especially meaningful time to do this. I'm learning to forgive—everybody, everything, every time—because I truly want to be forgiven. I'm also learning to pray to love those more whom I have loved less. I understand why God requires this of us. He loves us all more. He wants us to be like him. I understand all this much better than I did that first time as a newly baptized member weeping under a sheltering rose bush.

I have learned since then that kneeling and speaking aloud to our Father in a quiet place daily gives focus to my faith. I have a window in my walk-in closet, and I pray there at dawn, each morning. I enter my closet and shut the door, exactly as the scriptures direct. I feel really good just to have done that much right each day.

We can pray any place, any time—beside a mountain trail at Brighton, kneeling in a closet, anywhere. We are the ones who choose the when and the where. No time is wrong. The only prerequisite is a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And I think broken can mean more than the painful process we think of in repentance. Broken can also mean open, not hardened and inaccessible but open and ready to receive, to make place for the Lord's direction. The scriptures teach us to "pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing" (D&C 19:38; emphasis added). Does this mean keeping up a running conversation with the Lord every waking hour? Yes! He has taught, "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not" (D&C 6:36; emphasis added). So be informal; be formal; be all ways prayerful. Formal, kneeling prayers help us focus and cut out distractions. Consider locking the door, turning off the phone, savoring the silence. Perhaps setting your alarm for ten to fifteen minutes earlier than usual would enable you to enjoy the quiet before the three-year-old gets up or the baby cries. When we reverently enter the presence of the Lord in prayer, we can feel like guests in heaven.

As I knelt beside my bed, I was excited, full of faith, and prepared to entertain an angel should my answer come by that means. I used Moroni's words exactly: "I am asking with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, if this book is not true." (I remember wondering why it said "is not true." Why don't I ask if it "is true"? But the scriptures said "is not true," and I didn't dare say any other words because I wanted Moroni's promise to be answered.) In the guileless innocence of youth I repeated that plea over and over. I resolved I would not get up from my knees until I had my answer. After what seemed a very long time, it came. In an unmistakable way I felt the Spirit from my head to my toes, filling me with a warmth I could not deny. I remember a heartfelt thank-you as I jumped to my feet, rushed to my window, and barely restrained myself from shouting to all the world, "It's true! Joseph Smith is a prophet!" Thus began a lifelong study that continues to this moment. I can never get enough of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I learned for myself about the Holy Ghost and the reality of the Restoration—and I learned that God truly answers prayers.

Since that singular day, I have learned to ask for the daily guidance of the Holy Ghost. I have experienced what Isaiah describes when he says, "Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it" (Isa. 30:21). The Holy Ghost guides us into the will of God and away from temptation. He speaks directly to my spirit. Sometimes, when I have made up my mind, he causes me to question my confidence. At other, less-certain times, when I am confused or discouraged, I have learned to ask what I should pray for—ask in a prayer what to say in a prayer. As I learned from Paul's writing to the Romans: "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with sighings [^1] which cannot be uttered" (Rom. 8:26).

Joseph Smith made significant changes in that verse. "The Spirit maketh intercession for us with striving which cannot be expressed." [^2]

So the Holy Ghost translates and delivers our pleadings and praises to our Father even when we can't find the words to express our deepest joy or darkest sorrow. When you can't find words, trust the Spirit. Modern revelation teaches us: "He that asketh in Spirit shall receive in Spirit. . . . He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh" (D&C 46:28, 30).

I was a freshman at the University of Utah, working part-time at ZCMI during the Christmas break. Almost the moment I began asking the second prayer, "Is Bob the man I should marry?" a series of experiences and thoughts cumulatively answered me a resounding no! I remember the day the thought came, "Weren't you going to marry a returned missionary?" and I wondered when I had lost sight of that goal. Probably in the moonlight at Zion National Park, where we had worked the summer before. Day after day a former goal or idea surfaced in my mind. It was as if the Lord were saying to me gently but firmly, "What is it you don't understand about 'no'?" Finally, after about eight days of asking, I owned the answer to my prayer and told Bob no. I had learned that God could communicate clearly to me on important matters and could say no.

Since that painful day when I said no, even though I was sorely tempted to say yes, I have learned to pray to recognize temptations, no matter how subtle, and for the strength to flee from sin once recognized and to avoid going counter to God's will for me. Marrying Bob would have been going against God's will, which I was tempted to do. Temptation itself is not sin. In fact, as Elder Rulon G. Craven points out, temptation serves a purpose: we learn where we truly are when we are tempted; our strengths and weaknesses become brightly apparent to us as we respond to each temptation. [^3] It's hard but it's true. Life is truly a test. I have learned to pray for the strength to meet challenges, not to have them removed.

"Resist the devil, and he will flee from you" (James 4:7) is our sure promise. I teach that to my New Testament students, to my Isaiah students, to my Old Testament Roots students. In every class I teach, some time during the semester I tell them the great secret: "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you."

How grateful I am that Jesus taught us to meet temptation by paying no heed to it. I know we can lose all desire for sin. One day we will simply ignore the devil, not interested in the least in what he offers because we are so mightily interested in the promises of our Father to share all he has with us. So, I don't just pray not to be led into temptation, I pray to be led into understanding God's will for me. The basic purpose of prayer may well be to find out the will of God and then to ask for faith and strength to carry it out.

How do we know when our prayers are being answered? Sometimes we don't. Sometimes we don't want to, like investigators who put off praying to know if the Church is true because they are not ready to shoulder the responsibility of knowing.

I am continuing to learn how to recognize answers that come in unexpected ways. Sometimes he tells us directly "in our minds and in our hearts," in words, like my answer on that breezy hilltop overlooking the Salt Lake Valley. I am learning to sort out his impressions from my own ideas. Sometimes I have a lot of great ideas. I want to do a lot of good things, and sometimes I can't tell whether it's really the Lord that wants me to do it or whether it's only my wanting to do it. It's one of the biggest problems I have. From Isaiah I've learned that the Lord's thoughts are not my thoughts—they are higher. "Neither are your ways my ways"; his are higher (Isa. 55:8Â9). That's how I can tell the difference. Sometimes a three-year-old's scripture, spoken confidently by heart on a Primary program, matches precisely my need. At times the opening hymn may tell me all he wishes to communicate to me, or the closing hymn, or the sacrament hymn. I bear you my witness that has been true for me. Often the gentle words of a friend, even the friends in my own home—my husband, my children, my grandchildren—hold the answer. And, don't forget, God has been giving answers for a long, long time and commanded those who received them to take notes. Search the scriptures. Your answer might be waiting for you there.

During the next few years I had tests and surgery to enable me to bear more children. But the fear I had early in my marriage of not being able to bear children was now a reality. We prayed, pleading with the Lord to enable us to have more children. Then we were called to New England, where Truman would be a thirty-five-year-old mission president and I would be a twenty-nine-year-old "mission mother" and our three children under seven would live for the next three years in a wonderful old mission home. This, of course, was an amazing moment in our little family's life. When my doctor heard we would be in Boston, he was elated: the world-renowned Dr. John Rock had established the Rock Infertility Clinic there. I felt confident that this was to be the answer to our prayers.

After a thorough course of treatment, Dr. Rock gave me the medical verdict. I had evidently gone through a very early menopause and would have no more children. I was devastated. President Hugh B. Brown was touring our mission, and I asked him for a blessing. If the best of medical science couldn't do it, I was sure the Lord could handle it and, after all, I was serving him on a mission right now. It was only logical. Right? Wrong. In his eloquent blessing President Brown told me to "trouble the Lord no more on this matter." After I had cried my heart out, I asked President Brown what that meant, and he explained very simply that in my prayers I should no longer beg for a child. I learned about another kind of no. I learned to obey, to endure something that was totally against my will. I was beginning to learn "thy will, not mine, be done." That day I stopped praying for a baby.

One of my great concerns during those late-night reveries was how to teach each of our children to really pray—to open conduits to their Heavenly Father. I remember thinking that this would be the best insurance we could leave them if anything should happen to us before they were grown. And so I prayed that they would learn that God hears and answers prayers.

About this time, during a severe drought, when the Wasatch Mountains had never greened through spring and summer, President Spencer W. Kimball asked us as a church to fast for rain on an appointed day. Our family did. During family home evening, we heard the rain begin to fall on the metal roof of our patio. It was an electric moment. At first it was just a few drops, but soon it was a torrent. We all ran outside, and one of our children said, "Let's kneel down here with the rain falling on us to thank the Lord." Then we all put around small bottles to catch the water. I've kept mine since that day; it's full of "holy" water. Our children learned part of the lesson then; God indeed hears and answers prayers. Their dripping faces and soaking clothes and water bottles clutched in their damp hands were tangible proof.

In addition, they learned that uniting our prayers with others changes the equation. Later, temple experiences taught them of a united upward reach, made more effective by kind feelings, full of love. Unity is powerful in prayer. Personal prayers reflected in family prayers make us one in purpose. I love to hear my husband use the exact words in our morning prayer that I have uttered in solitude just moments earlier in my own personal prayer. It is a wonderful coming together. To paraphrase a statement we all know, "If ye are one, ye are mine."

During the years since my first halting prayers, I have uttered many kinds of prayers. "Telegraph prayers" use a few, simple words to tell our urgent need or joy. I don't think the Lord expects beautiful, poetic words when we're in a crisis. I remember standing outside of a hospital x-ray room saying just, "Save her. Save her, please, save her."

Sometimes the crisis is one of personal survival. God also hears self-centered prayer, when survival is all that matters. As we work our way out of depression, we move thankfully from focusing on our own coping to noticing once more the needs of others around us. I speak from personal experience in this regard. What a blessed moment when we are able to reach out once more, stretch forth our hand in the pattern we learn from the Lord, to name the names of many others as we pray, seeking to bless their lives. One day recently I numbered the times I said, "Please bless me." It was appalling. I don't recommend that exercise. But if survival requires all our focus for a time, we can rejoice in the hope of a moment when we will lose our ego-centered view and see again the whole wide world who needs our ministrations. We can then fill our prayers with the names of others.

Pray from the heart, a broken heart, a contrite spirit. It's our hearts that need to change and will change.

One of those inspiring exchanges was in progress when I decided to go up on deck, just one more time, to see the stars. I climbed into a hammock and found myself totally alone under a magnificent canopy of stars. As I lay there in utter contentment, I was gradually flooded with gratitude. I began to name the individual reasons for my joy, counting stars as I did. The stars seemed endless, and so did my thanks. As I catalogued each one, beginning with Truman, I would add a sentence explaining one or more reasons for my joy. "Oh, Heavenly Father, I thank thee for Truman, for his integrity, for his patience with me, for his fidelity to me in a world where those words are almost unknown."

I warmed to the task, speaking aloud and at length about the temple, my family, my friends, each one on the boat and all over the world, my experiences one by one, and on and on, counting stars and equating them with my gratitude. What had begun as a list of blessings was continuing as a prayer. I soon realized this was the longest prayer I had ever offered, and I felt no need to stop. When I ran out of people, I counted sea and breezes and birds and flowers—I described them, and I would have included those beautiful blue flowers in England if I had known of them then. I even listed some qualities in myself, talents with which I had been blessed. Somehow it was easier to see them in this context. You can see how gratitude can be contagious.

Then I began to realize how I prized my knowledge of the Restoration and Joseph Smith. I had a lot to say about Joseph Smith. It was only natural to chronicle my joy in the Savior and his atoning for me. By then I was filled to the brim, and I didn't want to stop. I understood how Enos and others could have prayed all night. And with Enos I cried out in joy, "'Oh Lord, how is it done?' How do you give me these feelings? How do I know the feeling of the Holy Ghost?" I wanted this feeling of love and joy never to end. But it did.

When we flew into Salt Lake the next evening, I was still trailing the clouds of gratitude I had felt. Our bishop was waiting for us in the rain. He had come to tell us that our Lamanite son had been sent home from his mission and put on Church probation. I think that after expressing gratitude for Truman, my prayer the night before had moved to this son, "Thank you that after eleven years, Larry is serving in the mission field."

I learned then that counting blessings with all energy of heart can be a glorious, communing experience and that it will fill you with love. I also learned that the love fortifies us for the pain and disappointment that are a part of this earth life. To paraphrase, after great blessings, cometh the tribulation.

On the boat, praying felt easy and natural, but I have also learned to pray when I don't feel like it. Sometimes we feel unworthy to pray; we avoid the process because we feel unclean, out of sorts, angry, hostile, or just plain tired. How Satan must laugh as we abandon praying instead of hurrying to our knees to be cleansed and nurtured.

"Prayer changes things" read a little sign sitting in the bookcase of my childhood home. I learned there that prayer is our pathway to mighty changes. When you don't feel like praying, read the words of the Lord. Read Jesus' tender invitation, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest" (Matt. 11:28). Come, he says over and over. Through Alma he implores us, "Come and fear not, and lay aside every sin, which easily doth beset you, . . . and show unto your God that ye are willing to repent of your sins and enter into a covenant with him" (Alma 7:15). The desire to pray will grow in you as you read the scriptures, and you will be able to close the book with renewed desire to speak with the author.

"Thy will, not mine, be done." We mouth the words easily until someone we love deeply is at risk. I found it impossible even to mouth the words then, just in case it was not his will for her to live. At such moments we plead, "claiming" our imagined merit or theirs; we bargain with the Lord, not unlike Abraham as he bargained for a handful of the righteous in ancient, wicked cities. Sometimes, after the flailing around is finished, we sink again to our knees and whisper as quietly as we can, "Not my will but thine be done," barely able to muster the faith to say it.

I had not yet reached this point of submission. Instead, I paced and prayed, looked in on the children, and imagined various possible scenarios. Who could possibly love and support Grant as Mindy could? Who could rear those three little ones with the same dedication, inspiration, and flair? My agitation fed on itself, and I could see all would be better served if I focused my faith on the miracle needed. "Please stop the bleeding," I pleaded over and over, weeping as I spoke.

Then I learned what the Lord meant when he said, "Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23). In the midst of my churning emotions, an unmistakable calm came over me. "Everything is going to be all right." It was a clear message, but I quickly inserted into my running prayer, "But will she live?" because I knew everything could be all right but she could die. No answer. That's significant. No answer, but again, and with a serenity I have memorized, "Be at peace. Everything is going to be all right." And it was. She was anemic and weak for months but today is healthy and strong.

That same coin has another side, however. Just last year our family combined our faith to pray for the healing of a beloved friend with cancer. We asked for a miracle. We pleaded for a miracle. But he died. During the long year of his illness, we exercised faith for his recovery, and at moments it seemed to be happening. But finally this strong man gave himself over to the will of the Lord. There was a purity and grace about him during his final days. I learned from him the meaning of sanctification. We prayed often together. He no longer asked for his life to be prolonged—he was forty-three years old with a wife and three young children—but he quietly assured the Lord that he wanted nothing more than to see the Lord's will done. He didn't pray for himself. He prayed for us and others whom he loved. I watched his own will being swallowed up in the will of our Heavenly Father. So I began to exercise the faith that I hoped would prolong his life to aid him in this sacred process.

It has been a year since he died. I watched and learned, but I still struggle to understand God's purposes, to align my will with his. The process continues in me. I do not doubt God's wisdom, but I struggle to understand, to make that wisdom my own. I know that bringing that struggle to the Lord in prayer is my avenue to peace.

Life-and-death experiences continue to tutor me. I learned in those crisis times to "pray with all energy of heart." What other way was there? I learned to focus in ways I had never dreamed possible. That kind of prayer takes an amazing amount of energy and endurance and patience. I don't always manage it. We "underpray" far more often than we "overpray," skimming the surface, seldom dipping heart-deep. But I know now how it feels. How we can learn to look up! Reach up! Pray through tears. Pray steadfastly, patiently, but look up! [^4]

The words of the prophet Micah come to me readily when I find myself looking down. "Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me" (Micah 7:7Â8). Don't rejoice, Mr. Devil. I may be down, but I'm not out! We can only be defeated if we refuse to get up, to look up, to reach up!

Isaiah teaches us that the Lord constantly reaches to us as he repeats over and over again, "His hand is stretched out still"—not just "out" but "stretched out." [^5] How often the Lord asks throughout the book of Isaiah, "Is my arm too short to save you?" and the rhetorical question is answered with a resounding, "No!" We are his work and his glory. We are his first concern. We are, after all, his children. If we stretch to him, we will reach him. I picture the hands on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, all but touching. He longs to touch, grasp, and lift us to him.

These are the ideas about prayer that I hoped would be most helpful to you. I could go on and tell you how my mother taught me to love the words of St. Francis: "Lord, make me an instrument of thy peace." [^6] She taught me that all people can know how to pray and approach God, not just Latter-day Saints.

Or, I'd tell you of sublime answers when I have prayed to be an instrument in the Lord's hands. Or I would tell you about my ongoing prayers to perfect my relationship with my cherished husband so that the promises given to us would launch us from our forty-three years so far into forever. Or I would tell you about the gentle guidance that came to me in answer to my prayers about this talk.

Mormon spoke the words which are my theme. Quoted by his son, Moroni, Mormon's words are the climax of a great sermon on charity, the pure love of Christ. "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons [and daughters] of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moro. 7:48). I know that we receive the Spirit through prayer and are thus given access to Christlike love. Our lives—mind, body, and spirit—are renewed in this process of sacred communion, and we become like him and like our Father in Heaven who loves and reaches out to each of us.

NOTES

Lord, make me an instrument of thy peace.

Where there is hatred, let me sow love;

Where there is injury, pardon;

Where there is doubt, faith;

Where there is despair, hope;

Where there is darkness, light;

Where there is sadness, joy.

O divine Master, grant that I may not so much seek

To be consoled as to console,

To be understood as to understand,

To be loved as to love:

For it is in giving that we receive,

It is in pardoning that we are pardoned,

It is in dying to self that we are born to eternal life.

---
Notas:
[^1] Russell M. Nelson, "With God Nothing Shall Be Impossible," Ensign, May 1988, 35.
[^2] Even saying the word Brighton stirs deep feelings in me. I was thirteen years old and just finishing an idyllic week at the Brighton MIA Girls' Camp in Big Cottonwood Canyon. It was Sunday, and sitting in tall meadow grasses on a mountainside strewn with white granite boulders on a sunny, summer day, we had listened to an inspired Sunday School teacher bear witness to us. Then all of us knelt together in the tall grass, almost invisible to any passerby, while a young man about to serve a mission prayed in a way I had never heard before—he addressed God directly—and suddenly I didn't dare open my eyes because I knew for certain that God was a person and I felt him unmistakably near. At that moment and ever since, I have known that God is a living, loving, powerful being. After the others had wandered back down the trail, my best friend and I knelt once more, hidden under an overhanging pine bough. We didn't say much to each other, but we each knelt down and poured out our hearts in gratitude. We both knew what had happened and felt a tremendous need to tell the Lord how grateful we were that we'd come to know him. Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), 278.
[^3] A few months after my mountaintop experience at Brighton, well after midnight one night, I finished reading the Book of Mormon for the first time. I had been reading it in my closet, because my dad had told me to turn off the light. (I was devious then, I confess.) I had excitedly finished, anxious to put Moroni's promise to the test. My dear teacher and friend, Oscar Hunter, week after week, pleaded with a group of youth attending his weekly ward fireside not to take his word only but to find out for ourselves. He urged us to read the Book of Mormon and do exactly what Moroni invites. At last, I could ask that prayer, because I had finished the book from cover to cover—except those tedious chunks of Isaiah, which I didn't understand. (This makes my students, children, and husband smile because I now teach Isaiah classes at BYU.) Rulon G. Craven, "Temptation," Ensign, April 1996, 77.
[^4] In the following years, my testimony grew, as I listened intently in seminary and then ate up every word offered me at the University of Utah institute of religion. The summer after high school I met and fell in love with a handsome young man—who was not a Latter-day Saint. We began reading the Book of Mormon together, and I was sure he would join the Church. In the middle of this process, he begged me to marry him. I thought I would—one year to the day after he was baptized, when we could go to the temple. My prayers began to move from, "I know how great my joy will be with this one soul I'm bringing to you" to "Father, should I marry Bob?" See Russell M. Nelson, "Thou Shalt Have No Other Gods," Ensign, May 1996, 14Â16.
[^5] I told my granddaughter the other day that from the moment I broke off that "first love" relationship, I prayed about every boy I dated. It was tedious. "Is this the man I am going to marry?"—and I would supply the name of my latest date. That is when I learned to continue in prayer, using "vain" repetition. I learned a modicum of patience but got tired of repeating those same words over and over again, filling in the blank. But one night, standing with Truman Madsen on a northern hillside overlooking the Salt Lake Valley, which was a jewel box of lights, I heard the whispered voice of the Spirit, "This is the man you're going to marry"—and I didn't believe it. I remember shaking my head and scolding myself for entertaining such a notion, but then it came again with more force. And yet again. And I learned how the Holy Ghost speaks with us, Spirit to spirit, putting words not our own into our minds in the customized, unmistakable way only he can communicate to each of us individually. I learned one way God can say yes. That was one of the most pivotal yesses I was ever able to recognize. See, for example, Isa. 5:25; 9:12, 17, 21; 10:4.
[^6] I began praying for children before Truman and I were even married, and from the moment we were married, we both prayed earnestly to begin our family. Truman was beginning his four-year Ph.D. work at Harvard. It never occurred to us to postpone our family. Kneeling at that altar in the Salt Lake Temple, we felt more than ready to welcome children into our home. (That's how young and ignorant we were—who is ever fully ready for children?) For nine months our pleading for children seemed to produce nothing, and I feared I would never have a child. Then I was pregnant! Five years later when Truman was a bishop and we had three children under four, I was frenzied but fulfilled. We were a year into Truman's teaching career at Brigham Young University. I went to my obstetrician at this point, anticipating that he would tell me that I was expecting our fourth child. (Our third was about seven months old at this time.) Instead, he told me I was not pregnant but had a problem. Saint Francis of Assisi, "Make Me an Instrument of Thy Peace." See, for example, Love Never Faileth: The Inspiration of Saint Francis, Saint Augustine, Saint Paul, and Mother Teresa, by Eknath Easwaran (Petaluma, Calif.: Nilgiri Press, 1984), 18.
