Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

AN EARTH-LIFE THING

Jeanne Edmondson Carraway

Jeanne Edmondson Carraway, a career counselor, worked for many years as a newspaper reporter and a freelance writer. She and her husband, Jack Hal Carraway, have one child. She serves as her ward's music chairman. She began chemotherapy two days after returning from the 1996 Woman's Conference.

Last summer my fifteen-year-old son received the first serious sunburn of his life, and as he gravely surveyed his blistered skin, he asked, "Mom, do you think I'll be all right?"

"You'll be uncomfortable for a while," I replied, "but you'll be all right."

I smiled as I thought about his choice of words, remembering a time I had asked a similar question. Almost thirty years ago, aggressive radiation therapy for Hodgkin's disease (cancer of the lymph system) had left a deep burn on my neck. My doctors were worried that the skin in the area had deteriorated to a precancerous state, so they scheduled a series of three surgeries to remove the burned tissue and replace it with skin and muscle from my right arm. As the surgeon explained potential complications from the painful procedure, only one seemed of any real concern to me: I could lose the use of my right arm.

Later, at home, I sat in terror. I am right-handed. I shuddered to imagine the kind of life I might have without the use of my arm. Questions raced and tumbled through my mind. How would I write? Carry things? Lead music? Partake of the sacrament in the prescribed way? Raise my right arm to the square? Participate fully in temple ordinances? In tears and on my knees, I pleaded with Heavenly Father. Finally, in the midst of my anguish, I had a strong, specific prompting. I felt rather than heard, "What do you want me to do?" Surprised, I thought a while and then replied, "I just want to know that everything is going to be all right." Then came a sustaining moment of peaceful sweetness that I still carry in my heart. He had answered, in the clearest, most specific response to a prayer I have ever received: "No matter what happens, everything will be all right."

I came out of the surgery with reduced use of my arm. Since then, I have gradually lost the ability to use it for most things. Cooking, canning, cleaning, and dressing are very difficult for me. I can do them all, but very slowly. I can lead music only with my left arm. I cannot attend the temple without help. I struggle to take the sacrament with my right hand, and my right arm, raised as high as it will go, doesn't come anywhere close to being at the square.

Over the years I have come to understand the Lord's message to me. It has sustained me through subsequent surgeries and treatments for thyroid, skin, and lung cancers that resulted from that first aggressive radiation therapy for Hodgkin's. I have gained great peace in the midst of frustration, turmoil, and uncertainty because those trials have taught me that truly, no matter what happens, everything will be far better than just "all right" if I trust the Lord and work to keep the challenges of earth life in perspective.

Elder Russell M. Nelson has said, "With celestial sight, trials impossible to change become possible to endure." [^1] Celestial lenses, I have found, reveal things that are invisible to the earthbound eye. Through them, we can see what we can become, and what it will take to get there. As Paul told the Corinthians: "Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal" (2 Cor. 4:17Â18).

I served in the Indiana-Michigan Mission with a companion who inevitably responded to less-than-pleasant experiences by saying, "Well, it's just an earth-life thing." What she meant, of course, is that rocks and thistles are part of our earth experience, but they are temporary. And as the Lord told Joseph Smith, "If thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high" (D&C 121:8). But seeking celestial perspective reveals far more than a reward at the end of a difficult journey. Celestial spectacles have corrective lenses, allowing us sharper understanding of present experiences.

According to my mother, I have always been extremely independent, almost to a fault. My cancer crises have brought into focus how much I need help to journey successfully through this earth-life experience. For a number of years, I allowed the weakness of my right arm to keep me out of the temple. I pridefully chose not to go rather than ask for help. Finally, two persistent visiting teachers tackled my attitude and lovingly led me back to a place I had longed to be. It was not easy . . . for them or me! I felt embarrassed that I could not take care of my clothing myself. I wanted to be there, knew I had to be there. Yet at first, I cried every time I went. Sometimes my friends assisted me. Other times my helper was a temple worker. But help was always there, and inevitably, after the session, my helpers would thank me for allowing them to serve.

One day I was waiting in the Chicago Illinois Temple, thinking about my experiences, when I had one of those moments of "celestial sight." I realized that my inability to participate unaided in the temple has a corollary: I also cannot return to the presence of our Father without considerable assistance. I absolutely cannot do it alone. And that is the blessing of cancer for me. It has driven me to my knees, where I have begun to learn about the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. He does for me what I cannot do for myself. He doesn't fix everything, but his presence in trial has given me strength to endure—with great joy. I have heard someone say that "joy is not the absence of pain but the presence of God." My experience tells me this is true.

As I put the finishing touches on this essay, I am sitting in familiar surroundings—the waiting room of my hospital's radiology department. A recent CT scan has revealed new and suspicious spots and shadows in my chest, so today I am having more tests. My oncologist will review the results and in a week or so tell me if it's cancer . . . again. As I consider the possibility, I am frustrated to think there may be another interruption in my life for treatment and recovery, more projects put on hold, more goals pushed aside. I am frustrated, but not afraid of the outcome, whatever it may be. My experiences have given me access to a celestial perspective to help me find my way over this rocky terrain. Again and again I have found peace, and I will once more. No matter what happens, everything will be all right.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Russell M. Nelson, "With God Nothing Shall Be Impossible," Ensign, May 1988, 35.
