Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

FINDING HOLINESS IN EVERYDAY LIFE

Mary B. Kirk

Mary B. Kirk is a homemaker and nutritional consultant. She and her husband, James S. Kirk, are the parents of five children. She served as a missionary in Canada and serves now as an early-morning seminary teacher and Gospel Doctrine teacher in Sunday School. She also directs the ward and Primary choirs.

I am a visual learner. If I can see something, I can remember it, and it's real to me. Christ always said, "Come unto me." But if I want to understand and know the Savior, I have to say to him, "Come unto me. Visit me in my house, in my space on earth." And if he would come and be right there close by me, I could say, "Lord, what wouldst thou have me do?" I have a good imagination, so I can see the Savior coming up the steps with the faulty rail, standing on my porch, and gently knocking on my door, wanting to come in and bring some peace and joy to my whirlwind. And I can see myself flinging that door open and saying, "Please, Savior, come in."

That is how I remember Christ and his atonement in my everyday life. I visualize him being here with me. Maybe you are a visual learner, too, so you can see this. "Jesus, see this clutter? It's evidence of something wonderful—it's proof of Thy blessings. See all these boxes in my workroom? I know, they take up a lot of space, but they are full of scraps of fabric my friends have given to me and old clothes and blue jeans and blankets and drapes. I weave them into rugs. Then I sell them to help pay the bills, and I give them away sometimes. And best of all, I love to make them. I can be creative and use these castoffs to make something of beauty. I really have a sense of satisfaction when I do that. Thank Thee for letting me have this gift.

"See this spilled dirt? My three-year-old, Logan, and I were planting some seeds the other day, trying to get a head start on the garden. We really enjoy the earth that Thou hast given to us, and we think dirt is fascinating. When we come home, wilt Thou teach us how this works—this dirt, these seeds, and this water? How does it work? How do they all become flowers and trees and vegetables and grass? We can't comprehend it!

"Now, come in the kitchen and see the dirty dishes. My firstborn son, with us fourteen years now, is on dishes this week. He's not at all sure that he should have to take a turn doing the dishes, but we're trying to teach him responsibility and self-sufficiency. We need him to be a contributing member of our family and of the community and the world around him. So he just gets to take part in it the same as the rest of us. I know, I could have done the work for him—that would be easier in a way—but how would he learn?

"Come see my laundry room. See all these clothes? I know that many people need these worse than we do, but we have them. In fact, most of them were given to us. And we use them all, but the laundry pile can be discouraging at times. I'm so grateful to have hot, running water. That is the thing that I am most grateful for . . . besides the Atonement. I know a lot of my brothers and sisters on earth don't have hot, running water—or even water. And see, the laundry is up here, not in the basement. I appreciate that! And today there are more clothes clean and folded than dirty and unsorted. When I work in here, I can see work clothes and school clothes and play clothes and church clothes. Looking at these clothes I can see Jim hard at work to provide for us. I see one of my sons sitting on the deacon's bench, getting ready to serve the sacrament. I see my other son running track in the rain and the mud. It's right there in the laundry room. I can see them. And I can see my girls playing dress-ups, pretending to be mommies and dancers and doctors and teachers and all those wonderful things. Imagining and dreaming . . . and who cares if they got lipstick on this shawl. I don't. And then I shake the sand out of one of these little socks, and I wonder how many trucks and tractors are buried in the sandbox.

"Listen. Canst Thou hear Logan sing 'I Am a Child of God' out there by the toy box? I can, even with the washer running. And he has clean socks on now, and I am so thankful to Thee who gave him to us.

"Remember when Matt was three years old and learning to dress himself? One day he came downstairs, and he had on his shirt and a pair of underwear—with the underwear on backwards. His father, after patting him on the back and praising him for his accomplishment, gently pointed out the problem. And do you remember that Matt said, 'It's not my fault, Dad. That's the way they were in the drawer'?"

I can find holiness in that. Can you? Children come here with a lot to learn, and that's one of the things we have to teach them. We may have to try lots of times to get them to put on their underwear the right way around. We need to try even harder to get them to study the scriptures and to feel like the Savior tours their life with them and cares about all that they do.

So then I ask the Savior to come sit on the porch for a minute, and we continue our conversation. "Remember when we were rewiring the house here before we moved in? Of course, Thou knowest. We never really thought it was necessary to put that extra kitchen light switch on the far end by the pantry. It's not handy there at all. But now that we've decided to build the garage on the west side instead of the east side, the door will come in right there and it's exactly in the right spot. I suppose it's no surprise to Thee, but we've wondered in awe at Thy power to care for little details—unbeknownst to us—that prove Thine unending love."

Now you may think this is an odd way to feel the presence of the Savior and find holiness in your everyday life. But for me, any plan, any course, that can let me think of him more often, help me to acknowledge his hand in everything around me, feel gratitude for every aspect of my life, and serve him more readily is an okay road to take. And he teaches me as we go. I'm finally seeing that what I thought was mundane and bothersome is really meaningful and beautiful. And you can, too.

Your circumstances and work may be very different from mine, but you can find holiness in them. In Mosiah 18:12 Alma says, "O Lord, pour out thy Spirit upon thy servant, that he may do this work with holiness of heart." I want you to read it yourself, and you may find that it says something like this: "Oh Lord, pour out thy Spirit upon me, Mary, thy servant, that I may do this work with holiness of heart." Put your own name in Alma's prayer, and if your desire is pure, God will grant you holiness of heart—every day.

You know, it took my husband's great insight and a personal revelation to me to finally fix in my mind the fact that eternal life doesn't start at the Savior's second coming, that it's right now. Our relationship with God and Christ goes back all the way and it goes forward all the way and today is part of it. We need to think about each day as being an integral part of the great picture. In other words, the mere fact that we are alive today is holy in itself. We chose to participate in mortality. So let's "rejoice and be glad" in it, and acknowledge our stewardship over each day, and feel each day's potential for holiness.

In one Bill Keane "Family Circus" comic strip, Dolly and Jeffy are sitting high on a hill looking out over things. Dolly has her arm around Jeffy's shoulders, and he's looking teachable and very intent upon what she is saying. The wisdom of her words has helped me find holiness many times since I first read it. She explains, "Yesterday is the past, tomorrow is the future, and today is a gift. That's why they call it the present." God is the author of the past and the future, and he's the giver of the present gift. He'll sprinkle holiness into today, and we will find it. He will pour out his holiness upon us at the rate that we open our eyes and perceive, open our ears and understand, and open our hearts and invite him in. And then we'll become like him.

NOTE

I appreciate the insight of Joan B. MacDonald in her book, The Holiness of Everyday Life, which helped me focus my presentation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1995).
