Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

THE ATONEMENT: A SEA OF PEACE

Sally B. Palmer

Sally Broadbent Palmer, the single mother of ten, is completing her Ph.D. at the University of CaliforniaÂDavis, where she teaches literature and represents graduate women on the Provost's Committee. She teaches in Relief Society and is a Cub Scout den mother and an adult-literacy tutor.

When I was a little girl growing up in northern California, I loved going to the beach at Bodega Bay. There were long, smooth stretches of wet sand that no one had trampled. You could take a stick and make a furrow or write your name. Or you could take a shovel and throw up big, messy mounds and walls, make holes and tunnels and mountains and valleys. You could scoop up handfuls to throw at your sisters, or bury them in the sand. After a while the beach was all plowed up and looked like an excavation site.

But then a wave would come in farther than usual, curling and foaming across the sand. The cold water would run into and fill up every hole, every crevice, every tunnel and valley and indentation. It would cover the piles and hills and mounds, swirling over them all. Then it would recede, leaving the sand completely smooth and flat, cool and clean again.

Jesus said, "I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions . . . and will not remember thy sins" (Isa. 43:25). He said, "In the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land" (D&C 133:29). He said his voice shall be "as the voice of many waters, . . . which shall break down the mountains" (D&C 133:22). Jesus said, "I will give unto him that is athirst . . . of the water of life" (Rev. 21:6).

The scriptures are full of images of Christ as water and of his atonement as the water of life. For me, the Atonement is that ocean wave at the seashore that makes everything smooth again. I like to carry that metaphor, that image, around with me in my pocket every day. It is an extremely useful item. Every once in a while I take it out and look at it—turn it over in my mind and notice things about it. I notice, for instance, that there's always plenty of water—always enough to fill the very deepest hole, cover the highest mound of sand, and make them level again. "Though your sins be as scarlet," says Isaiah, "they shall be as white as snow" (Isa. 1:18). I also notice that the water is always there as the years go by, unchanging, constant, and endless as eternity. Amulek says nothing short of an infinite atonement will suffice for the sins of the world, the infinite and eternal sacrifice of the Son of God (see Alma 34:8Â14). I notice, too, that the water leaves everything washed clean.

I don't know how others feel, but for me life is never a smooth beach. Every day, irritations will start piling up in my mind. It starts with the kids' complaints at breakfast. "Why do we always have to get up so early?" "Why is it still raining?" "How come we have to have oatmeal again?" Then, a bit later, in the car, somebody will cut me off in traffic or honk and make rude gestures because of something I did. Soon a disgruntled student calls to challenge a low grade, and my boss will send me a critical memo. Meanwhile the bank's giving me the runaround, and the car's making the same scary noise it did last week before I paid five hundred dollars to have it fixed.

There's no justice! Things become all plowed up in the gritty sand of my mind; I'm starting to feel annoyed and frustrated with myself and other people. Then I remember what's in my pocket. I take a breath. I close my eyes for just a second, and I can see the water coming. That wave quietly wells up and fills all the pits and cracks and holes in my mind. Then it recedes, leaving them smooth and filled and even again. Through the Atonement, I can forgive and become whole and at peace.

To illustrate, not long ago my brother, who lives three thousand miles away, came to town on business, and we went to the temple together. It happened that we were seated next to each other in the session, which pleased me greatly. Not only is it rare that I can attend the temple with my brother but it is even more rare that a man and a woman are seated next to each other in the temple. Then another patron on our row stood up and asked my brother and me to move so that he and his wife could sit together. We moved, but I was inwardly steaming. "That man can sit by his wife twenty-four hours a day if he wants to," I fumed to myself, "but I'll never again be able to sit by my brother in the temple!" Just then the lights went out, and the film began. Up on the screen, there was the ocean, with its thundering, swirling waves. I thought of Christ's atonement, let it wash over the irritation in my heart, and immediately I was at peace. The incident dissolved away.

But let's up the ante a little bit and move beyond the small cracks in our surface contentment. Let's consider the huge cataclysms that split the terrain of our lives down to bedrock. I myself am an earthquake survivor. After a twenty-year temple marriage, my husband left me and our ten children for another woman. Only those who have experienced that kind of betrayal can understand the magnitude of the seismic tremors it brings to every area of life: physical, financial, social, emotional, and spiritual. Only they realize with immediacy that the aftershocks along the fault line continue for a lifetime. The injustices are profound and unending.

Every culture has its own concept of justice and rules for establishing it in their communities. But isn't it interesting that, much as they may try, human beings, even Latter-day Saints, are unable to bring justice about? We simply cannot do it. Think of examples in the media lately—are you impressed with what our own system of justice hands out? Often, in our attempts to flatten and smooth out the sand ourselves, we only make matters worse.

Maxine Hong Kingston writes of an aunt who lived in a village in China with her family. As a girl, this aunt had been raped and then was found to be pregnant, which brought great distress to her family. In China, rape is blamed on the victim. The girl's parents did not let her eat with the family after that, but she was permitted to eat at an "outcast table" by herself. Kingston's mother said, "On the night the baby was to be born the villagers raided our house. . . . Like a great saw, teeth strung with lights, files of people walked zigzag across our land, tearing the rice. . . . As the villagers closed in, we could see that some of them, probably men and women we knew well, wore white masks. The people with long hair hung it over their faces. . . . At first they threw mud and rocks at the house. Then they threw eggs and began slaughtering our stock. We could hear the animals scream their deaths. . . . Their knives dripped with the blood of our animals. They smeared blood on the doors and walls. . . . We stood together . . . [in the hall] and looked straight ahead. . . . They ripped up her clothes and shoes and broke her combs. . . . They tore her work from the loom. They scattered the cooking fire and rolled the new weaving in it. We could hear them in the kitchen breaking our bowls. When they left, they took sugar and oranges. . . . Some of them took bowls that were not broken and clothes that were not torn." [^1]

This is a shocking story, but it is true. It illustrates how mortal attempts to bring about justice, to right wrongs, can just make things worse. In my own life and ward, and in yours, too, tragedies of sin and shame can begin and compound just as this one did. When one person begins to dig in the sand, others come along and kick the sand around, too. Perhaps they build a fire, or spill some toxic substance onto the sand, or leave rotting trash at the site to gather flies.

People in their ignorance and fear can misunderstand the source of sin. They gossip and condemn, they assign praise and blame, and they make things worse trying to straighten them out. They rationalize and lie to make the truth come out the way they want it to. Even when they mean well, they can aggravate both the heartache of injustice and the consequences.

When things get this messed up, how can they ever be straightened out again? How can wrecked lives be restored; how can broken families be healed; how can destroyed bodies regain wholeness; how can wasted years be brought back; how can crushed hopes and testimonies be regained?

"Restoring what you cannot restore, healing the wound you cannot heal, fixing that which you broke and you cannot fix is the very purpose of the atonement of Christ. . . . There is no habit, no addiction, no rebellion, no transgression, no apostasy, no crime exempted from the promise of complete forgiveness. That is the promise of the atonement of Christ." [^2] That is a powerful statement from latter-day apostle Boyd K. Packer. Think of it when you lift that tiny paper cup to your lips Sunday morning and let those few drops slide across your tongue. This is just a symbolic portion of the mighty force of the living water. Not only can it heal the unhealable but its awesome power can change the landscape in other ways, too. It has the power to crash against the rocky cliffs, sending its spray high into the air; to crush huge boulders into sand, carve valleys out of mountains, and dash ships and cities into bits.

The Atonement is infinite. The ocean is endless; the waves, constant. Eventually, every hole, every gorge will disappear without a trace, no matter how ravaged the landscape, through the atonement of Jesus Christ. To qualify for that wave of cleansing water, we have to repent of the wrongs we have done. We must acknowledge the mess we've made, be sorry for its ugliness, and try to smooth it out ourselves. We may have to live with it for a time, while the tide's out, suffering perhaps by having to put up with the gritty sand blowing about in our eyes, or the salt, or the debris that's strewn around. But eventually the wave will come, and then, like Alma, we will exclaim, "Oh, what joy . . . yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!" (Alma 36:20).

Close your eyes; see the living water run into your soul and fill up your empty spaces with peace. Feel the cool spray on your cheeks, and hear the wavelet's whisper. "Every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters" (Isa. 55:1) and "with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation" (Isa. 12:3).

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Maxine Hong Kingston, The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood among Ghosts (New York: Random House, 1989), 3Â5.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, "The Brilliant Morning of Forgiveness," Ensign, November 1995, 19Â20.
