Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

"TEACH THEM CORRECT PRINCIPLES"

Stephen D. Nadauld

Stephen D. Nadauld has served as president of Weber State University and as a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy. He also served as first counselor in the Young Men General Presidency until his release in October 1996. He and his wife, Margaret Dyreng Nadauld, are the parents of seven sons.

Many parents in the Church today worry about their teenagers. How can we save them from what lies around them in a difficult and dangerous world? I believe the key to success with our young men is no different from what it is with the young women, but because I am serving in the Young Men General Presidency, I have thought mostly about young men. Let me share with you three or four ideas.

First and foremost, we have to help them get a vision of who they are and what they can become. What do we hope will happen in the lives of young men? What is that vision? First of all, we want them to become converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ. Second, we want them to magnify their priesthood callings. Third, we want them to give meaningful service. Fourth, we want them to prepare to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood. Fifth, we want them committed to serve a mission. And sixth, we want them to live so that they can receive temple covenants and become righteous husbands and fathers. These six purposes of the Aaronic Priesthood have the power to provide a vision.

About four years ago, the Young Men General Presidency sat down to articulate this vision for young men in the Church. We hoped mightily that we could motivate the young men to move aside the Michael Jordan and Nirvana posters in their rooms and put there instead a poster with the purposes of the Aaronic Priesthood on it. I mentioned our thoughts in a priesthood commemoration fireside, and the most interesting and wonderful thing has happened. Priesthood leaders all over the Church have designed mission statements on posters, plaques, and wallet cards—in every size and shape. I have probably thirty or forty in a file that have been sent to me from around the Church. Wouldn't it be wonderful if every bishop could visit each twelve-year-old young man in his own home and say, "Here's the vision that I as your bishop have for you. Your father and I share this vision. Here's what you can become, my wonderful young priesthood holder." Together they could go over those six purposes of the Aaronic Priesthood. So this is the first point: there is enormous power in having a vision of what you can become, and we ought to share that vision with every young man in the Church.

The second point comes from studies we've made of young men. We've looked at and analyzed their behavior—their attendance at meetings, their participation in priesthood assignments. We have found that the single most important factor in determining whether or not a young man holds the Melchizedek Priesthood later in his life is his private religious observance. It's not his attendance at meetings; it's not his participation in sacrament meeting. Those things are important, but the number one predictor is private religious observance. Private religious observance is what goes on in the home—personal prayer, family prayer, scripture reading, tithe paying, Sabbath observance. The best predictor of whether or not a young man will really catch this vision we are trying to share is his private religious behavior.

That is why teaching doctrine is so important. In Alma 12:32 we read: "Therefore God gave unto them commandments, after having made known unto them the plan of redemption." This verse is not remarkable on the surface. I had read it many times, but one day someone pointed out something I had not noticed. The issue is the sequence of events: before God gave commandments—the dos and don'ts—to his children, he wanted to make sure that they understood the plan. "God gave unto them commandments, after having made known unto them the plan of redemption" (emphasis added). Instructions on what to do and what not to do—commandments, if you will—would be set in the context of a plan, a vision.

Visualize a flow chart. On the left-hand side is doctrine. On the right-hand side is application, or behavior. In the middle are principles.

Doctrine Â Principles Â Behavior

Those of us who are parents or who teach from the pulpit or in any other setting, whether priesthood or Relief Society or family, may spend too much time harping on behavior, pointing out how somebody is not doing this right and how he needs to do better. Our challenge, I believe, is to redress the balance and spend equal time talking about the doctrine and the principles that flow from the doctrine. Doctrine is the foundation. From the doctrine flow certain principles, and from those principles flow certain behaviors, which are application of those principles.

Let me give you an example. Probably the most difficult challenge for young people today is morality. Never before have our young people been so bombarded with misinformation and temptation relative to standards of sexual behavior. As parents and youth leaders, we ought to provide clear, specific guidelines for conduct. We need to spend considerable time saying to them: Don't touch each other in inappropriate places; Don't lie beside or on top of each other on couches; Don't be out together late alone; Do double date with other couples; and so on. To counterbalance the media, our focus needs to be very much on behavior.

But in addition, I wonder how often we sit down with our young people and really talk to them about the doctrine and the principles. We may teach them the truth that immorality is next to murder in seriousness. But have we ever developed a logic that helps them understand why? The issue is one of authority. Can we explain the concept of authority and God's authority over life? Do we explain that only God has the authority to take and to give life? He reserves that to himself. That authority can be delegated; we can be authorized, as, for example, Nephi was authorized to slay Laban. Men and women are authorized to take life if they are protecting their homes, families, and children in times of war. By the same token, we have no right to start life unless we are given the authorization. The issue is not that sex is wrong or evil. The issue is authority. We don't have the right to start a life, and we don't have the right to take a life, unless and until we are given that authority. If we explain to our young people the doctrine, then we can lay out some logical principles regarding our commitment to chastity and the applications of those principles. Whenever we teach our young people, we would make more progress by first backing up a step or two to make sure that the doctrine is understood.

Often leaders want us to give specific and detailed prescriptions for every possible situation. For instance, one leader called to ask if the Church specified a policy about fourteen-year-old girls attending afternoon dances. We talked at length, and I tried to help this leader see that in a Church of approximately nine million members in nearly 150 countries, it is not practical or possible to provide a paragraph description of every possible application. It might be nice to be able to point to a rule from the prophet for every possible situation, but that's not the principle of agency.

We want to avoid what I call the IRS problem. The Church explains tithing with a ten-word description: give 10 percent of your increase on an annual basis. The IRS has shelves and shelves full of code books attempting to detail every specific kind of income and each exact kind of tax that ought to be paid, specifying all possible expenses and deductions, and so on and so forth.

As leaders and parents, instead of turning to a code book, let's talk with our youth about doctrine and help them identify principles that flow from doctrine. Then let's talk with them about reasonable applications. That is a process we should engage in ourselves as we solve problems at a local level. Should a fourteen-year-old girl attend a matinee dance? What makes sense? Local parents and leaders can discuss the issues and give counsel about how to apply principles to matinee dance behavior. Talking about the applications, helping young people understand the whys, becomes the basis for them to develop independence and the ability to cope with the tremendous number of influences from the world around them. Those influences become only more complex and complicated as they grow older. If we can ground our young people strongly in doctrines and principles, they can figure out the applications.

Consider a third idea: young men and women need to think of themselves as part of the engine and not as part of the baggage. The pioneers would never have made it across the plains if the teenagers had ridden in the wagons. They had to push, they had to pull, they had to carry—and as a result, the young men and women who crossed the plains had character, determination, and resilience that has carried through even to the present generation. Our ancestors' experiences have blessed us in ways we're not even aware of. Boys and girls need wood to chop. They need to think of themselves not as bystanders, not as spectators to be entertained, but as part of the engine. Only then will they be excited and enthusiastic about what's happening in their lives.

Let me relate a story that illustrates this point. A bishop in the Northwest was asked to provide the stake with some names of men and women in his ward who could do computer work in genealogy. They would be trained to extract names for temple work. The bishop compiled a list of fifteen names. His counselor said with a laugh, "You know, I believe every teenager in our ward knows more about computers than anybody on that list." The bishop replied, "You may be right." So he went to the Laurels and the priests and said, "I have a little computer project I'd like your help with." "We know about computers; we'd love to help," they replied. So he taught them how to do name extraction, and those young people began extracting away.

One day they asked, "What happens to these names?" The bishop then put on his hat as president of the Aaronic Priesthood and teacher of the plan of redemption and said, "You know when we do baptisms for the dead? These are the people you are baptized for." After a few minutes one of the young people noted, "Bishop, we've got a problem here." Others nodded. The bishop asked, "What's the problem?" The young man replied, "You know, we have only two temple trips scheduled this year." The bishop said, "Yes, what's the problem?" One of the Laurels joined in, "Well, we can't possibly be baptized for all these people in just two trips." The bishop invited more input: "How can we solve that problem?" And the young people responded, "We'll just have to go more often. You know, we've got to get this work done." So they scheduled four more trips to the Portland Oregon Temple that year.

On one of those trips, someone raised another question. "Bishop, what happens after the temple baptism is done?" The bishop again put on his special hat, ready now to teach doctrine. He taught about the temple endowment. They asked, "Bishop, who's in charge of making sure that work is done?" The bishop said, "Well, your parents are, I guess." When they asked, "Bishop, how are they doing?" the bishop hedged. "Well . . . well . . ." So they said, "Now look, Bishop. We can't let these people sit in some dead letter file. We've got to figure out how to get this work done! What can we do to help you get our parents to the temple?"

Do you see the power of getting these young people involved in being part of the engine rather than being part of the baggage? When you do that, all of a sudden they begin to pull the whole load forward. That ward had the highest temple attendance in the stake, the most temple baptisms for the dead, and the highest sacrament meeting attendance, because young men and women were a working part of that wonderful engine.

Finally, and perhaps most important, our youth need caring parents who have made up their minds that this young man or this young woman is going to be nurtured, be taken care of, be blessed to achieve the objectives that they can set for themselves. Consider this: the scouting program is an extraordinary program for young men. Ninety-five percent of LDS Eagle Scouts end up being missionaries. Is that cause and effect? Does working on the Eagle award or learning all you need to know to advance in rank lead you to be a missionary? The answer is no, not at all. Though the two are highly correlated, one does not cause the other. What causes both to occur is an infrastructure of parents and caring adults in the ward.

To run a successful scouting program, you must find men who are willing to be committee chairmen, men who are willing to take boys on hikes, men who are willing to help with advancement, and men who are willing to teach boys skills. All of a sudden you have developed a tremendous infrastructure that includes the bishop, his counselors, advisors, and committeemen. When mothers are added to this equation, this powerful infrastructure can work wonders with young men. They become Eagle Scouts, missionaries, and Melchizedek Priesthood holders. A quarterly or bi-monthly bishopric-parent conference is an excellent way for parents and youth leaders to talk about what's happening, give feedback, and figure out how to provide that infrastructure.

Let me share an example of how important caring parents are in that infrastructure for their youth. About six months ago, I interviewed a young missionary in a southern state. The influence of the Spirit in the mission home plus good companions had convinced him that he had done wrong in his life that he had not repented of. He brought these mistakes to the attention of his mission president. After counseling with General Authorities and stake presidents, this young man had been sent home to continue the repentance process. I was interviewing him to see if he could go back into the mission field. After a rather lengthy interview, I said to him, "Elder, how were you able to keep your desire to serve a mission through a year's worth of difficult repentance?" He gave a very specific answer, "When I came home to our small town, to get off the plane I had to walk down a set of stairs to the tarmac. As I started down the stairs, there at the bottom stood my mother. Her eyes were brimming with tears. I said to myself right then, One day I am going to come down the steps of this airplane again and see not tears of sorrow but tears of joy in my mother's eyes. And that thought," he said, "kept me wanting to do it right."

Parents, please don't ever give up on these young men and young women. Help them catch a vision of who they are. Get the bishop to come by with that poster of the mission of the Aaronic Priesthood. Put it on the wall and talk about it often. Encourage their private, religious behaviors—reading, praying, pondering. Give them wood to chop; help them be part of the engine of the Church. And finally, provide them with the infrastructure of caring adults that just won't let them fail. You can bless their lives as nobody else can. Whatever they've done, whatever their present circumstances, please know that one day you may greet each other not with tears of sorrow but with tears of joy.
