Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

"THE FAMILY: A PROCLAMATION TO THE WORLD"

Robert D. Hales

Robert D. Hales was sustained a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on 2 April 1994. A graduate of the University of Utah, he holds a master of business administration degree from Harvard. He and his wife, Mary Crandall Hales, are the parents of two sons.

On 23 September 1995, the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles issued a proclamation to the world that marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of his children. When President Hinckley read the proclamation at the 1995 worldwide general Relief Society meeting, he gave it as a revelation for our time. The proclamation concludes with a call to government leaders and citizens of all nations "to maintain and strengthen the family as the fundamental unit of society." [^1]

The family is not an accident of mortality. It existed as an organizational unit in the heavens before the world was formed; historically, it started on earth with Adam and Eve, as recorded in Genesis. Adam and Eve were married and sealed for time and all eternity by the Lord, and as a result their family will exist eternally.

The Bible records Adam and Eve's challenges in rearing children. We learn there of the influence of Satan on the first family on earth. Satan is clever, and he is also the father of all lies. Undermining the family as an institution furthers his goal to destroy the eternal nature and destiny of Heavenly Father's children.

Lehi's teaching of the plan of life and of Satan's opposition is important for us to understand. "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. . . . And to bring about his eternal purposes . . . the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other" (2 Ne. 2:11, 15Â16). Of Satan's purposes, Lehi warns that "because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind" (2 1 Ne. 2:18). Satan's opposition to our progress is very real, and disrupting our Heavenly Father's plan for the family is one of his goals.

Lehi, talking with his sons, warned that the devil "seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself" (2 Ne. 2:27). The only pleasure that Satan has is our transgressions. After we have transgressed, the light of Christ leaves us, and we are in darkness—just where Satan wants us—where we feel we have no hope. Note in 2 Ne. 31:20 that when Nephi speaks of hope, he refers to a "brightness" of hope.

After Christ's crucifixion, cities were destroyed because of the wickedness of the people. I can feel the anguish in the voice of the Lord as he cries out, "Wo, wo, wo unto this people . . . except they shall repent," and know that at the same time, "the devil laugheth, and his angels rejoice, because of the slain of the fair sons and daughters of my people" (3 Ne. 9:2). The laughter of the devil is something our children ought to be aware of—understanding that the only time the devil and his disciples rejoice is when we transgress and lose the light of Christ. To stand against Satan in this latter day, we must stand for the family. By sharing what we have learned and are still learning about the dynamics of our companionships and family life, we can answer the call to "strengthen the family as the fundamental unit of society." [^2]

Found in the Book of Mormon is the account of Lehi and Sariah's challenges as they reared their children in love and righteousness. Their family lived among a people who did not follow the commandments of the Lord, even though Lehi tried tirelessly to warn them of the destruction that would come if they did not repent. Eventually, as prompted by the Spirit of the Lord, for their own safety Lehi had to gather his family and flee Jerusalem. He was given spiritual guidance for his family and had the faith to follow the Spirit. Mother Sariah also felt the Spirit and had faith to follow her husband's counsel.

Following counsel meant the family had to sacrifice. They had to leave their home and all their worldly possessions to dwell in tents in the wilderness. Married to daughters of Ishmael, the sons of Lehi started families of their own. Two sons, Nephi and Sam, were obedient, following the counsel of their father in the Spirit of the Lord. Two sons, Laman and Lemuel, were contentious. They murmured about having to give up their home, their inheritance, their gold, silver, and other precious belongings, and take nothing with them but the family when they departed. In the wilderness, Laman and Lemuel continued to yearn for the worldly possessions left behind.

Discord among the family tested the faith of each member, but Lehi and Sariah did not let disobedient children affect their own faith and obedience. Nor did they give up when their sons were beyond feeling. Father Lehi knew and taught that they would face opposition in all things, but it could serve to strengthen them. In 1 Ne. 5:8, Sariah bears testimony to her husband and sons: "Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath commanded my husband to flee into the wilderness; yea, and I also know of a surety that the Lord hath protected my sons."

At the end of the vision of the tree of life in 1 Ne. 8, Lehi talks of the great multitude that entered a spacious building, meaning they went the ways of the world, and "after they did enter into that building they did point the finger of scorn at me and those that were partaking of the fruit [of the tree of life]. . . . And Laman and Lemuel partook not of the fruit [of the tree of life], said my father" (1 Ne. 8:33, 35). After telling them of his vision, Lehi confided to the family that "he exceedingly feared for Laman and Lemuel. . . . And he did exhort them then with all the feeling of a tender parent, that they would hearken to his words, that perhaps the Lord would be merciful to them, and not cast them off" (1 Ne. 8:36Â37; emphasis added). Lehi never ceased caring about his sons. He "preached unto them, and also prophesied unto them of many things, [and] he bade them to keep the commandments of the Lord" (1 Ne. 8:38).

I hope that we will have the courage of Lehi to teach, preach, exhort, and even prophesy in a kind and loving way to our children of what we believe and that we will continue to encourage them to keep the commandments so that they may come to the tree of life. That is eternal life. There is nothing more poignant to me than Lehi looking down the "strait and narrow path" to see if Laman and Lemuel will perhaps come to the tree of life and partake of the fruit.

Nephi began the record of the Book of Mormon with a great tribute to his mother and father: "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents" (1 Ne. 1:1). Parents must make every effort to live so that children can honor them. Lehi and Sariah loved one another and were faithful to one another, although at times they had to work out problems or concerns.

President Elaine L. Jack has shared insights about how Lehi and Sariah built a relationship of trust with each other. She first explains what trust feels like: "When I trust someone, I feel I can put my soul in his or her hands and know it will be protected. I can speak my mind and heart without fear of being judged wrongly. I can be myself. I can do my best work—or my worst—and know I will be aided and appreciated." [^3]

She then uses Lehi and Sariah as an example of marital interactions that build trust. She notes that Sariah was upset with Lehi because he had sent the sons off to get the records of the Lord. She feared that they would not return—that they would be slain by Laban. "In 1 Ne. 5, Nephi one of the sons, tells the story as follows: 'She [Sariah] had supposed that we [her sons] had perished in the wilderness; and she also had complained against my father, [children do hear these arguments, don't they?] telling him that he was a visionary man; saying: Behold thou hast led us forth from the land of our inheritance, and my sons are no more, and we perish in the wilderness' (1 Ne. 5:2)."

Nephi let us know that he didn't record all that his mother said: "And after this manner of language had my mother complained against my father" (1 1 Ne. 5:3). Sister Jack continues: "Sariah was not only apprehensive about her sons' welfare, but concerned that the whole group would die in the wilderness, and didn't hesitate to express her feelings to Lehi. But after her complaints, here's the beginning of Lehi's response: 'I know that I am a visionary man.' Why do you think he responded that way? What effect might it have had on Sariah? In this response, Lehi acknowledged what she had said without recrimination. It seems to me that what she spoke was the truth and he verified it. He didn't defend himself by putting her down, or denying her observations, or complaining against her." [^4]

There was marvelous communication when Lehi next said to his dear wife, "If I had not seen the things of God in a vision I should not have known the goodness of God, but had tarried at Jerusalem, and had perished with my brethren. But behold, I have obtained a land of promise, in the which things I do rejoice" (1 1 Ne. 5:4Â5). Sister Jack comments, "He shared his testimony with her and explained why he had done what he had done and put her remarks in the broader context of their mission." By explaining that they were all on the Lord's mission he invited the Spirit into the discussion, and then he reassured her: "I know that the Lord will deliver my sons out of the hands of Laban, and bring them down again unto us in the wilderness" (1 Ne. 5:5). Sister Jack perceptively analyzes the whole interaction. Lehi had "clearly identified and acknowledged the source of her concern and responded to it. What was Sariah's reaction? Nephi explained, 'And after this manner of language did my father, Lehi, comfort my mother, Sariah, concerning us' (1 Ne. 5:6). Lehi reminded her of the source of comfort, bore his testimony concerning their sons and the Lord's goodness to them all. Sariah, being a woman of spiritual understanding, was comforted by the truth he spoke and by his explanation that all would be well with her sons. I imagine she felt the Spirit bear witness to her that he spoke the truth.

"In 1 Ne. 5:7 we hear the end of this particular story. Nephi records, 'And when we had returned to the tent of my father, behold their joy was full, and my mother was comforted' [emphasis added]. I like the their in that sentence. Lehi was equally concerned about his sons. Sariah voiced fears, I am sure, that were also Lehi's fears. When he bore testimony and comforted her, he was also calming his own fears.

"As Lehi responded to his wife, he showed a profound respect for Sariah and a deep understanding of her character. He could have taken offense at her accusation that he was a 'visionary man,' but he did not. He seemed to understand that her comments were driven by her anxiety for her children, and he provided the comfort that she sought. Furthermore, he shared his most sacred feelings with her and finally rejoiced with her at their sons return." [^5]

I am grateful to Sister Jack for her insights. Mothers and fathers have a companion relationship, which should include open communication with each other and the family members; we should be able to listen to suggestions for improvement from our best friends and critics, our brothers and sisters, our sons and daughters, our husband or wife, without taking offense.

D&C 108 tells us to strengthen each other in all of our conversations, prayers, exhortations, and doings. It would be so much easier if it said most—in most of your conversations, most prayers, most exhortations, and most of your doings. But it says "in all." That process enables us to be one—of one mind, one heart, one purpose, one accord—knowing the desires of our companion and of each of our children. In this way we become one, as a family.

Of course we still have differences, but we just don't personalize them. We allow each family member a little space, a little private time. We encourage family members to have successful experiences and to be themselves.

As children learn to love and strengthen parents and brothers and sisters and to unite as a family, they are really preparing themselves to select their own companion and to parent in their own families. The family is a protective incubator for caring, testing, trials, and controlled growth. The family is where we can make mistakes and be loved, where we can trust. When I think of the prodigal son, I think of a father running to his son, throwing his arms around him and loving him. I would also hope that parents would remember to take time—not only with the children who are struggling with their testimonies or their obedience—but with those who are faithful, so that they, too, might know of their love and appreciation. Alma's words to his middle son, Shiblon, are an example: "I say unto you, my son, that I have had great joy in thee already, because of thy faithfulness and thy diligence" (Alma 38:3).

An article I read about communication estimated that about 70 percent of communication within the family is nonverbal: it's music, emotions, touching when we hug one another or when we express love for one another. Within the family structure we move beyond self-centered thoughts and develop concern for others. Much of our strength comes from passive and visual communication as we persuade one another through emotion and reason to do what is right. A family unit that works well gives its members a sense of security, making it easier to venture into the world and trust others. A smile, though nonverbal, expresses love and gives courage. It does not, however, take the place of telling our wives, husbands, and children, "I love you."

The things we do together bond us. I can remember as a young boy lying on the ground with my father and brother. We looked up into the clouds, and Father, who was an artist, asked us to pick out different animals or other shapes that we saw—kind of a nature's Rorschach test. I have long remembered those sweet moments.

In a 1993 general conference talk entitled "How Will Our Children Remember Us?" I pondered about how my children will remember me. [^6] How will your children remember you? My warm memories of Mother's tiny slippered feet on top of Father's feet as they danced around the kitchen help me recall their expressions of love for each other. I remember sitting as a young boy on the floor by their bedside while they took turns reading aloud from the scriptures. We could join in whenever we desired. I have beautiful memories in later years of going to the Salt Lake Temple and watching Mother and Father participate in the presentation of a live endowment ceremony. These memories have been a guide for me.

One of the greatest privileges and responsibilities given to us is being a parent, helping to bring to earth children of God and having a sacred responsibility to love, care, and guide them back to our Heavenly Father. Children often look to their parents to learn the characteristics of their Heavenly Father. When they love, respect, and have confidence in their earthly parents, they often unknowingly develop the same feeling towards their Heavenly Father.

No parent on earth is perfect. Children can be understanding when they sense that parents truly care and are attempting to do their best. Faults will be overlooked and forgiven if children have been loved enough. Children need to see good parents having differing opinions and working out these differences without striking, yelling, or throwing things. Seeing calm communication that respects other's viewpoints and differences will teach children how to work out their differences in their own lives, both in their families and with those whom they meet in the world.

It is no secret that example is the best teacher. The Lord has said: "And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord" (D&C 68:28). Children who are taught to pray and who pray with their parents when young are more likely to pray when they are older. Those who are taught at an early age to love God and believe in him will more often continue their spiritual development and increase their feelings of love as they mature. Yet even children reared with great love and care and carefully taught may as adults choose for a variety of reasons not to follow our teachings. How should we respond? What is our responsibility as parents? Basic to our faith is an understanding of and a respect for the principle of agency. Coercion is never part of God's plan. Rather, we pray that life's experiences will help those children regain their desire and ability to live in the gospel. They are still our children, and we love and care about them no matter what their beliefs and lifestyles. We do not lock the doors of our house against them, nor do we lock the doors of our heart.

If we think other families don't have difficulties, we just don't know them well enough. Some Church members feel they cannot accept or fulfill a church calling if one of their children is straying. They are filled with a sense of failure and unworthiness. Yet, accepting a calling and doing our best may have a profound spiritual effect on those we love the most.

If our parents' example has not been good, we can break the cycle. Humility, faith, prayer, and study can show us a better way, bless the lives of present family members, and teach correct traditions for generations to follow. The Lord's promises are sure: "I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go" (Ps. 32:8). And again, "And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you" (3 Ne. 18:20).

Let's review some practical advice about marriage. Temple marriage is of eternal significance. In the temple we are sealed by priesthood power in an eternal covenant, bound together for this life and for all eternity. Knowing of the importance of marriage from the time of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden until our day, what are some of the things that prevent our relationships from having joy and eternal happiness?

President Harold B. Lee helped me when Mary and I were sealed in the temple in 1953. After describing the eternal nature of marriage, he said, "What you do in all the eternities to come will depend on how you live this life. Court your wife in the same manner throughout your life as you did to have her choose to come to the temple with you." That is great advice. Then he said, "Bring flowers home often enough so that she doesn't say, 'What's the matter?'" Courtship and loving, then, are important parts of marriage. We should always keep our love alive by expressing it to one another any number of times during the day. Sometimes I will call my wife during the day just to talk to her and tell her I love her. Sometimes I call because I need the reassurance of her love.

We need to be quick to say, "I'm sorry." Try to get your pride out of the way and look at a situation from your spouse's point of view. When you say, "I'm sorry," try to have the humility to say, "I'm sorry, and I will do better."

Unhappy marriage partners are often struggling with the way they handle money. It's important to live within our means. Debt causes stress. When I counsel a couple before they go to the temple to be married, I give them one phrase to remember throughout their marriage to help them live within their means: "We can't afford it." And if mother and father are able to say, "We can't afford it," to each other, then it will be easier for them to say that to their children and in their family councils.

We need the courage to ask, How can I be a better husband and father? How can I be a better mother and wife? How can I be a better son or daughter? We should discuss our differences calmly when they are small, when they first happen. Unacknowledged, little problems become big problems.

At times I have been softly corrected by my wife. Let me tell of one instance. In 1975 on my first assignment as a General Authority, I spoke at Ricks College. My speech was informal and I enjoyed using humor. In answering the students' questions afterwards, I knew they were having a good time, and we laughed together as I gave all kinds of clever answers. I felt good about the meeting. As my wife, Mary, and I left Rexburg and were driving back to Salt Lake, Mary moved over next to me and put her head on my shoulder. "How do you think it went?" I asked, smiling. Her answer changed me: "They expect more of you than that." Her reply stung a bit, but that is why we have companions. That is why we go to the Lord in individual prayer and companion prayer and family prayer. If we will listen to our companions and to the Lord—and try to get our pride out of the way—we can accomplish what the Lord would have us do.

One of President Spencer W. Kimball's frequent topics was marriage. He taught that there is no such thing as soul mates; that is, marriages are not made in heaven—two people are not destined from the premortal existence to meet and marry. President Kimball felt that we had to work together and work through our differences, that we had to get over our selfishness and not be spoiled, that we had to sacrifice and to share with one another. I remember him telling us, "Don't just pray to marry the one you love; pray to love the one you marry." Praying together daily will help love grow. So will expressing love for one another daily—more than once. D&C 42:22 says: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else."

The proclamation promises, "Happiness in family life is most likely to be achieved when founded upon the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ." The Lord has given us agency to accept or reject this proclamation. It would be wonderful if every mother and father understood, as they held a newborn babe in their arms, that the child was sent from a loving Heavenly Father into their home to be nurtured, cared for, and loved. Our homes should be protected havens. Individuals who abuse their spouse and/or children violate the laws of both God and society. Both violence and words hurt, and Church leaders have counseled that more subtle forms of abuse are evil as well. James 1:19 gives us advice about communicating: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath."

Parents are responsible to teach their children to walk in the ways of truth and to love and serve one another—rejecting the devil's ways. In Mosiah 4:14Â15 we read: "And ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another. . . . But ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another." If we will pray and ask for guidance and if we will covenant with our Heavenly Father to obey the commandments, we are assured that we will be given the strength to accomplish what he has asked us to do in our families.

I have been touched to hear fathers, knowing that death is imminent, bless their families, testifying of the Savior and encouraging them to obey the commandments of God—to be worthy of those blessings that come to the faithful. If we are wise, we will also teach daily and testify by the way we live our lives. We will let our sons and daughters know that our Heavenly Father lives, that we lived with him as spirits in families in the premortal life, and we can return to his presence and live in families once again for all the eternities.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida, act III, scene ii, line 17.
[^2] Ibid., 133.
[^3] Elaine L. Jack, "Building Relationships of Trust," Relief Society Open House, Fall 1994, 1.
[^4] Ibid., 1Â2.
[^5] Ibid., 2.
[^6] Robert D. Hales, "How Will Our Children Remember Us?" Ensign, November 1993, 8Â10.
