Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

MEASURING UP TO EXPECTATION

Helen B. Stone

Helen B. Stone has taught nutrition and food science at the University of Rhode Island and Cornell University. She and her husband, John R. Stone, who is president of the New York New York Stake, are the parents of five children. She is a homemaker and serves as her ward's Relief Society president.

My dad, J. Hobart Bartlett, was an active, energetic, healthy ninety-one-year-old who exercised daily, went to the Family History Library every day, worked hard, and one day fell as he was crossing the street in downtown Salt Lake City. Unconscious and covered with blood, he was rushed to LDS Hospital. Doctors there determined that he had suffered a traumatic head injury, which altered his swallowing, his speech, his hearing, and his general mobility. They put a gastrointestinal tube into his stomach, which provided liquid nourishment without his having to swallow. My dad had been single for thirty-five years (my mother died when we children were teenagers, and Dad never remarried), and his self-imposed diet left a lot to be desired. Every morning: oatmeal and orange juice; every lunch: cottage cheese and wholewheat toast; and every supper: tuna fish and apples. We actually thought his liquid nutrition would add a little spice to his diet after so many years of the other.

His hospital stay stretched on. The therapy he received—physical, speech, and occupational—seemed to have little effect in restoring normal function. After a month, the doctors told us he needed to be transferred to a care facility of some kind or to someone's home. My brother, Jim, and sister, Janet, live in Salt Lake City; and they had been absolutely wonderful to our dad for the previous eleven years. They had done for him tasks he didn't have the inclination or the patience to do for himself, such as balancing his checkbook, shopping for groceries, tidying his home, or even at times finishing up some details of his genealogical research. He could have done those things; he just didn't want to. So now it was my turn. Because my brother and sister both worked outside the home, it seemed a natural choice to take Dad home with me to New York. We went straight from the hospital to the Salt Lake airport to New York—a very stressful trip but without incident.

Home was noisy and busy. At the time, my husband and I had three college-age children home for the summer, two high school students, and an adult nephew living with us. I thought the activity would be a wonderful stimulation for my dad. Still, we were all nervous about Grandpa coming to live with us; he had always expected a lot of himself, as well as of his children and grandchildren. We knew he loved us, but he had always wanted us to be working hard and accomplishing all of the time. Measuring up to expectation could be a challenge.

But Dad was in a weakened state now. It was hard for him to talk or walk. Though he could walk a bit with a walker and somebody by his side, he could do very little for himself. We brushed his teeth, bathed him, dressed him, and really did everything for him.

We converted the dining room of our old colonial house into a bedroom because the stairs were difficult for him, and we began our adventure. I slept on a mattress on the floor to be close to him through the night. That first night we made a bathroom trip every thirty minutes. Sometimes we made it to the bathroom, and sometimes we didn't. When morning came, I felt as though night had never been, but I kept thinking, Maybe he's just nervous and restless because he's in a new place. This pattern, however, turned out to be the norm for the rest of his life. So the first major problem we had to address was lack of sleep.

At first I enlisted everyone's help, but that wasn't fair to those who went to school or to work every day. I found that they became so tired they sometimes slept through Dad's needs for help. At this point my eldest daughter, Stephanie, who had just graduated from Brigham Young University and was looking for a teaching position, decided she would alter her life's agenda to help me. She set up a tutoring business—allowing her to set her own hours and take turns doing night duty with me. On her nights, she did not even try to sleep. Also, my husband, John, stepped in whenever he could (and sometimes even when it was very difficult for him) to spell me.

Dad was an avid walker before his accident. To keep his body and mind as nimble as possible, we wanted to continue his walking however we were able. It gave Dad hope that life could continue as before his accident. So every hour, just about, we would laboriously walk down the street and back. These were very tender times for me because every single time we walked together, Dad, in his very limited speech, would express to me his gratitude for my care and his joy at being in our home. I felt a new softness and sweetness in him that I believe was a gift of the Spirit given to him at a time when it would make caring for him an easier task.

At the outset of our experience together, I was reminded of my favorite scripture in Job 29:13, in which Job is defending himself against his friends' unsympathetic comments. Job, among other things, says: "I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy." This was a major trial in my father's life, and I determined from the start that we as a family would do all that we could to make Dad's heart sing for joy. It didn't take a lot: little walks, little talks, gentle kisses, little touches, a listening ear, and mostly just a quiet presence. The children all visited his bedside each morning when they left for the day to explain their upcoming activities. Then at the end of the day they would report back to him. This made him see that he was still the patriarch of this family and very much part of the activities of our home. My kids were fabulous.

One month into his stay with us, I left his bedside at 10 o'clock at night to make a short phone call. I didn't intend to be away very long, but in the middle of the call, my nephew rushed in to say, "Aunt Helen, Grandpa has fallen." He had been in bed. He must have tried to get up by himself, I thought. I ran into the room and found blood all over. He had fallen on the arm of the chair that I sat in most of the time right beside his bed. His eye was gouged, and blood was everywhere. I didn't know what to do, but I got a cloth and covered his eye. My daughter drove us to the nearest hospital emergency room. After six hours of surgery, we returned home, sobered about the responsibility that we had committed ourselves to. We realized now that someone (that quiet presence) had to be by Dad's side all of the time. He still wanted to be independent, so if anybody left his room, he tried to get out of bed. Thereafter that first year, we had to stay beside him day and night to prevent him hurting himself by trying to get up.

The second year, Dad was bedridden and began to choke a lot. He couldn't swallow, and phlegm collected in his throat. We rented a suction machine and eventually had to suction him regularly. He was peaceful and calm if someone was sitting by him. He was anxious and scared if no one was there. Arranging for someone always to be with Dad presented another major problem for me as the caretaker. I eliminated everything else from my life. Three of my children had gone back to school, my nephew had left, and I had two children at home—my daughter Stephanie, who was still doing night duty, and my high-school-age son, Greg. I was the only one left to be by his side during the day. I had a choice. I could either make this a happy experience for me and my dad, or I could begrudge every minute that I sat there thinking of other things that I needed to do.

For a long time I had wanted to make a serious study of the Old Testament. This seemed the perfect time. I brought in my scriptures and study books and put them around my chair in Dad's room. It tickled him that I was studying the scriptures like that. I often shared with him the things that I was learning. I also decided to attempt a "Families Are Forever" cross-stitch to put up for Dad to look at. I had never had the patience to cross-stitch in my life, although I had admired other people's needlework. So I learned to cross-stitch while I sat beside my dad. After the first one, I did several others. There was something very soul enriching about creating miniature works of art (though only I would call them art). These two projects helped me through a difficult period. My husband, my daughter, and my fifteen-year-old son, who were the only ones around after that first summer, spelled me in our constant vigil.

The physical demands of caring for Dad were enormous. Before he was bedridden, the lifting on and off the toilet and the daily bathing exacted effort from our legs and backs and feet that we really didn't know we had in us. After he was bedridden, it was position changing, suctioning, and totally sleepless nights. The toll was beginning to mount. I can't offer a solution for that, because I didn't cope well with the problem. I will probably always pay the price for not taking care of myself during this period. I was an avid walker before my dad came, but as his stay lengthened, I became less and less physically able to walk. Occasionally, when I could get someone to cover for me, I went swimming. That was my exercise. If I were to do it again, I would consult a physical therapist or specialists to learn both how to preserve my body and how to care better for a bedridden individual.

Even as my dad's expectations of me lessened, my expectations of myself increased. My bishop and close friends always said, "Oh, Helen, you're so strong. You are so wonderful to do this." And I thought, How can I ask for help when they think I'm so wonderful and so strong? So I forged ahead, too proud to get help, though people offered. I allowed overly high expectations of myself to drive me on past good sense.

Let me give you an example of how I felt. I wrote in my journal just six months before my dad died: "I have come to a point where I really and truly feel that I will not live long enough to finish taking care of Dad. There is not a single part of my body that is not in pain. I have headaches the likes of which I've never had before (and I've had some pretty gruesome migraines in my day). A few days ago I thought my head would blow up, and I called Dr. Cardillo. I told him I needed some help fast. He sent me right to the hospital for a CAT scan of my head. There were no tumors . . . nothing showed on the scan. What to do now?

"I took my problem to the Lord and begged for help. I told him that I was willing to care for Dad for as long as was necessary, but I just plain could not go on with my headaches (it was getting so I could not sleep for more than an hour at a time without being awakened with intense pain). I needed to know what to do for my pain, or I needed Dad to be taken to his heavenly home. It was the next day that Dad became so ill he had to be taken to the hospital. I felt this was absolutely a direct and forceful answer to my pleadings. I needed help, and I needed it fast. I was on the Lord's errand and he blessed me . . . as he always does. I felt so bad for Dad, but I honestly did not know how I could keep going. The headaches have eased, the pain in my legs, feet, and back has diminished, and now I feel like I can go on."

Because Dad was being fed via a G-tube, he sometimes aspirated his food, resulting in pneumonia. His fever would spike, and he would become very ill. The first time that happened, the doctor gave me the option of sending him to the hospital for a quick IV antibiotic treatment or letting him stay home and possibly die. We discovered considerable opposition to the "rush" for help. It became apparent that the attitude of many people was that because his care was so difficult and I refused to put him in a home, we really ought to let him die at home with one of his bouts of pneumonia.

I'd spoken to the Lord about it many times, and I had felt a great peace about doing all we could to help him live. I felt the Lord was in control and that He would take him when the time was right. So every time he got really ill, I felt at peace helping him live.

Towards the end of Dad's life, we had little contact with people outside our immediate family. That troubled me, especially at Christmas time. As Dad got older and sicker, he could no longer talk, and people felt uncomfortable visiting him. I understood and forgave that, yet I still longed to have friends come. Christmas was nearing, and I thought how wonderful it would be to have someone besides our family carol to Dad for a little while. I didn't want to ask anybody because the holidays are family times and I knew how busy everyone is. So instead I talked to the Lord and specifically asked him to send somebody to carol to Dad. Surely it's a righteous desire to make this request of the Lord, I thought. He wants us to comfort the sick, he wants us to serve and uplift and bless the lives of others. So I prayed several times for that specific blessing. On Christmas Eve, a group came to our home, walked past the rest of us, and headed for Dad's room, asking, "Can we sing to your dad?" I know the Spirit led that family to sing to my dad and also to comfort me that Christmas Eve.

The day Dad passed away, 6 July 1994, I wrote in my journal: "The night was horrendous for Dad. His fever spiked, and he started horrible vomiting. He finally went to sleep at 6 o'clock this morning. I didn't want to turn him at all because he seemed to be so peaceful. It didn't really occur to me that he was probably in a coma. I thought he was just sleeping peacefully. By noon I was feeling pretty guilty that I hadn't changed his position . . . and when I tried to turn him I realized that he was not conscious. I called the nurse . . . she stopped by abt. 2 at which point Dad was struggling to continue breathing. The nurse told me that I would have to tell him it was okay to leave. I had a very hard time doing that, as I really did not want him to go. Finally, about 3 p.m. I hugged Dad and kissed him and told him that we had had a great time together and I considered him such a good pal, but now maybe it would be okay to go to Mom . . . she had waited a long time for him to come home. 50 minutes later he died. Oh—I'm so sad! Dad has been such a champion of me and my causes—all my life. What to do now? I feel so lonely."

Among the many things I have learned from this experience, one of the most important is that unrealistic expectations of others or self needlessly complicate life. Shakespeare described me when he said, "Expectation whirls me around." [^1] Rather I would hearken to the counsel of the Lord: "Let your hearts be comforted . . . ; be still and know that I am God" (D&C 101:16). And when I think of Dad, I feel the joy that Jacob talks about when the Lord of the vineyard says: "If ye labor with your might with me ye shall have joy" (Jacob 5:71; emphasis added).

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Role of Righteous Women," Ensign, November 1979, 102.
