Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

DANCING TO DIFFERENT TUNES

Sandra Petree

Sandra Ailey Petree is a candidate for the doctoral degree in English at the University of Arkansas. She serves as an institute of religion teacher, ward in-service leader, teacher development teacher, and Relief Society teacher. Sandra and her husband, James H. Petree, are the parents of five children.

I am married to a kind, loving, supportive husband who is, as far as he knows how to be, an excellent father. He is not a member of the Church. He goes to church every Sunday with us; we have regular family home evenings, family prayer, and scripture study. He drives to youth events and helps me with lesson preparation and anything else I have to do. No doubt some of you are wondering what I have to worry about.

But there are some problems, the most significant of which are hidden, with having such a supportive nonmember husband. One problem is that some people at church tend to think that it must be my fault, or the children's, that he hasn't joined yet. Another problem is that every new set of missionaries feels that all my husband needs is a direct challenge. He's had hundreds! Still another problem is that home teachers tend to concentrate more on trying to convert my husband than on trying to provide priesthood leadership for my family.

But the most serious problem is that when my children look at this good, kind, loving man, see his sacrifices for his family, and feel his warmth and his love, it's very hard for them to recognize the distinct benefits of membership in the Church. When they see our fairly solid, twenty-six-year marriage, it's hard for them to believe that marriage in the temple is worth waiting for. And, in a subtle and deadly way, my husband's decision year after year not to join the Church, even though he reads the scriptures and hears the lessons, has sometimes influenced my children to believe that commitment is unnecessary and even to wonder if the Church can really be what we say it is. Sometimes it seems that the result of my husband's terrific support is actually a removal of the underpinnings of testimony.

Some years ago as I crossed the living room where my children had left the television on, something caught my ear or eye, and I paused to watch two dancers, a male and a female, in a beautifully choreographed, synchronous ballet. I know very little about music or dance, but the grace and power and control of their movements were fascinating, and I sat down on the floor, leaning against my couch with my dust cloth and can of Pledge in hand, to watch.

It was breathtaking. The stage was dark, with no props or stage-setting, only the lights playing on the leaping and gliding figures of the dancers. They moved together, matching each other's steps and leaps and turns, touching occasionally, perfectly complementing each other, and their bodies seemed to be at once energized by and expressive of the music itself. I had the sense, sitting there in my sweats on housecleaning day, that I was watching something terribly important, a threefold meld of dancers and music so absolutely interdependent that none could have meaning without the others.

At one point, the female dancer stepped gracefully back into the shadows, and her partner had the spotlight alone. His dance was riveting. He leaped high, his powerful muscles demonstrating the vibrant tones of the music. I found myself moved to tears at the majesty of his movements. When his solo was finished, his partner moved back onto the stage, and again together they soared and bowed and swayed. The music seemed to engulf them—and me. Soon the male dancer, in his turn, dropped into the background, and the woman, alone, performed exquisite, intricate, delicate movements, truly inspiring to watch. Towards the end of her own lovely piece, she seemed to pause a moment and then stretched herself, arms together, high above her head, as though she were reaching for something beyond human sight. She reached from the points of her ballet shoes upward in one unbroken, graceful, elongated line. I was struck with admiration. Then, just as she stretched her own body to its utmost height, her partner stepped in and with his powerful arms lifted her off the floor, higher and higher, until the two of them seemed to form a straight conduit to the heavens.

When the dance ended, I turned off the television and sat with my dust cloth in my hand, weeping. I had received a revelation. The dance symbolized our Father's plan for marriage, a plan whereby a man and a woman, joined through the powers of the holy priesthood, might dance together and reach heights neither of them could achieve alone. Oh, what a melancholy revelation that seemed for me. Usually when the Holy Spirit teaches me, it is gentle, kind, encouraging, and uplifting. I wondered, Why would the Lord want to point out to me what I am, frankly, missing?

Since then I have learned more fully the meaning of that day's revelation. I cannot detail everything, but I would like to share with you the high points of how this revelation changed my life. The first thing I learned is that partners in an exquisite and eternal dance must develop their own powers and strength individually. The quality of our dance does not depend, and indeed cannot depend, upon our partner. We must develop spiritually and physically so that when (and I say when, not if) opportunity comes to dance a duet, we will be strong and skilled. How can we do that?

First of all, we can readily do hard things.

As you know, this is not a dispensation for wimps. At general conference, I have been struck by the number of times speakers refer to powerful and dynamically spiritual women. This is a dispensation that calls for powerful women. The greater our challenges, the more powerful the results can be.

In 1979, President Spencer W. Kimball addressed the women of the Church in the worldwide Women's Fireside Address, a remarkable event. Because he was in the hospital at the time, he asked his wife, Camilla, to read his remarks. President Kimball said: "I stress again the deep need each woman has to study the scriptures. We want our homes to be blessed with sister scriptorians—whether you are single or married, young or old, widowed or living in a family. . . . Become scholars of the scriptures—not to put others down, but to lift them up!" [^1]

Easy things do not build power. We must study the scriptures. We must accept challenging callings. We must strive diligently and powerfully to teach our children (and our partners) the gospel of Jesus Christ. And we must develop ourselves to our fullest and finest potential. President Kimball went on to say: "Seek excellence in all your righteous endeavors, and in all aspects of your lives. . . . Much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days will come because many of the good women of the world (in whom there is often such an inner sense of spirituality) will be drawn to the Church in large numbers. This will happen to the degree that the women of the Church reflect righteousness and articulateness in their lives and to the degree that the women of the Church are seen as distinct and different—in happy ways—from the women of the world. . . . Thus it will be that female exemplars of the Church will be a significant force in both the numerical and spiritual growth of the Church in the last days." [^2]

In short, we must fill the measure of our creation. To me, that is the essence of President Kimball's message. No matter who I am married to, or what my parents or my children may choose to do, I must never lose sight of who I am. I am a daughter of Zion, a mother in Israel. Oh, sisters, the power in those names! Eleanor Roosevelt said to the women of America at a hard time, "You must do the thing you think you cannot do." [^3]

What might that be? It differs for each of us and comes at different times in our lives. Perhaps you know within yourself that what you need to be working on right now is becoming a scriptorian, developing a talent, continuing your education, beginning an exercise program, learning to sew, bridling your tongue, disciplining yourself in one or a thousand ways. To make your own dance a thing of beauty, you must do hard things—and do them cheerfully and well.

Second, we must hear, know, and feel the music, which is the gospel of Jesus Christ. Our goal is for the music to become so intricately a part of our mental and physical landscapes that we develop perfection in the rhythm of the dance. This means, of course, that we must practice living the gospel seriously every day, every hour of the day, until the music springs up within us, until we are prompted to our exquisite dances by the pulsation of the music of the gospel of Jesus Christ within our own souls.

Third, we must not become resigned to feeling that we are alone, that we dance entirely alone. Remember that our partners are dancing, too—only they are hearing different music. Now, that sounds ridiculous—how can we dance with a partner whose beat differs, sometimes wildly, from our own? This surely is not a dance but cacophony and confusion! "Besides," we may complain to ourselves, "it's impossibly hard! Trying to match such a partner makes it harder for me than for anyone else!" Perhaps it does; but, if so, what might our own dances be if we learn to do this hard thing?

Stephen Robinson taught an important lesson from an experience he had at a diving competition when he was young. "While the rest of us did our crisp little swan dives, back dives, and jackknives, being ever so careful to arch our backs and point our toes, [one young man from the less affluent part of town] attempted back flips, one-and-a-halfs, doubles, and so on. But, oh, he was sloppy. He seldom kept his feet together, he never pointed his toes, and he usually missed his vertical entry. The rest of us noted with smug satisfaction as the judges held up their scorecards that he consistently got lower marks than we did with our safe and simple dives, and we congratulated ourselves that we were actually the better divers. . . . The announcement of the winners was a great shock to us, for the brave young lad with the flips had apparently beat us all." Full of outraged justice, a disgruntled Stephen stomped over to the scorers' table to demand an explanation. "'Degree of difficulty,' the scorer replied matter-of-factly as he looked [Stephen] in the eye. 'Sure, you had better form, but he did harder dives. When you factor in the degree of difficulty, he beat you hands down, kid.'" [^4] Think about that.

Henry David Thoreau said, "However mean your life is, meet it and live it; do not shun it and call it hard names." [^5] This is not only good advice but is inescapable advice! We each must live the lives we have. President Brigham Young said, "Every trial and experience you have passed through is necessary for your salvation." [^6] No one doubts that it is hard to dance when the partners hear different music. But if that's the stage we're performing on, that's what we have to do. Can we do it? Yes, we can. James 4:6 says, "But he giveth more grace." More grace than what, we may ask? More grace than life can give trials. We can do it.

As to the cacophony, the truth is that if we listen for them, there are many times when the two strands of music, the one your partner hears and the one you hear, actually correspond. When that happens we can dance wonderfully and joyfully together. It may be through discovering the places where we can dance together that our greatest learning and joy and most significant mutual growth will occur. In my marriage, my husband and I have very similar desires for our children and hopes for their future. In that measure of our music, we dance perfectly together.

There are cautions, of course. We can never compromise our own forms, we can never dance to music we do not hear, and we can never permit other tunes to drown out our own music. Remember that in doing hard things, we must always do them to the tune of the gospel of Jesus Christ. In this we are not without companionship and support. The most important part of what I learned from my revelation of the dance is this: There are never only two partners on the stage. The third and most powerful partner stays out of the spotlight, but his strength and his presence are always available. The Lord Jesus Christ hears both strains of music. He responds to both, and he loves both dancers. He is the choreographer who enables the dance to go on.

When we stretch ourselves to the utmost limits of our reach, when every muscle from our toes inside our ballet shoes to the tips of our fingers is extended to its farthest point, when we feel our hearts might burst with our efforts and we agonizingly call for a partner to lift us those last few inches that we simply cannot reach on our own, then the third partner will always step in from the sidelines. I testify to you that we never dance alone. The Lord himself, our third partner, will lift us, raise us, extend our reaches until we, too, soar in power and joy.

Meanwhile, the Lord continues to reveal to us how to dance out our lives on the stage of this earth, which is of course only a dress rehearsal for eternity. One day by inspiration, counsel from Isaiah came to me in a time of serious reaching, when I needed help stretching far enough. Reading Isaiah, especially chapter 30, almost always comforts and encourages me. This particular day, as I knelt weeping and pleading for the soul of one of my children, I felt inspired to read this chapter again. After I had read verse 15, "In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength," I exclaimed, "But, Lord! Look at me! I don't feel quiet, and I certainly don't feel confident! I need help!" And then he answered, as he always does, quietly and gently, "No, dear. The quietness must be in you, but the confidence must be in me." And so it is.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, 110. Elder Whitney also notes: "They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain."
[^2] Robert L. Millet, When A Child Wanders (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), 46.
[^3] Ibid., 39.
[^4] H. Burke Peterson, "Unrighteous Dominion," Ensign, July 1989, 6Â11.
[^5] Howard W. Hunter, "The Golden Thread of Choice," Ensign, November 1989, 18.
[^6] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854Â86), 8:150.
