Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

LESSONS FROM THE PRODIGAL SON

Wendy L. Watson, Elouise Trotter,

and Wendy Evans Ruppel

Wendy L. Watson is an associate professor, teaching marriage and family therapy graduate classes in the Department of Family Sciences at Brigham Young University. She serves as stake Relief Society president in a BYU stake.

Elouise Trotter is the mother of six and grandmother of nineteen. She and her husband, Eugene W. Trotter, also reared three foster sons and participated in the Indian Placement program. She worked as a secretary for the United States Army and served a mission in Texas. She has served as Gospel Doctrine teacher in Sunday School.

Wendy Evans Ruppel holds a master's degree in counseling from Hawthorne University and a CAC (certified addiction counselor) certificate from the University of Utah. She is the clinical coordinator for Lifeline, a rehabilitation center, counseling adolescents with addictions, behavior problems, and sexual abuse issues. She is the mother of six and grandmother of seven and teaches the Laurels in her ward.

The following is a panel conversation among three women: Wendy L. Watson, the moderator, and two Latter-day Saint women, Elouise Trotter and Wendy Evans Ruppel, who have had intimate personal experience with prodigals in their families.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): We cannot cover everything related to the complex, heart-wrenching, and soul-stirring topic of prodigals, but we invite you to reflect on some key issues and lessons from the prodigal son. A prodigal is defined as a reckless, wasteful person; the term prodigal son designates a returned wanderer, from the account of a family told in Luke 15. We hope to uncover here some ideas about what helps and what hinders our relationships with the prodigal sons in our lives, whether our prodigal son is a son or a daughter, a husband, a mother, or a sister. Elouise Trotter and Wendy Evans Ruppel bring rich and diverse personal and professional experience to the topic of prodigals. These are women of depth, great understanding, and wisdom. I wonder if loving the prodigals in our lives draws forth these qualities in women, or if these women were always this way. Many of us have increased depth, understanding, wisdom, and charity because of our experiences as prodigals or with prodigals. Let me begin by asking Elouise and Wendy to sketch their own "prodigal son" experience or experiences.

ELOUISE: My son left home at fourteen. During the next few years, I came to know a number of sheriffs and police chiefs in the surrounding communities, as well as in outlying states. He was away for fifteen years. One day I received a call from Australia (he had lived all over the world). He said he was going to walk across China, possibly wouldn't see me again, and wanted me to know where a few of his things were. I told him I thought I could find a six-foot-four inch, long-haired redhead in China. Two days later the phone rang, and my son said, "Mom, I'll be in Salt Lake in an hour. I haven't time to talk. Meet me."

I met him, but he was neither redheaded nor fair-skinned. He was deeply tanned and had long blond hair. He had lived, virtually alone, on an island in the South Pacific. I didn't know what had happened, but here he was, at home. "Mom," he said, "you promised that if I'd ever live like I was supposed to and follow your rules, you would educate me. I'm ready to be educated." In three years, he graduated from the University of Utah with honors and received a twenty-thousand-dollar scholarship to the University of Miami law school. I finally felt there was hope. He went to law school and then decided that wasn't what he wanted to do. He came back home and worked as a radio announcer for a while. He's now with one of the airlines.

In the middle of all this, he married a wonderful Latter-day Saint girl. She has a master's degree and is a nurse practitioner. She's been in Russia on medical teams and she's run a 26K, so you can see she's up to him. It's going to work. He's not the boy I dreamed of, but he's so much better than I imagined possible in my most despairing moments.

WENDY R.: I offer not only the experiences of my own family but my experiences as a counselor who works with young people. I see more potential prodigal sons in a day than people see in a lifetime. I am no stranger to the heartache of watching a child make poor choices. As the wife of a former stake president and bishop, I have found it really interesting to sit on the lawn of the jail and wait for my own son to walk up the ramp so I can take him home. I've done that. I've been there with more than one of my own children who had difficult times.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): Within the Church, we sometimes find women and men who are blaming of families with problems, including themselves if they are the ones experiencing the problems. Some even believe that families have prodigals because they don't live the gospel correctly. Such a belief may actually exacerbate the situation. Some families won't admit they have a problem because of what they believe that says about them. They will ignore what is happening, keep secrets about their problems, or wait inordinately long to seek help. "If I don't look at a problem, it doesn't exist." What other beliefs worked against your being able to deal with problems?

WENDY R.: I think every home has its prodigal in one way or another. All of us struggle in various ways. Believing that if we are obedient and obey the commandments, everything in life will turn out okay is a fantasy. How many times have your kids said to you, "Mom, it isn't fair" and you have said, "Honey, life isn't fair." But we also need to teach them that eternal life is fair, that in the long haul there is justice in all things. One of our sons was told in his patriarchal blessing that the Savior would embrace him, call him by name, and tell him, "Well done, my good and faithful servant." This son didn't cut his hair for nine years after his mission, he has twenty-seven tattoos on his body, and he's a very interesting person. But that doesn't mean his blessing isn't valid, because Heavenly Father truly knows his soul and his spirit and what he deals with. I'm grateful I don't have to judge him—or anyone else's child, either.

ELOUISE: Judging from outside appearances was a disaster for us when we first moved to Utah from California. My thirteen-year-old son and I were able to carry on conversations 80 percent of the time, I'd say, on a level where we didn't blast out each other's ears. (The rest of the time we did argue rather pointlessly.) My son was reading when he was four, and he came home from kindergarten at age five to tell me he was no longer going to school because he knew everything the teacher was teaching. In California at age twelve, he audited high school classes. Then we moved to Utah, and we found that he was neither fish nor fowl in this new environment. Number one, he didn't know anything about Utah history and, worst of all, he had long hair. In the 1970s, long hair was a dirty word. I'll never forget talking to the school counselor that summer. He said, "When he gets his hair cut, he'll be welcome here, Mrs. Trotter." My son's hair was touching his collar. So he had it cut. On registration day I dropped him off at school, and as I was driving out of the school yard, my son came running after me and jumped into the car. He related that as he entered the school, the school counselor had grabbed him by the neck, pushed him down to the floor in front of the other students, and said, "You've got to get your hair cut, Trotter. The minute it touches your collar you are out of here." We calmed down and left, but that night my son ran away.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): While we're talking about cultural beliefs that can be arbitrary and hurtful, let's look at the beliefs, even about yourselves, that the prodigals in your lives have helped you to give up. Some women, for example, believe "I am right and they are wrong." Emotional violence occurs when we hold an idea to be true and insist that another's idea is wrong and must change. It's the "and must change" part that causes the violence. Can you think of any beliefs about yourself that you had to shift, that you found initially constraining?

ELOUISE: You have hit a nerve with me. My number one problem with my runaway son was that I figured I was right and he was wrong. And I wanted him to be all that he could be. He once sent me a card in which he had written, "I am who I am." That helped me give up trying to reinvent my son. I finally eased back. His overachieving father was also part of the problem. My husband had sold his soul to the company store, as even he now admits. He was known as Mr. Perfect at his company. His hours were unbelievable. I raised the children alone. I remember once when our son was four or five, his father came striding through the door looking like a million bucks, and my little boy said, "Daddy, can I touch you? I washed my hands." Does that give you an idea of what my husband and I were doing wrong at this point? That's probably another reason our son ran away at age thirteen.

WENDY R.: There's a hideous, damaging myth of the perfect parent that some of us invent inside our heads when we are told that we must bring our children back to Heavenly Father. Doing that doesn't mean we bring them back kicking and screaming and saying, "Mommy, I don't want to go." But sometimes we try to do that anyway, only more subtly. We make ourselves incredibly helpful. (You know that old joke, "Behind every Eagle Scout there's a pushy mother.") We've probably all been there. We "suggest" to our child. We wake him up every morning; we go back and wake him up again. In fact, it's a pattern. He doesn't get up the first time because he knows we'll come back a second time. Getting him up becomes our responsibility. When we suggest, when we schedule for them, when we help them with everything under the sun, when we're there, there, there—what's the message? At a family counseling session in my office a son looked at his mother and said, "Mom, when you do so much for me, that makes me believe that I'm incompetent and can't do things for myself." Latter-day Saint women may easily fall into this trap. We may convince our children they are incompetent by being too helpful and full of suggestions.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): That's similar to what one woman told me: "Things started to change when I realized that my husband still believed in the gospel; he just didn't believe in himself."

WENDY R.: For years Mother's Days were particularly painful for me. They were a reminder of all that hadn't gone right with my children. One Mother's Day I stayed home from church meetings because I was in so much pain. When I was thirty, I went through a windshield, had 250 stitches in my face, broke my ribs, my shoulders, and burned my hair off. It was a painful, horrendous two years, but I would go back and do that again before I would live through the kind of pain I went through as I watched my children, by their own choices, leave. I felt they were abandoning me and my value system. That particular Sunday I cried so hard that if my neighbors hadn't all been in church, I'm sure they would have called the paramedics. I cried and cried and cried. As I walked around the corner in my bedroom, I caught a glimpse of a small statue of the Savior in the Garden of Gethsemane that had been a gift to me. Reflected in several mirrors, it was like a vision repeated over and over again of the Savior at Gethsemane.

A message, a feeling, a knowledge came into my head: this is what the Garden of Gethsemane was about. The Savior bled at every pore because of his sorrows and sadnesses for us. I was struggling with only three prodigals, and he struggles with millions. I promised myself and the Savior that day that I would never let my children's choices ruin the quality of my own life. Suddenly I understood more about Christ's crucifixion and atonement than I ever had before.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): What other beliefs helped the two of you through your experiences with prodigals? What beliefs gave you hope? What beliefs provided perspective and facilitated patience?

ELOUISE: Foremost in my life is knowing that I'm not on an island, white-knuckling through my children's problems alone. I've always felt that Heavenly Father was there, that he knows what's going on. We've been a family of miracles, and I've had my share. Often when we were having problems, we would talk about the nice things that had happened to us as a family. I kept my son in touch with his sisters, even when he was into drugs and living a life I did not approve of. He called and asked one summer, "Can the girls come over and spend some time?" It was hard, but I let them go. Being with his sisters, I think, kept him in touch. (Today he is very close to them.) I felt my Heavenly Father guided me to do that. How do you get that guidance? By living the gospel and doing the best you can, keeping their names on the temple prayer roll, having daily prayer, reading scriptures, doing all that you can, supporting everyone in what they're doing, and trying to love their father unconditionally.

That last part was the hardest for me, because my husband was excommunicated in the midst of all this. Somehow I kept my marriage together. I had a great bishop and a great stake president who helped me through. I used to say that I was holding on by my toenails and looking for the toenail clipper. Once I went to my stake president and said, "I can't do this any more. I've got too much on my plate." He told me to stay with it. For years, my mother had been telling me, "Get out, get out, get out!" I called her up and said, "Mother, I'm getting out." And my mother said, "What's the matter with you? You get hold of your bishop right this minute and get a blessing." So I called my bishop, and he said, "I'll be right up." He gave me a blessing and told me that this wasn't a trial of my husband and of my son—this was a test for me.

WENDY R.: The teacher of an Old Testament class I once took told the story of a very dear friend of his who was faithful and true. The friend had a son who had taken his parents down the road and back, and they were weary. Finally the son had killed someone and was at the state prison. His parents were distraught. The father prayed and fasted, read the scriptures and studied and pondered, trying to understand what he had done wrong and what he could do now to rectify the situation.

As he sat in the temple one day, he had a strong impression that his home had been picked specifically for this soul, a young man who had been present in the premortal existence, to be taught the principles of the gospel, to understand right from wrong. When the time came that he chose to commit murder, he needed to be fully accountable for his choice. Now, if anything doesn't seem fair, that doesn't. Look what these parents went through.

But if we aspire for eternal increase, we can't make a choice on either side of the veil to refuse assignments and avoid hard experiences. Our Father's plan was not the plan whereby none of his spirit children would be lost, and he weeps for his children when they suffer and make poor choices. When Abraham was asked to sacrifice his son, he must have had a glimpse of how difficult it may be to have eternal increase. We cannot choose eternal life unless we've had the painful as well as joyful experiences upon which to base our choices.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): When a friend loses a family member to death, it seems natural to join her in grieving and offer support in a variety of ways. But when a friend's daughter is immoral or a husband turns to drugs, support seems more difficult. We are often tempted in such situations to offer advice. What is the best and the worst advice you received during your experiences?

ELOUISE: The worst advice I ever received was from a well-meaning soul who said, "This is just a phase. He will grow out of it." You do wait for the prodigal to grow out of it, and, therefore, you miss opportunities. My son came to me once, trying to tell me about his father. He was the first one to pick up on the trouble brewing in our marriage. I said, "You're all wrong. That's not right. I don't know where you got that. I've observed and that's not happening." I refused to communicate. Families with problems need to take time to talk and communicate, not wait for one another to "grow out of it." I try to avoid judging children on little things, like hair or clothes or food choices, so I can be open to every possibility within them, to talk about beliefs.

My best advice is to refuse to get hung up on things that aren't important. My children grew up in California, and I saw long hair. Once I walked into my family room to find asleep on the floor eight long-haired people I had never before seen in my life. When they started to leave, I discovered that one of them was my son.

WENDY R.: The worst advice I ever heard was from someone who said, "Parents cannot be happier than their saddest child." That is simply untrue. The Savior does not stop his eternal progression when things aren't going well for us. He continues in his work. He may cry for us, but he doesn't discontinue his work.

The best advice I ever had came from a definition related to my specialty, which is drug- and alcohol-abuse counseling. A colleague of mine said an addict is a person who answers a spiritual call by going to the wrong address. That didn't make sense at first, but then I thought about it. All of us, when we're not doing well, have an empty place inside us that we want to fill. Some of us go shopping; some of us eat; some of us get See's chocolates; some of us go to Vegas to gamble; some get involved sexually. Whatever our addiction is, what we really want deep down is to be happy and feel close to our Heavenly Father again. That longing is okay. But we go to the wrong place and try the wrong remedy, and it doesn't work. That's what makes addicts. The only way we can fill that empty hole inside is by having faith in Heavenly Father. That is the only thing that works.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): When we're in the midst of problems, we often ask ourselves agonizing questions—questions that may have no answer and that may actually increase our suffering. For example, when Alma the Younger did his prodigal wondering and wandering, Alma the Elder, if he was a typical parent, probably asked himself, "How can I remain president of the Church when I have family problems? How can I, who am so ineffective with my own son, counsel others?" So, Wendy and Elouise, what questions have you agonized over?

ELOUISE: Number one was, Did I really agree to this? And number two, when I looked in the mirror and saw my mother, I asked myself, "Why are you repeating her mistakes?" Do you find your mother showing up in your life in the way you deal with your own children? Do you remember having said, "I'm never going to do that to my children." I used to say I'm never going to have kids with runny noses. I had six of them.

I came really late to the gospel party. I didn't show up until I was in my twenties. And when I did, I was so excited. Since then, the gospel has been my life, my sailing ship in the stormy sea. I turn to the gospel for everything. In fact, when they were growing, my kids tired of hearing their mother quote the scriptures. But I have a scripture that's my own. I made it up, with the help of the scriptures. It goes, "Be still my mouth. Trust God and lean not to your own understanding."

WENDY R.: Perhaps the biggest question when you're in agony is just Why? The answer is different for every occasion. I take comfort from what Elder Orson F. Whitney, interpreting a statement of Joseph Smith, taught in a 1929 general conference: "The Prophet Joseph Smith declared—and he never taught more comforting doctrine—that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or in the life to come, they will return." I waited all my life—all my life—to hear that. So what can we do now? Elder Whitney says simply, "Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold onto them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God." [^1]

Unusual trials are upon us in the latter days. In my profession, the comment I hear most often on what is happening is, "We must be reaching the bottom of the gene pool." But it's more than just biology. It's spiritual. Every day the battle becomes more severe and more serious, and a lot of our "why" questions don't have answers that we can understand in this life. So for me it's a matter of faith, of truly knowing the Savior well enough to know that there is a reason and that there is justice in all things. More important, there is mercy in all things. Sometimes all I can have faith in is that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ know what they're doing. In the end it will all turn out.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): The moral agency of the prodigal family member influences much of what tran- spires; however, some women find that their responses to the choices of a prodigal often only make the situation worse. For example, some women find that in their effort to set a good example and to get their loved one back on the road again, they're really sending the message, "Do you see how far you are from my standard?" So, although we may have very little to do with the initial wandering of loved ones, our best-intended efforts may actually exacerbate the prodigalness in those we love. As we prod our prodigals with our version of the iron rod, we may actually add to their suffering and to ours. Can you share an example of well-intended efforts that only drove your prodigal even further away from where you hoped he or she would be?

ELOUISE: Several of our children were teenagers when we moved here from California. Doctors thought the drier air here would be better for my lungs, which had been damaged by polio. My children did not like Utah. Our backyard in California had been thirty thousand acres of virgin redwood. My kids had lots of room, lots of animals. We came up here with cats, dogs, and horses. We found a cement pond to live by and a yard the size of a postage stamp, comparatively speaking. We didn't include the children in our decision to move—we just said that the doctors had given me only four or five years to live if we didn't move to a drier climate.

That mistake hit Mark the hardest. What happened at school with the counselor was a repeat of what had already happened the first Sunday we attended our new ward. The bishop walked over and put his arm around my boy and said, "Son, when you get your hair cut, you'll be welcome here." I'm not saying that the bishop was wrong. I am saying that my son was ready for that. He wanted to hear it. It justified his being who he was and how he was. I tried to talk him out of his feelings instead of letting him have them. I think that was my biggest mistake, not letting my children have their feelings and express them freely in front of me.

WENDY R.: Imagine this scenario: Your daughter has fallen down a mine shaft and you stand at the top and holler down to her, "You get up here right now." It's probably an impossibility for that child to climb out by herself. But if we climb down, put our arms around her, and climb out of the mine shaft together, things work a lot better.

When we take our perfection yardstick and measure our children every day, they notice that they keep coming up short. Our constant reminders drive them away. Parenthood is about going through life with our children; it's not about criticizing them or constantly reminding them of their inadequacies. Share your own inadequacies with them; they've probably already noticed. Take a few minutes and share with your children how hard it is: "I know this is hard for you. It is for me, too. What can I do to help?" You'll work together a lot better.

ELOUISE: Don't be afraid to fall off your pedestal. It really doesn't hurt.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): Robert Millet, dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University, said: "It is a sin against charity and a crime against human decency to ignore or belittle or speak unkindly—to judge—those whose children [or other loved ones] stray. I believe God will hold us accountable if we do so." [^2] Elouise and Wendy, how did the bond of charity affect you in your relationship with yourself, with the prodigal, and other family members?

ELOUISE: A stream of unkempt young people flowed through our house for several years. My son said he sent them to test my Christianity. They came from all walks of life, from beggars to sons of college professors. Those young people taught me to listen, something I didn't do before. I learned to cut hair. I learned to clean out fingernails—ones that hadn't been cleaned forever—of kids who couldn't believe that anybody cared that much about them.

We found a counselor through LDS Social Services who saw us those first few years of working with Mark. Mark liked him and confided in him. He was from Chicago and had been one of these kids—he'd been where they had been—before he joined the Church and eventually became a bishop. One day, after we had had an especially rousing session with Mark, the counselor said, "Let him go. Let him go. He will be okay. He can take care of himself. If you keep holding him like you're doing, you're going to destroy your family." And he also said, "It's better that one should perish than that a whole family go down." That's why we let him go.

As I said, out of all of this, I became humbled. I prayed to my Heavenly Father. I had moments when I knew the Holy Ghost was guiding and directing me, not only for my son but for other people. I remember when we took in our Korean son, Yong-in Shin. There was a marvelous moment when I knew that was what my Heavenly Father wanted me to do. I couldn't handle my own son, but I could handle other people's. Yong-in Shin went on to receive his doctorate. Another boy we worked with called us from a prison in California, and I said to him, "Read your scriptures and get your head together." He came back to Utah, and we baptized him a member of the Church. I couldn't do it with my own son, but I could do it with a stranger's. Isn't that something? But the Holy Ghost was a constant, wonderful presence during those times. I knew wisdom was being distilled from heaven into my mind, telling me how to deal with those boys whose mothers were worrying and weeping as I had.

WENDY R.: I think Elouise's advice about letting go is absolutely perfect when you've done everything you should do—not everything you could do but everything you should do. Then you need to let go and turn the whole situation over to God, because he knows better than we.

God knew there would be only one perfect person on this earth, and it wasn't you or me.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): What words do you have for a woman who fears she is losing a loved one to the influences of the world?

ELOUISE: First of all, recognize that in all of us the gospel operates at different levels of obedience, belief, comprehension, and testimony. Stick with the truth, whether it makes you look good or bad. Don't lie to your children. If you have made a mistake, say so. Ask for forgiveness. Lies are wandering ghosts—they show up when you least expect them, and they can make more trouble in your life. You may think, "Oh, this is something the children shouldn't know. This is something we shouldn't tell them." But don't lie to them, and don't play with their minds. They sense what is going on, and they need you to clarify things for them.

Help your children remember that God is in their lives. Talk about him daily. Thank God for what he has done for you and for your children. Start early to help your children see God in their lives. You never know what will influence them. For instance, my son legally changed his name from Mark to Nick. When I asked why, he explained, "Mom, there were many times when I thought I was dead. In fact," he said, "I've had guns this far from my face. And somehow I would find myself out of the situation, so my friends nicknamed me 'Nick,' because I was always out in the nick of time." And he said, "You know what? I told them the reason I'm out is because my mom keeps my name in the temple and my mom prays for me."

Keep their names—and yours—on the temple rolls. Who's to say who needs the most help, you or your child? When you go to the temple, be worthy of the blessings you seek. Don't go seeking something you can't handle. You've got to be able to handle the blessings God gives you. You've got to live so they're viable in your life.

That marvelous Social Services counselor told us to speak love every day of our lives. When my children were little, we put a small message box by each of their beds. No matter how much trouble we'd had during the day or how much had gone wrong, I would go into my room, write out little messages, and put one in each of the boxes each night. They read them before they went to bed. It made a difference for them. My son said to me of his years away, "I had some nights when I would look for the little box."

Remember that no matter what you're going through, it will not last. The Book of Mormon has a phrase that you read over and over again: "And it came to pass." Remember that whatever comes into your life, it came to pass—it didn't come to stay. Heavenly Father wants what we want—an eternal family. His goals are constant. He is committed. We must be also. Center our lives in Christ. I don't care what else goes on around us. We will never fail if we center our lives in Christ.

WENDY R.: One of my prodigals came back home for a short spell. We did not want to scare him off with three thousand rules about behavior and deportment, so we established four or five most-important, bottom-line rules of our home. Because I have sons who are addicted to drugs and alcohol, I know that one of the rules is that you can't drink alcohol or use drugs anywhere on the planet and live in this house. That may sound a little heavy, but that's the way it is. When your child is an addict in the process of using, he or she can take your home right down the drain and all the younger siblings with it. It's a very difficult thing. So, you have to set up that rule: You drink or use anywhere, you can't live at home.

Other rules are, Don't smoke anywhere around here—if you want to smoke, do it someplace else; You need to go to sacrament meeting with us; On occasion, participate in some family events. Only a few rules, but you need to set a bottom line about the things you absolutely cannot tolerate. It's your home; you have a right to refuse to allow a behavior to be there.

Heavenly Father never ever takes away our agency. We always have choices in our lives, and our children do, too. We do not have to compromise our family value system to have our children be at home, but we also need to resist constantly measuring them by our own yardstick. We need to listen to them. We need to realize that life is not a destination but a journey; it's our job to go through the journey side by side with them. We need to refrain from being judgmental. Those of you who've been there know the pain of going to your son's friends' farewells and the pain as you sit in your bench and say to yourself, "Well, at least my son's alive." Sometimes that's all you get.

Don't be judgmental. Don't set your expectations too high. Be accepting. Love them. Always follow the example of the Savior.

WENDY W. (MODERATOR): I'd like to offer some final thoughts about the prodigals in our lives who are listening to a different drum, a drum that's deafening their ears to the sweet sounds of the gospel. As we clothe ourselves with the bond of charity, we can seek gifts of the Spirit. One gift, the gift of discernment, allows us not only to detect evil in one that appears righteous but to detect goodness in those who appear unrighteous.

We commenced this discussion by defining the terms prodigal and prodigal son. Synonyms for prodigal as an adjective include "profuse, lavish, extravagant, excessive, abundant." How differently would we approach the prodigals in our life if we remember the synonym abundant when we think of them? Do the prodigals in our lives show us the abundant love of the Savior for ourselves and for our wandering loved ones?

I'm also interested in words related to prodigal—words such as prodigious, which means "marvelous, amazing," and prodigy, meaning "marvelous thing, or person endowed with surprising qualities or abilities." A colleague of mine says that problem children in LDS families are her most interesting cases. So my question is, How is the prodigal in your life a wonderful example of some quality? When we prod our prodigals and try to turn out a product, we miss the prodigious aspects, the marvelous, amazing aspects of our currently wandering loved ones. So another question is, What amazing aspect of your prodigal have you been overlooking?

The causes of prodigalness are many and varied. Some women may find it helpful to ask themselves, How differently would we approach our wandering loved ones if we saw the defiant behavior as something arising from their moral agency, not as arising from a deficiency in us or in our relationship with them? Robert Millet wrote: "As a parent I can bear testimony, live my religion, encourage my children to search and ponder and pray, but in the end the depth of their testimony and the level of their commitment will be largely a product of their own choosing. The exercise of agency can be painful." [^3]

Women often seem to prefer to feel guilty rather than out of control. When we feel guilty, it means we did something or failed to do something. So although we feel guilt, we also feel we can do something differently next time. We might ask ourselves, How differently would I approach my loved one if I didn't feel responsible for everything he is or is not doing? Other women find it useful to consider, How might my responses be exacerbating the situation? When those we love choose to turn away from gospel truths, do we turn away from them? As long as we keep distance between us and the wanderer (or as long as the wanderer experiences distance, despite what we believe we are doing to express acceptance), things do not get better. So we might ask, How might the distance that my loved ones are feeling from me increase how distant they feel from the Lord?

Another set of questions: Do we allow the prodigal to come home or do we show through our relentless questions on the same theme that we really don't believe that they will ever change or that change is even possible? If you were to believe that the prodigal in your life is closer to home than you think, perhaps even just around the corner, what would you give up thinking, asking, and doing? Do we show that we believe Christ when he says, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow"? (Isa. 1:18). Are we seeking to understand and access the power of the Atonement in our own lives?

In our efforts to fix the situation, we may unwittingly find ourselves in the arena of unrighteous dominion. In the July 1989 Ensign, Elder H. Burke Peterson points out that all of us can drift into unrighteous dominion. [^4] A colleague, Jim Harper, and I adapted Elder Peterson's marvelous questions to family situations:

Â As a Church member, believing in the doctrine of agency, how do I guard and protect the agency of others in relationships?

Â Do I insist that others obey me and do most things my way?

Â Do family members seem reluctant to talk to me about particular feelings and concerns?

Â Do I dislike sharing the power and responsibility for decision making in family matters?

Â Do I feel I will lose respect and authority if I admit to being in the wrong?

Â Do I ask for and appreciate feedback?

Â Do I expect to be the main source of inspiration for my family rather than expecting others to listen to the Spirit?

Â Do I criticize family members more often than I compliment them?

Â Are my best intentions to live the gospel as fully as I can felt by others as oppressive or loving, as constraining or freeing?

Â What would I look for in others that would tell me that, despite the sincere intentions of my heart, others feel that I exercise unrighteous dominion?

Let's get on with the business of building our relationships with our prodigals and loving them as the Savior loves. And how does the Savior love? According to President Howard W. Hunter: "God's chief way of acting is by persuasion and patience and long-suffering, not by coercion and stark confrontation. He acts by gentle solicitation and by sweet enticement. He always acts with unfailing respect for the freedom and independence that we possess. He wants to help us and pleads for the chance to assist us, but he will not do so in violation of our agency. He loves us too much to do that, and doing so would run counter to his divine character." [^5]

May we clothe ourselves with the bond of charity and love our prodigals and ourselves as the Savior loves.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, 110. Elder Whitney also notes: "They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain."
[^2] Robert L. Millet, When A Child Wanders (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1996), 46.
[^3] Ibid., 39.
[^4] H. Burke Peterson, "Unrighteous Dominion," Ensign, July 1989, 6Â11.
[^5] Howard W. Hunter, "The Golden Thread of Choice," Ensign, November 1989, 18.
