Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

FINDING A FAMILY

Marlene B. Hilleshiem

Marlene B. Hilleshiem managed a local insurance agency in Suisun City, California, after receiving her license in health and property/casualty insurance. Now a homemaker, she and her husband, Foster Brian Hilleshiem, are expecting their second child in March 1997. She serves on the homemaking board in the Orem Cherry Hill Second Ward.

I was born in Manila, the Philippines, in December 1972. Three months after escaping from a physically abusive marriage, my mother, who was in her early twenties, discovered that she was already four months pregnant with me. In that condition, earning barely minimum wages, she did the hard physical labor of a housekeeper. She worked right up to my birth. I was born at home, and my mother almost died from excessive bleeding and malnourishment. Yet as soon as she could, she was up working again so the two of us could have food, clothing, and shelter. She begged for work and took me with her to each house. What she earned was not enough, however. By the time I was seventeen months old, I was very ill. My stomach bulged with severe malnourishment. My skin, rough like a lizard's, draped loosely over my bones. My ribs showed clearly, and I had very little hair. Mother knew she could lose me at any minute.

Word reached her of an American military couple stationed in Angeles City, the Philippines, who could not have children and were trying desperately to adopt. Fearing for my very life, my mother went to this couple and begged them to take me. The American woman was very touched and took me to the military hospital immediately, where I was hospitalized for three months. When I was released, I had creamy olive skin, big, brown eyes, and I was full of life. I even had little rolls of baby fat, and my hair flowed freely past my ears. My birth mother barely recognized me when she held me for the first time in several months. While my adoptive parents were stationed at Clark Air Force Base, my birth mother visited me daily. Six months later my adoptive parents also adopted a newborn baby boy. Soon after, they were reassigned to the United States, to Sacramento, California. I can only imagine the pain my mother must have felt in having to let me go.

I have lived in the United States since that time and have never returned to the Philippines. Unfortunately, my adoptive parents were not what they had appeared to be. Life with them was a nightmare. My earliest memories of sexual and physical abuse are at the age of five. My adoptive mother became a severe alcoholic. My adoptive father was deeply troubled by earlier wartime experiences. The abuse I suffered was ongoing.

At age fifteen, I could not bear my situation anymore. For many years I had kept silent, partly because I did not think anyone would believe me and partly because I did not want to be separated from my adoptive brother. We had been through a lot together. I cared for him as if he were my own child. From the time I was five and he was two-and-a-half, I had changed his diapers, fed him, and cared for him in every way. As we grew older, however, especially after he entered his teenage years, he began to replace me with friends, drugs, and alcohol. My grades in school were dropping, and without my brother's support, I felt my life was falling apart. I could not bear to see him self-destruct anymore, and I could not bear the abuse.

I went to my brother's probation officer and told everything. I was removed from my home and placed in a halfway house with kids who had broken probation or committed misdemeanors. As one who had never even skipped school, let alone ever committed a crime, I felt frightened and out of place. The children I shared the house with were rough, physical, and used foul language. For three months I felt I was in prison. The other children taunted me because they knew that I had never been in trouble, that I wasn't tough.

After a few months, the halfway house sponsored a writing contest. I had often written poems to help ease my pain. My therapist suggested I enter the contest. It took a lot of courage for me to get up in front of those "tough kids" and express my deepest feelings, but I did. I will never forget the silence in the room. The air seemed to echo my pain. As I looked up from my paper, I saw many eyes filled with tears. I then realized these children were not as tough as I thought they were. They were much tougher. They were survivors. Sharing my hidden experiences and feelings somehow helped them accept me. We realized together we had shared similar abuse situations but had responded to them differently. I became a friend, and during my remaining six months there, I helped others express their pain. It was a learning and strengthening experience for me. We gave each other hope, and our spirits were lifted.

In spite of the trauma I suffered at the hands of my adoptive parents, I had always felt Heavenly Father close to me. I felt his protection, his comfort and love. My adoptive parents never taught any religion in their home, but I investigated many churches on my own.

At sixteen I was released from the halfway house on a pilot program. The state of California gave me six hundred dollars a month for six months to help me get started on my own. Before they would release me, I had to prove that I would continue my counseling, attend school, hold a job for at least six months, and attend "On My Own" workshops, which taught budgeting and homemaking skills. I was assigned a mentor, who checked on me weekly. I did very well with the program. I went to school on independent study, worked three part- time jobs, and attended counseling until I was eighteen. One part-time job was working as a telemarketer for a local insurance agency. As soon as I was released from the halfway house, I began working directly for the childless couple who owned the agency. For the next two years, they encouraged me to go with them to their church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Each time I refused. I worked every day, and if I wasn't working, I was studying. They never gave up inviting, however.

Finally one Sunday, I gave in. We attended not a regular Sunday meeting but a stake conference. I heard several people bear their testimonies and heard a talk given by a General Authority. My heart swelled with peace and joy. I cried throughout the rest of the meeting. This felt so right. I knew it was something I had been searching for. My prayers had been answered, and a week and a half later I was baptized.

In May 1990, right before I was to graduate from high school, my LDS employers invited me to move in with them. They could see I was overburdened with school and three jobs. They wanted me to get licensed as a state insurance agent as soon as I graduated from high school. By living with them, I could concentrate more on school and prepare for the licensing exam. I quit my two part-time jobs and worked only at the insurance office. I was very grateful for the compassion and love and genuine concern this couple had for me.

The next six months were the beginning of a new life for me. I graduated from high school and passed the state insurance exam. My employers, Mike and Julie Schoonover, had become like family to me. We had holidays together, celebrated birthdays, and built many cherished memories. Our temporary situation became permanent. They gave me a lot of love, increased my standard of living, and raised my expectations of life. They taught by example and expressed deep feelings for me—the child they never had but had tried so hard for. We found joy and peace with each other.

I met my future husband in February 1993 at a dinner party held by the ward missionary leader in Suisun City, California. My future husband was a full-time missionary, and he took mission rules seriously. I knew the standards of the Church regarding missionaries talking to young women, and I was proud that he did not bend the rules. Though we did not speak then, he flew out to see me after he was released in June 1993, and we were engaged four days later. We were married that September.

A year later in September 1994, I wrote a letter to the First Presidency. I wanted to be sealed to the wonderful couple I had grown so close to since I was sixteen. We had been a family in every sense except through the sealing power of the holy priesthood. My request was granted, and on 24 September 1994, we were sealed as a family in the Oakland Temple. At last my birth mother's hopes that I would find a better home than she could provide me were fulfilled.

Despite its hardships, I am thankful for the long, difficult journey that has brought me an eternal family. I am thankful for the sacrifice and support my sealed parents have given me. They have helped me to understand my adoptive parents' pasts and childhoods. I am able to have compassion for the abuse they suffered. I can forgive them and am thankful that I have not continued the vicious cycle of child abuse. My sealed parents also helped me to understand my adoption and my birth mother's great sacrifice in seeking a better life for me. Both of them have enabled me to enjoy the wonderful blessings of my eternal family. My son, who is nineteen months old, reminds me daily of love and purity and Christ's perfect love for me. I am now filled with love, gratitude, and the desire to share my story that others will see that through Jesus Christ, the love of others, hope, and faith, we can have true happiness.
