Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

CHARITY IN CHILDBIRTH

Wendy C. Tidwell

Wendy C. Tidwell is an attorney who has served on the staff of Utah Congressman Bill Orton and does consulting. She served as a missionary to Spain and is the Mia Maid advisor in her ward. She and her husband, Lyle J. Archibald, are the parents of a daughter.

I spent my first seventeen years on an Idaho dairy farm being conditioned by wonderful role models to be a wife and mother. It never occurred to me that my life would not follow the same familiar pattern: graduate from high school, attend college for a year or two, find Mr. Right, settle down (probably back at home), and rear a family. I don't remember having any strong feelings one way or the other about being a mother—it just seemed the natural thing to do.

I spent the second seventeen years of my life being conditioned away from that pattern. I was the first woman in my family to graduate from college. I lived in Washington, D.C., and worked on Capitol Hill. I served a mission to Spain. While remaining politically active, I worked in the travel business and eventually was the vice president of a tour company, escorting performing groups internationally. Then, in case I didn't have enough variety in my life, I returned to school and got my law degree.

Those first seventeen years were only dim memories by the time, as a recent thirty-five-year-old law school graduate, I met my husband. In the intervening years, I had developed a mortal dread of labor pains and delivery, and I met the prospect of pregnancy with ambivalence. I had faith that I would find mothering rewarding, but I admit a substantial skepticism about the process whereby I would arrive at mothering. From the outset, I dealt with issues of control.

Married at thirty-five, I felt immediate pressure to start a family, even though I would have liked to enjoy the "honeymoon" with my husband a little longer. At my age I felt I could not postpone pregnancy, yet I did not welcome the urgency I felt to change my life irretrievably. Once pregnant, I lost control over seemingly all aspects of my life. My otherwise very healthy body turned on me immediately and didn't stop until weeks after my child's birth. I was sick for five and a half months and dealt with complication after complication throughout the pregnancy, culminating in a forty-hour delivery.

I also lost control of people's perceptions and treatment of me as a professional woman. It was a little hard to maintain a polished demeanor as I waddled into a committee hearing carrying thirty extra pounds of weight and then had to excuse myself to "use the bathroom." I had worked hard to establish myself as a professional Mormon woman, and now people made all sorts of assumptions about who I was. Those assumptions had very little to do with my hard-won identity. All that happened before I even got to labor and delivery!

Unlike many women who view childbirth as a spiritual opportunity, I saw labor and delivery as a compulsory, traumatic, life-threatening episode filled with unspeakable indignities of which I wanted no part and had no right of first refusal. To those who asked if I would have an epidural, I replied, "Are you kidding? There are reasons we don't stab ourselves with knives or walk out in front of moving vehicles. Why would anyone ask to experience pain if it's avoidable? Like pregnancy has been such a pleasant experience?" I reveal all this to give you some insight into the two principal lessons—cultural and spiritual—that I learned from my childbirth experience.

Birth is a universal human experience. Giving birth, however, is an experience unique to each woman, and from this I learned an important cultural lesson. Just because giving birth is a common experience does not mean that we hold in common all the details of that experience. We often set up for each other unrealistic expectations of what pregnancy and childbirth will be like. For example, many women made pronouncements to me about what I would feel, physically and emotionally, at different stages of the pregnancy. They would say, "You will be so excited when you find out you are pregnant . . . start to show . . . hear the heartbeat . . . feel movement." But the ultimate pronouncement for me was, "When they put that baby into your arms, you will forget it all." I could not imagine what kind of brain lapse I would have to experience to forget two skin conditions that caused unbearable itching for the last six weeks of pregnancy, not to mention several other unpleasant and unhealthy complications I was dealing with. But, I thought, if it was possible for those other women to forget, maybe it will be for me, too.

When my daughter was born, they didn't put her "into my arms" for hours. She was not breathing well after such a long and difficult delivery, and they whisked her away to the nursery oxygen tent. When it was all over, I was left with the "clean-up crew" for extensive repair work. When I finally held her for the first time, I had been awake for almost forty-eight grueling hours. I was so medicated and exhausted that I could not possibly appreciate the significance of her being there. I felt cheated and disappointed at the loss of that oft-promised "moment," and I am sorry to say the trauma of childbirth still haunts me almost a year later.

I don't deny many women have the "forget-it-all experience," but some of us don't, and I hope that we will be sensitive to the diversity of each other's experiences and value our sisters' experiences that are different from our own.

Childbirth did, however, give me a glimpse of tremendous compassion and charity, a spiritual lesson of great value to me. In the care I received from the nurses during and after delivery, I saw firsthand what it is to be "willing to bear one another's burdens that they may be light . . . and comfort those that stand in need of comfort" (Mosiah 18:8Â9). I was treated with respect, dignity, and kindness by women who were and still are strangers to me. I never once felt that I was just another pregnant woman on an assembly line. I was not just a job for them to do and collect a paycheck.

Instead, they spoke to me of their own children and experiences in childbirth. The first postpartum nurse to care for me bathed me, and I will never forget how good it felt to be clean, despite my immodesty. As important as the bathing were her touch and kind words of encouragement. She told me of her own six-week-old baby and how worth it that child was. I was hooked up to tubes and IVs, so showering was difficult. Sensitive to my situation, another nurse offered to shave my legs. Under any other circumstances, I would have been mortified, but I appreciated immensely that small act of consideration.

Those women cared for me in a Christlike way that demonstrated they knew my pain but also knew the joy I would ultimately feel. How I pray all women might see each other as the sisters we truly are and show that depth of compassion, care, and understanding in whatever circumstances we find ourselves and others in.

While I still struggle to be reconciled to my difficult childbirth experiences, I am deeply grateful for the blessings of being a wife and a mother. My husband was the consummate partner to me throughout the birth of our child, as he is in whatever other challenges we face together. At eleven months old, MacKenzie daily brings joy and wonder into our home. She is worth every moment of discomfort, pain, and fear I experienced. I am infinitely thankful for the ways motherhood is teaching me more about the perfect love the Savior demonstrated in his holy atonement.

We truly are sisters and uniquely share the childbirth experience as well as many others. As we interact with each other in all aspects of our lives, both in those that we share in common and in those that set us apart, may we "above all things, clothe [our]selves with the bond of charity, as with a mantle, which is the bond of perfectness and peace" (D&C 88:125).
