Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

WITH YOUR ARMS UNFAILING 'ROUND THEM

Sharon Lee Staples

Sharon L. Staples is a professor and chair of the Department of Humanities and Philosophy at Utah Valley State College. She has served on the Young Women General Board and the Adult Correlation Committee of the Church. She teaches the seven- and eight-year-old CTR class in Primary.

A story by Mohammed Diarra is told in Mali, Africa, of a hyena who has treed another wild animal. The hyena is trying to convince the animal to come down from the tree so that he might eat him. He begins:

"You may come down from the tree, for I have eaten your friends and I am not hungry."

"No," says the animal.

"I have eaten your brothers and sisters, and you may come down because I am full."

"No," repeats the animal.

"But I have eaten your mother and father, and I am very full and you can come down."

"No," is the answer once more.

"Well, I have eaten your hope," the hyena finally says.

"If you have eaten my hope," says the animal, "then there is no need for living, and I will come down."

Hope, whether in a child or an adult, is the beginning of faith and trust. To have a sense of community, a sense of neighborhood, one needs to be able to trust and to have faith in others in a variety of situations. I served in our ward nursery for almost two years and loved it. I loved the children and had a delightful time, enjoying many rewarding experiences. One of my favorite memories is of helping the children offer prayers. I would put my arm around them, my mouth next to an ear to whisper words. Think of the many parents who trust that their teachings about prayer will be confirmed and sustained by someone else, such as a nursery leader. Initially, nursery leaders may be strangers to the parents of many of the children with whom they have been entrusted. Yet, trust is extended.

Not long after my nursery experience, I was doing much the same thing for a woman in her late thirties at the Utah State Prison. Attending church services is an earned privilege there. I was assigned from a group of four volunteers to visit the women who had not earned the privilege to attend Sunday School and Relief Society in the main gathering area, usually the cafeteria. I passed through three steel doors on my way into their tier of cells to sit on the cement floor with them and give a Sunday School lesson. The women were bundled up in blankets and in their pajamas. There was no music, and I'm a monotone, so that part was always basically just dreadful.

One morning the lesson was on prayer. At the end I asked a sister, "Would you offer the prayer for us?" When she shook her head no, I said, "Well, can we help?"

"I never prayed in front of people before," she blurted.

"Would you like to try?" I offered.

"Will you help me?"

"Yes, I can help," I replied.

She was on the other side of the room from us, and because of prison rules I could not simply go over to stand with an arm around her as I did the nursery children. But we began, and I taught her the same way that I taught the three-year-olds.

"Dear Heavenly Father," I said.

"Dear Heavenly Father," she repeated.

In nursery, I was putting my "arms unfailing round [them]," as the hymn says, to teach them the basic steps of prayer. [^1] I was doing the same with this incarcerated sister. Such intimacy required a great deal of trust on her part, for this woman at a very young age had probably had two things taken away from her that are essential to human development: hope and trust.

Sissela Bok, a modern philosopher, tells us that "whatever matters to human beings, trust is the atmosphere in which it thrives." [^2] We know from developmental studies that children learn to trust during their first year of life. They have a scant twelve months to learn to trust this new world around them. The second year they learn autonomy; the third year, hope. This sister had to trust that I would not make fun of her and that the other women and sisters in the tier would not make fun of her.

Another modern ethicist, Annette Baier, notes that "to entrust is intentionally and usually formally to hand over the care of something to someone." [^3] We really are vulnerable when we acknowledge our ignorance to a group of peers, as this woman did in acknowledging in front of other inmates that she did not know how to pray publicly. We turn over our self-esteem, hoping and trusting it will be honored and not denigrated. How difficult it must be to trust at this level.

I am not married, and I have no children. But I am part of the citizenry of a community of Saints with many other single, divorced, and widowed brothers and sisters who can and do instill hope, faith, and trust in children, young people, and sometimes adults. We are often influential in a child's formative years. Unfortunately, many of the women I meet at the prison did not have a good first twelve months of life. During this formative period, many of them were alternately neglected and abused. An excerpt from one inmate's letter illustrates for me how not being nourished in a trusting home can cause some young women to isolate themselves from others and suffer throughout their lives: "Dear Sharon, . . . I lied to you. . . . I told that [lie] to push you away from me. . . . When I had realized how close I had allowed you and others to get, I got scared and was determined to push you all away before I got hurt. In the past, I would either deliberately hurt people or just leave before I was hurt. My trust level is still nil when it comes to anyone who shows care and concern toward me." More caring individuals in this young woman's life will help to give her hope and trust. Already with this letter she is opening the door a crack.

I am fortunate to be a homeowner with a dear friend who holds a similar philosophy of the importance of community. In attempting to contribute to those around us, she and I hold an annual Easter egg hunt for all the neighbor children. We color Easter eggs and buy balloons, bubble blowers, jacks and other little toys, and plenty of candy. We hide them all over our end of the block. It is such a treat for us to watch the fascination of these little ones (and one chocolate-freak father) as they delight in discovering each little treasure. These parents trust us with their children, knowing that our intent is to help their children have a concept of neighborhood—their neighborhood.

Last year another effort was to allow one eager four-year-old neighbor to help us plant our garden. Our plants came up already sorted into a mixed green salad! We also keep Disney movies on hand to entice the children to visit us. For us it's a delight to have two six-year-olds knock on the door. "Hi. Can we borrow a video?"

"Sure." They come in, go upstairs, look through all of the videos, and choose one to borrow. The next day they bring it back.

"Hi. Can we borrow another video?"

"Sure." Seeing their precious little faces at our doorstep often makes my day better. We are their neighbors, not just their parents' neighbors. They can have a relationship with us apart from mom and dad, in addition to with mom and dad. We are a part of their community—one in which they can experience hope and acceptance.

My encouragement to parents is to get to know their neighbors, especially single sisters. Let us help instill hope and trust in your children. My favorite Shel Silverstein poem from Where the Sidewalk Ends describes from a child's perspective what hope feels like. He marches out all the MUSTN'TS, SHOULDN'TS, and DON'TS—words that a child hears daily—but ends with this whispered secret:

Anything can happen, child,

ANYTHING can be. [^4]

A sense of hope and possibilities is essential for adults as well. I taught an ethics course to several women at the prison. One of their assignments was to write their philosophy of life at the conclusion of the course. The following excerpt from one of those philosophies gives me hope that "anything can be."

"My philosophy on life has changed so much over the past seven months. It used to be 'live and let live' and do what you can get away with. I don't think like that anymore. My philosophy on life is to be with the people that I love the most—my husband and my children, to enjoy life by being happy with them, enjoying their company, watching my children grow; have a happy house. . . . I believe that there is good in all people. . . . I believe in myself as a mother, wife, and human being."

To me, putting our arms around Heavenly Father's children means encouraging them to believe in themselves, to trust and hope. And as we are able to help create trust and instill hope in children or adults, we advance their ability to contribute to others. They may perceive that they are part of a community of Saints in their own right—that they are capable of giving trust, faith, and hope to us.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Anne Morrow Lindbergh, quoted in Bruce C. Hafen and Marie K. Hafen, The Belonging Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 178.
[^2] Chieko N. Okazaki, Lighten Up! (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1993), 5Â6.
[^3] Boyd. K. Packer, "The Moving of the Water," Ensign, May 1991, 7Â8.
[^4] Mother Teresa, quoted in Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ: The Parable of the Bicycle and Other Good News (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 99.
