Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

"THAT'S HOW THE LIGHT GETS IN"

Nancy Baird

Nancy Hanks Baird was named Utah Poet of the Year in 1996. She received her bachelor's degree in English from Brigham Young University and has worked as a freelance writer and editor. She and her husband, John K. Baird, are the parents of five children. She is the Gospel Doctrine teacher in her ward Sunday School in Salt Lake City.

It is snowing. Late February, the idea of spring so real you can smell the steaming dirt, feel the south wind curving around your throat. But it is snowing, a blizzard really, the heavens emptying themselves of months of winter. And so we wait for the sky to finish, for the earth to dry and break open again. We wait for the crack.

There is a line from Leonard Cohen that I love. It reads: "There is a crack, a crack in everything, that's how the light gets in." [^1] If I have found any peace in this life, it is from understanding two truths: that in the adventure of life, the journey itself—the "finding"—is everything; that there are reasons for the trouble that follows us, for the "cracks" that occur in our lives to let in God's light. I find great comfort and hope in the apostle Paul's belief that "my strength is made perfect in weakness" (2 Cor. 12:9).

Anyone who has, as I have, spent a lifetime stuttering, would flinch to read these words of Malcolm Muggeridge: "Everything I have learned in my seventy-five years in this world, everything that has truly enhanced and enlightened my existence, has been through affliction and not through happiness." [^2] Must that be so?

To stutter is to experience a series of feelings every time you open your mouth: amazement, confusion, embarrassment, betrayal, grief, disillusionment, rage. Why the amazement after forty-four years? Because stuttering is not an integral part of who I am. It is a foreign beast that lives within, a thief sleeping on my tongue, and I am always, always, amazed, if not surprised, when it flaps into view.

[The word] is caught in her mouth

like a frantic bird in a cage.

Her tongue beats the word,

Her mouth fills with feathers. . . .

She feels the words rising;

music in her throat,

quicksilver between her teeth.

The devil in her wounded tongue

licks them in. [^3]

Where—I stamp my foot, as do all human beings who have had pieces of their life stolen—where is there comfort and peace for me? Has not my heart been broken enough?

I believe the balm of Gilead, that resin of regeneration, must come from within, from achieving a perfect inner harmony with oneself and the Spirit of God. I have found this place a few precious times, and so I know what it feels like, to be so grounded in God's Spirit that nothing, no pain in this world, can shake you. It is a place where "your whole bodies shall be filled with light," where "that body . . . comprehended all things" (D&C 88:67). Oh, to be there always!

There are paths to that place.

God says that every human soul is precious to him, and I believe him. "One [sparrow] shall not fall on the ground without your Father [knowing]" (Matt. 10:29). Someone must have loved Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, very much to have stopped the narrative of the prophets in Genesis to include the four lines of her death and burial: "But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Beth-el under an oak" (Gen. 35:8). Deborah, an unknown, beloved woman, remembered forever.

I believe that every life has purpose, and that every soul can make a difference.

One summer years ago, while living in Honolulu, I went on a morning run, ending at the Diamond Head lookout, an outcrop of road high above the ocean by a lighthouse, a favorite stopping spot for residents and tourists. I rested on a stone wall and watched the sun lift, lucent as a pearl, over the Pacific, while my feet dangled above piles of garbage—the detritus of many human visitors. And I watched, stunned, as a local man finished his morning coffee and then spent five minutes picking up other people's garbage and putting it in the trash before getting into his car and driving away.

My son's Eagle Scout project was to gather used books for a school in our city where there are many underprivileged and transient children, most of whom have never owned a book. He gratefully received piles of donated used books—some in good shape, some not—and one small stack of brand-new books from our neighbor, a single mother, who wanted a few children to have their very own, new books. Joseph Smith said, "A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world anxious to bless the whole human race." [^4]

In our "finding" we cannot be detached from others' pain. "For the hurt of . . . my people am I hurt," cried Jeremiah (Jeremiah 8:21). Jesus was not detached. How could he be with what he saw—hypocrisy, pride, rapacity, materialism, treachery, debauchery? But he taught us to love extravagantly.

To love extravagantly. What beautiful words. Think of the Samaritan, reviled by all nations, yet stopping to help one of the very people who rejected him. And think of Christ himself. With whom did he spend his time? Adulterers and thieves, the ill and the lost. Where would we find him eating today? No doubt with drug addicts, homosexuals, gang members, the homeless, and the excommunicated. He never held back his love. He spent everything.

Indeed, one of his disappointments was that he was not sought for what he came to give. People were eager for physical cures and material benefits—"Ye seek me . . . because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled," he said (John 6:26)—but often had no interest in the spiritual gifts he wanted to give them. Yet some did. As recorded in John 4, the Savior offered the Samaritan woman at the well "living water" (v. 10), that water which Ezekiel described as["issu[ing] out from under the threshold" of the temple and healing every living thing "whither the river cometh" (Ezek. 47:1, 9). The woman went into the city and bore testimony of the Redeemer: "Is not this the Christ?" What an amazing offer Christ makes—to permanently satisfy and heal a soul.

This is the path of comfort, the balm of Gilead—to truly live by his word. The hard part, of course, is accepting his love and "casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you" (1 Pet. 5:7). It is hard to take that step into the unknown void of faith and believe what he says.

Moses couldn't do it at first. "I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue," he said when God called him to lead Israel. And God answered patiently, "Who hath made man's mouth? . . . I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say." But Moses could not fly into the chasm, and the window that God opened for turning his weakness to strength was closed. He asked for Aaron to be his mouthpiece, and "the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses" (Ex. 4:10Â14).

Compare his experience to Enoch's, that fiery soul. Enoch, too, was "slow of speech." "All the people hate me," he said. He, too, was told to "open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance." Enoch, though, "went forth." So simple! And they said of him: "There is a strange thing in the land; a wild man hath come among us" (Moses 6:31Â32, 37, 38).

We all have wounds, cracks in the perfect surfaces of our lives. That is how our hearts are broken and through which may be filled with light. That is how we know our strength. Indeed, the Greek word for trial means "the tried or proven part," or, in other words, the part of us that is genuine. The web of cracks and fissures in every life is the grid through which, every day, we are poured, and the blueprint by which we learn, as did the apostle Paul, to "be content" (Philip. 4:11).

And of course, God, who loves us so completely he has "graven [us] upon the palms of [his] hands" (Isa. 49:16), expects us, having received comfort, to comfort others: "Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God" (2 Cor. 1:4). Surely we are expected to leave in our wake the fragrance, the footprints of grace.

I seek the finding. I want to leap under the thundering sky, be struck by lightning, be splintered and cracked open and so filled with light that Jeremiah's "burning fire" transforms the dark places of my spirit (Jer. 20:9). Only then will I become a "wild man" in the land (Moses 6:31) and find the peace that "passeth all understanding" (Philip. 4:7).

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 19.
[^2] Malcolm Muggeridge, A Twentieth Century Testimony (Nashville, Tenn.: Thomas Nelson, 1978), 17.
[^3] Nancy Baird, "Saying Scissors," The Shell in Silk (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1996), 53.
[^4] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century One, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 4:227.
