Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

RIGHT PERSON, RIGHT place, RIGHT time

Marti Holloman and Marcie Holloman

Marti Shaffer Holloman has lived in Asia for ten years and worked at the United States Embassy in Beijing, China. She received her bachelor's degree from Brigham Young University and is a cross-cultural trainer for business and government agencies. She and her husband, Richard C. Holloman Jr., are the parents of four children. She serves as compassionate service leader in her ward's Relief Society.

Martha Ann (Marcie) Holloman, a daughter of Marti and Richard Holloman, attended high school in Beijing and Hong Kong. She has worked as an intern at the Library of Congress and at the American Institute of Taiwan while studying at Taiwan Normal University. She has served as Gospel Doctrine teacher in her BYU ward Sunday School.

In our home we have a very old and beautiful Chinese porcelain jar purchased when my husband and I served in the United States Embassy in Beijing, China. Adorned with two happiness characters, this "double happiness" jar, once a fixture in every Chinese home, is a symbol of happiness and blessings overflowing.

If this old jar could talk, it could tell quite a story. It has lived through several dynasties and through wars and revolutions. It has seen the rhythm of generations in a Chinese family, and witnessed births, deaths, celebrations, and New Year's festivals. Then it was packed in a box for a dark and bumpy ride across the ocean. Now it knows the rhythm of my family. I'm sure that after the initial culture shock wore off, this old jar probably realized, "Why, they're a lot like the family in my home village. They've got challenges and hopes. The same sun rises on their land, and they too light firecrackers for their festivals and sing lullabies to their babies—in a different tongue, but all under the same moon." I hope that this old jar has truly found a double measure of happiness: one in China and one here.

To be the right person, in the right place, at the right time—surely that must bring us a triple measure of happiness and a true sense of personal peace. Have you had a time of closeness to the Spirit—feeling the pure love of Christ in your relationships, the peace of knowing that you're right where you're supposed to be, just at the right time? Times like that last for a glorious season, and then the clouds roll in, and a crisis hits with a fury. Strong winds of change disturb once-peaceful and well-ordered lives, shaking us loose from our moorings and shattering our jar of happiness and some of our hopes. On both diplomatic and military assignments, our family has been moved from place to place at unpredictable intervals; our sense of self, timing, and place has often been challenged.

"But everything was going so beautifully!" we would chorus in protest. "Why now, Lord?" And each of us had our own individual concerns: "How can I be the right person for this calling, Lord—I feel so inadequate. There are others so much more capable!" "But I love this place! Do we have to move in my senior year? Can't we stay in Beijing just one more year?" "It's not time yet! I've just had a baby, and I'm not ready for another international move with four kids! Just tell those people to wait!"

The scriptures abound with examples of Heavenly Father's children struggling with these same basic issues. Enoch questioned, "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?" (Moses 6:31). Can you feel his discouragement? His message was loud and clear: "Lord, I'm not the right person! You've got the wrong guy!" But Enoch went forth and did as the Lord commanded and established Zion, the ultimate Right Place, where everyone was of one heart and mind.

Esther was the right person and the only person who could orchestrate a very complicated and dangerous mission to save her people. Only by being at the right place with her impeccable sense of timing and great courage could she accomplish her crucial task "for such a time as this" (Esth. 4:14).

We all seek to be that right person in the right place at the right time—the perfectly whole, unbroken jar—but it is unrealistic to expect to maintain the equilibrium. To have our yin and yang completely balanced is rare—we should enjoy it while it lasts. Most of the time we struggle, perhaps feeling less than whole, questioning who we are, why we find ourselves in a certain place, or why certain experiences come so unexpectedly and with such force. These normal challenges, however, are one of the main purposes of our earthly existence. Struggle can mean growth.

Right Person

Sometimes we can be the one crucial link for someone, the right person at a time of need, or another individual can be that for us. Eleven years ago we lived in a town in southern China on the dusty corner of Liberation Street and Patriotism Road. On average we had power and water only half the week and shared our house with a parade of local fauna—rats, bats, snakes, poisonous spiders, and lizards—even in our computer files. Just down the road were beautiful pastoral scenes unchanged for centuries—terraced rice paddies, water buffalo, and walled villages.

We were the anachronism here—a Western family with three very exotic red-headed children. Marcie was the first foreign student to attend the nearby school. She marched to martial music and recited her characters in unison with the class under the tutelage of her teacher, Miss Plum Blossom. Whenever Miss Plum Blossom left the room, Marcie was surrounded by her very curious classmates. Our children opened many doors for us and dissolved international barriers. Border guards would break into smiles and speed our crossing at the sight of the children; female uniformed police in pigtails would run from their posts to hold and kiss the baby. Once when we were stranded far from home in a crowded train station, railway officials announced there were no tickets available to return home. A man seeing our plight took our baby boy in his arms and held him high above the crowd, which then parted like the Red Sea. Tickets suddenly materialized for us.

A-ngaan, a bright young woman from the countryside who lived with us, had never met foreigners before she came to help us. She became a treasured part of our family—Marcie called her JieJie (older sister). She loved our baby as if he were her own. She would sing Chinese opera every night while embroidering with silk on a handmade loom. Marcie and her sister April would sit under that loom, listen to the operas, and watch the silken threads become brilliant peonies and cranes. Together A-gnaan and I killed chickens, bailed flood waters, washed laundry with our feet by her "stomp" method, and talked in Cantonese about life.

A-ngaan's only problem was that she didn't like our Laap Saap (garbage) lady. That was very unfortunate, because Mrs. Yip, the Laap Saap lady, had become a self-appointed permanent fixture around our house and made the whole neighborhood's affairs her business. Both women were rather territorial when it came to the baby. At dawn Mrs. Yip would come with her wheelbarrow and shout through the gate; the baby would go running in his pajamas to her open arms. At lunch she would come and carry him on her back to go "eat rice," and again in the evenings she would sweep the street with her bundle of branches and visit once more. She had gold teeth, leathery hands, a high-pitched accent, and a very big heart. She was from an ethnic minority group called Haaka, literally "guest people," who are generally looked down upon and assigned menial jobs. The Haaka women were known for their distinctive, black-fringed hats, although, curiously, I had never seen her wear one.

She good-naturedly fended off a daily barrage of very unkind remarks from neighbors and schoolchildren about her heritage, her accent, and her appearance. She would just smile patiently and go about her business, but I suspected that at some level, the unkindness must have hurt her.

I couldn't convince A-ngaan of her prejudice against Mrs. Yip. "Haaka people are not beautiful, not good people," she said matter-of-factly. She thought Mrs. Yip was superstitious and was particularly critical of her medical skills. Mrs. Yip was trained as a "barefoot doctor" in the Cultural Revolution and knew the medicinal value of every plant and growing thing. When the baby had a bad fall, she rushed over with a homemade folk remedy—marigold whiskey. Just the smell of it could knock you across a room. Thankfully, her intent was to apply the brew topically, and it worked wonders. (She certainly made D&C 89:7 come alive: "Strong drinks are not for the belly, but for the washing of your bodies.") When the baby had a fever, she rushed over to give him a bath in noodles, which A-ngaan thought was ridiculous but which seemed to help.

The neighbors all made fun of her when she tried to tie a string around the borders of our yard and shake water in the corners to bring a good harvest to our newly planted garden. But Mrs. Yip was steadfast; she believed in what she did. She had certainly internalized the principles of communal property: one Saturday afternoon, after returning from a trip, our exhausted family took a nap. We were deep in slumber when the bedroom door swung open and in marched Mrs. Yip. My husband and I sat straight up, startled. Without missing a beat, she started a cheerful update on the local news and inquired about our trip. She showed not the least embarrassment or reticence. She just came in the gate, in the front door, up the stairs, and into the bedroom to talk to us. Perfectly natural in a Communist system—our home belonged to the people, and therefore she was entitled to enter. We learned she was a devout Buddhist when she invited us to her home for a New Year's celebration. She used nearly her whole month's food ration to prepare her feast, part of which she offered at a small shrine in the corner of her room. For many years she had not been allowed to worship, and we could see that performing her rituals for her ancestors meant a great deal to her. She sang a melancholy chant, walked in circles, and blew off firecrackers in the doorways to frighten evil spirits. She succeeded in frightening us, too, when one nearly blew up in her face.

Later in the year, she invited us to visit her home village. We rented a van, piled everyone in (including some of her relatives, whom we picked up in the foothills), and then proceeded on a steep and treacherous journey to visit her ancestors' temple, nestled high in the mountaintops. Usually a three-day climb on foot, this was a sacred pilgrimage for her, the third visit in her life. She and her sister poured themselves into their ceremony, chanting, singing, and presenting offerings of food and gifts. This temple experience for her seemed to be as sacred as our own. At the end of the day, she and her sister came singing down the mountainside, arm in arm, replete with joy. On the way home she stopped by the marketplace and there bought two black-fringed Haaka hats, one for me and one for herself. Though we commonly saw people in these hats every day, no one had ever seen her wear her native hat before. But from then on, she wore it daily. Evidently, word had traveled quickly in the neighborhood of our visit to her village. The next day we noticed she was treated quite differently by the neighbors—respectfully and even kindly. Our journey with her somehow validated her as a person in our little community.

In the process, A-ngaan was compelled to see Mrs. Yip in a different light, looking past ages-old borders of prejudice and enlarging the borders of her own heart to include her new Haaka friend. She proclaimed with a smile, "Haaka people are very good!" That brought us double happiness, because we loved them both.

Years later another treasured friend, Lao Yang, came into our lives. We called him Lao (meaning "old") Yang as a form of respect and endearment, though he was only six months older than I. The Chinese also use family titles as loving forms of address with one another. In an extended family of more than a billion people, they are truly brothers and sisters: the middle-aged woman at the vegetable stand is "aunt," the elderly man on the bench is "grandfather," the friend younger than you are might be "meimei" or "little sister," and so on. It is a heartwarming tradition that makes you feel related as all God's children.

Lao Yang, an extremely intelligent and capable man, was our cook in Beijing. Assigned by the government's Diplomatic Service Bureau to that Communist work unit, he had no control over his career or education. He could have been a lawyer, a brain surgeon, a professor, but he was assigned to be a cook. Our cook. He was excellent and took great pride in his work, and we showered him with heartfelt praise—something rather new to him. After school the children loved to visit with Lao Yang—he taught them Chinese, juggled knives in the kitchen for my awestruck son, and demonstrated tai chi and martial arts after supper. His tiny home could have fit into our child's bedroom. He had one small coal stove to keep his family warm in winter and rode his bicycle ten miles to work, in rain or snow. We were his livelihood.

When we entertained guests for a diplomatic function, I would sometimes enter the kitchen and feel a pang of sadness to see this man of such great personal dignity waiting patiently to serve us our next course. I wished that he could be our guest and that we could serve him. Once, during one of our talks in the kitchen, I said, "You know, if you had been born in America and I had been born in China, I might have been your ayi (maid)." He laughed, but he understood my message. He brought a whole new meaning to the scripture: "But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant" (Matt. 23:11).

Every interaction with one of Heavenly Father's children is an opportunity to give something and to receive something. We were the right people to help A-ngaan experience a change of heart. Lao Yang was the right person to teach us the meaning of service. With each person we encounter, we should ask ourselves: What can I learn from this person? What wisdom can he give to me that I lack? What can I give him that will make his load easier to bear?

Right Place

"I'll go where you want me to go, dear Lord," but please don't take me out of my comfort zone! Every transition moves us into uncharted territories. Twenty-three moves have taught me that the only constant in life is change; and though each move brought me a calm assurance that we were in the right place at the right time, my own struggle was whether or not I was the right person for each new adventure. I learned that by the time the Lord accomplishes his purposes, we have become the right person in the process.

The Lord sometimes chooses as his workplace uncomfortable places and situations. We love the periods of happiness and peace and often are caught off guard by storms and crises. The Chinese word for crisis—wei ji—is rich in meaning. It is created by combining the two characters for danger (wei) and opportunity (ji). We may perceive a crisis to be dangerous—"dark clouds of trouble[hang[ing] o'er us, [that] threaten our peace to destroy," [^1] perhaps putting our jars of happiness in peril. In reality, winds of opportunity are blowing in our direction, bringing the possibility for growth and change. The Lord stretches us and proves us with every danger/opportunity. The issue is one of perception.

An old friend from Hong Kong asked us to take her back to her home village in China after the government sent word that the family home was being returned to her. A-ha had left China thirty-five years before and had not been able to return to see her family. She longed to return, yet she was fearful, and so, at this first opportunity (a true 'danger/opportunity' in her mind), she took our family along as an "insurance policy" that she would return safely. We took several trains and an eternal bus trip and then rode in the back of a bread truck to get to her Lao Jia ("ancestral home"). She was laden with gifts for her brothers and sisters and for a host of new family members she had never met. I was concerned: How would they recognize her after all these years? She had left a young woman in her thirties and now she was nearly seventy!

Without modern systems of communication, she had been able to send them a letter stating only the day we hoped to arrive and she hadn't heard back. What if they weren't there? We arrived in the late afternoon, at dusk. As we helped her out of the truck, she looked around expectantly and then spotted the family delegation coming down the dusty road ahead. Chinese reserve would allow them only to grasp hands, but it was a glorious moment. A-ha's relatives then greeted our family as though they hadn't seen us in thirty-five years—and linked arms with each of us and paraded us all triumphantly through the village to her sister's home.

The home had earthen floors, no plumbing or electricity, and a communal kitchen shared with four other families. Waiting for her there was "Number 3 Mother," a tiny grandmother in black pajamas and a black silk cap who had been A-ha's father's third wife. She continually gave us a thumbs-up sign and a big grin to show approval of our baby. The reunion was bittersweet. A-ha learned of the terrible hardships her family had endured: her mother, father, and brother had been killed, their treasures and beautiful porcelain jars smashed by the Red Guards, their genealogies burned. The family home, it turned out, had been used as a grain silo by the army and was overgrown, filthy, and home to wild animals. But her heart had found its home, and it wasn't that crumbling structure she had come to reclaim; her home was the love of her family.

The right place doesn't have to be physical but, as illustrated by A-ha's experience, can occupy instead a place in the heart. During Marcie's senior year, she and her classmates volunteered in a Chinese orphanage. The dire conditions were sobering. The children were bedridden, despondent, handicapped, sick, and attended by a well-meaning but overburdened staff. The initial unresponsiveness of the children was daunting: how could this possibly be the right place for anyone? The volunteers wondered how they could hope to impact children in such dismal circumstances. They didn't have the medical or technical training needed to change conditions. All they could offer the children, besides the toys, music, and "things" they brought, was their time and their touch.

Marcie was drawn to the lonely children in the back room. Some lay motionless, others perpetually moaned. One particularly emotionless, unresponsive child was three years old, but her body was that of an infant, her limbs rubbery and useless, and her senses seemed to tune out stimulation. Because she was a hermaphrodite, she was given minimal care. But Marcie felt the child deserved the same love and enthusiastic attention she would have given her own baby sister—though her hopes of enlivening this unresponsive little girl weren't high. One day, however, as they began to dance to the beat of "Penny Lane," some Beatles music she had brought in, a particularly energetic movement of Marcie's caused the girl to giggle infectiously, earning her the nickname thereafter of "Penny." To the great interest of the staff caretakers, day by day Penny's giggles grew more frequent and her face more animated—she was loved, noticed, and alive. Marcie's heart was overflowing when by the end of the week Penny uttered her first "word"—perhaps no monumental miracle, but the joy of that moment helped them forget the dirt, stench, and dreariness of their surroundings, drinking in the comfort of this new place of the heart. Any place where love can temporarily shove pain and loneliness away is a "right place."

So, when the Lord calls, drop your nets as Peter did and follow. Don't look back. Go forward and prayerfully ask, What am I to learn from this place, from these people, from this particular situation? What gifts can I give that are needed here? It is sad to see those who view change as a threat to their peace and happiness, who refuse to embrace new opportunities because they might be dangerous.

Right Time

Our Chinese friends have a great deal of patience, part of which is a cultural endowment. They think in terms of thousands of years, whereas we, impatient Westerners, want everything yesterday. Their sense of time is culturally different from ours. So is the Lord's from the world's. We want immediate fixes for cracks and breaks and immediate answers to our prayers, but we forget that our time is not his time. We pray for peace and happiness but forget that the peace he gives is "not as the world giveth" (John 14:27).

Perhaps one of the greatest lessons of patience and grace we learned was from our dear friend and a gifted artist, Wang. We met Wang at an art exhibit one December. He inquired where my husband learned his Chinese. "You were a missionary?" he said with whispered excitement. Quietly he told us he had learned his English from American Protestant missionaries some forty years earlier. Because his family members were Christians and wealthy landowners, they suffered at the hands of the Communist revolutionaries. His father died, the family lost their home and their money, buried their Bibles, and kept their faith safe in their hearts. His dream of attending a university to study art was short-lived. During the Cultural Revolution, he was expelled and eventually imprisoned for being both religious and an intellectual. Yet throughout this ordeal, his faith never wavered.

Hearing his story, my husband felt impressed to invite him to a caroling party we were hosting. It was part of a cultural exchange with the Chinese university at which my husband studied and we both taught. This exchange occurred only because we were there during a rare window of time when there was far greater openness to Western ideas than in the past.

The previous year our lecture on Western Christmas traditions at the university drew standing-room-only crowds—with our middle-aged students dancing afterwards with wreaths around their necks and garlands on their heads, declaring that the next week they would have a university Christmas party in the lecture hall. They felt the infectious joy of the season. The school cook made two cakes that said "Christmas Happy," we had an obligatory power failure, and by candlelight Santa Holloman came "ni hao-hao-hao-ing" into pandemonium. So, by this, the second year, we were inundated with requests to produce multiple university celebrations to accommodate all the new Christmas enthusiasts.

With that precedent and the administration's blessing, we welcomed Wang and a huge crowd of students into our home on Christmas Eve to have cookies and cider, see their first Christmas tree and stockings, and to sing carols in the neighborhood (rehearsed as part of our English lesson). Santa Holloman led the band of carolers through the streets on that starry Christmas Eve. They sang by candlelight and delivered plates of cookies to Mrs. Yip and other bewildered but delighted neighbors, workmen, and soldiers.

In the midst of all the faces struggling to read the unfamiliar songs, we saw our new friend, Wang, his head held high, singing the carols from memory and with such exuberance that he captured the hearts of all the carolers. When the party was over, he lingered. He had brought gifts for each one of us—the finest treasures from his art exhibit. These were true gifts from the heart. He felt such joy in giving them, yet they surely represented many month's wages for him. What made us feel worse was that in the midst of all the preparations we had forgotten he was coming and had no gift for him! But the Lord, in his perfect timing, had seen to it that my brother's gift to us arrived that very day: a Metropolitan Museum of Art book entitled, Christmas by the Great Masters. It was the perfect gift for an artist, and as we presented it to him, Wang explained that he hadn't seen such paintings since his childhood. "Da-vinsky!" "Oh, Michelangelo!" "Oh, so beautiful!" he exclaimed as he looked at the paintings of the Nativity that had once been banned.

With great enthusiasm, he asked, "Could we please sing more carols?" So we gathered by the tree and sang. Then he turned to my husband and said, "Mr. Holloman, would you please tell the Christmas story?" That request presented us with a dilemma: we were allowed to worship in the privacy of our own home but were strictly forbidden to proselyte (a law we steadfastly honored). We were allowed to share Christmas traditions with our students, but we were not to talk about their religious implications, other than a cursory mention that the season did commemorate the birth of Jesus Christ.

Now it was, after all, Christmas Eve, and every year of our lives we had read the Christmas story on Christmas Eve—it was part of our culture. And here was this earnest request before us. It was nearly midnight, and our children were waiting. My husband drew a breath and began reading the familiar words from Luke. We looked at our friend and realized that he was silently mouthing the words he had committed to memory as a child so many years before. "Please, more carols!" he said, and we sang and sang, ending with "Silent Night." The lights of the Christmas tree reflected tears in our friend's eyes, and as he stood to leave, he said, "Oh, thank you! Thank you! This is the first Christmas I've had in thirty-six years."

Wang became our dear friend, a favorite "uncle," and a most devoted art teacher for our children. He prepared page after page of handwritten notes to teach them about the lives of the great masters and painstakingly taught them to sketch, to use charcoal, oils, and watercolors. I have never seen anyone match his enthusiasm in teaching.

Wang's willingness to wait on the Lord's time for a chance to renew his Christian faith was a humbling lesson to us to wait with faith for the "Lord's time" whenever "our time" doesn't hold the desired outcome. Wang's faith was always active and strong—hidden safe in his heart.

We consider another miracle in our lives to be our ayi ("maid"), Xiao Wai. Our paths crossed at a time when we both had needs only the other could fill. We had known other families to whom she had been assigned previously, and she was beloved by all. From the first day I met her, we were a team. We got down on the eternally dirty tile floor together and laughed and scrubbed till our knuckles were raw. The floor still looked terrible, but it was the start of a wonderful friendship. I was struck by her intelligence and wit, her steady endurance and gift of discernment. Like Lao Yang, she too had the capability to do anything, but she was assigned to be a maid. She was a marvelous mother, possessing wisdom and calm perfectly suited to a mother of many. Yet Chinese law strictly forbids couples having more than one child, and her one child was a lovely daughter. We often discussed our children and theories on child-rearing, and she knew the children loved and respected her. For us she was a role model, a treasured "aunt," a mentor and friend. Given her circumstances, I felt almost embarrassed to confide in her that (after several losses) I still longed to have another child—Why, I had three beautiful children, a truly bounteous posterity!—and I knew the intensity of this longing must have been far greater for her than for me. When I told her I was expecting and then shortly thereafter had another miscarriage, she reacted with deep compassion. She was someone who knew the loss of what might have been. I cannot think of anyone who could have offered me more solace during that difficult time than she did in her quiet way.

Heavenly Father did bless us with a successful pregnancy not long after, and Xiao Wai and Lao Yang went into warp speed with advice, strange soups, and herbal preparations "to make me strong." Both were extremely protective of the precious cargo I carried.

When I came home with a little red-headed bundle and laid her in this dear sister's arms, I will never forget the look of joy and wonder and tenderness on her face. This was a second child—one she would never be allowed to have—and somehow the baby sensed this. They formed a mother-child bond on the spot. Surely Heavenly Father ordained this! When I would try in vain to quiet the baby's crying, she would instantly relax in Xiao Wai's arms, transfixed in a loving gaze at her Chinese mother—to Xiao Wai's sheer delight. She would talk to her, sing to her, recite poetry, and dance with this little baby, showering upon her all her maternal love. I knew that for us, this was something holy, facilitated at a special time by a loving Father in Heaven. I called Xiao Wai "Number 1 Mother," and myself "Number 2 Mother"—an honor she deserved and a token of the sacred bond of motherhood we share.

In the thick of our struggles, we sometimes wondered if the Lord's timing was off. We yearned for Xiao Wai and questioned why she had to be denied family blessings because her time for motherhood and a government policy arrived at the same time in her life. Yet her spirit was resilient, and she found other channels for her love. This was the time when her needs and ours coincided. While Wang was denied the freedom to worship his God openly, his time of silent suffering was well spent building solid reserves of faith. He gave depth and texture to the admonition, "wait patiently on the Lord," and his strength was renewed as promised. He taught us to look past our finite understanding and ask, "Is this a time when the Lord needs me to wait patiently on his timing?" Because of Xiao Wai, we now think to ask, "What can I do to bring about the right time for someone else?"

In closing, I'd like to tell you a modern parable—the parable of the shard boxes. Sometime in the mid-1980s, after the Cultural Revolution was over, small porcelain boxes in myriads of jagged and unusual shapes began appearing in Beijing. They were made of broken pottery shards from lovely blue and white porcelains, Ming and Qing vases, and jars of double happiness that had probably been smashed by Red Guards. The shards were given new life by Lao Han, the shard box man, who collects these old broken pieces of pottery and crafts them into "shard boxes." He sees potential in the discards of others and turns them into treasure. No two shards are alike; each one's irregular shape is uniquely created by the force that broke it. Lao Han, a gentle, honest soul, labors in a small workshop. First, he takes a jagged piece of porcelain and carefully molds a silver shell around its edges to fashion a top, and then he creates a matching silver bottom. He knows pure silver alone is too soft to withstand everyday use, so he adds a little copper and a tiny bit of nickel to give it strength. By heating these elements together in a refiner's fire, he creates the alloy known as sterling silver, which gets its sheen and innate beauty from the silver and its strength to stand up and be firm from the nickel and copper. Finally, Lao Han embosses the silver sides of the boxes with beautiful designs while the metal is still hot and malleable from the refiner's fire.

The silver that emerges from that refiner's fire glows—just as the pure love of Christ makes someone's countenance glow. In our trials of fire, the Lord sends others into our lives to give us strength, people of sterling character, people who glow with that same love of Christ. They are the nickel and copper that give us the strength to stand up and be firm.

Shard boxes reflect the effort to make something beautiful and useful out of destruction. Beautiful, because each shard, like a piece of a puzzle, reveals part of the lovely pattern of the original unbroken jar. And useful, because the once-useless pieces are remade into practical containers that can once again store things, hold treasures, have a purpose.

I have found some shard boxes with part of the double happiness pattern on them, part of some ancestral jar that was passed down through the generations of a family before it met its fate. I wonder if it would give happiness to some of those long-departed owners to know that their family treasures, once thought to be destroyed, are now bringing beauty into the world again in new and useful forms? Why, think of it—one shattered vase can create many shard boxes! Where one vase served one purpose, the many shard boxes created from that same vase can have many useful purposes. Whatever crisis breaks the vase also brings opportunities to create beauty in its aftermath.

If in the storms of crisis, your double happiness jar is broken and you feel you can never be whole again, or be the right person again, look at your experience from an enlarged perspective. Out of one shattering experience, you have the opportunity to take each piece of your broken heart, bind it with the pure love of Christ, and come out of your trial of fire with many beautiful and useful shard boxes born of your pain. The Lord, like the shard box man, molds you and leaves his mark upon you after you have gone through the refiner's fire—while you are hot and glowing and humble. In the end, there are more parts to you than there were before: more practical experience, more wisdom, more compassion, and even more happiness. You are different but in a new and infinitely better configuration.

I keep a shard box made from part of a double happiness jar right next to the matching whole jar as a testament to the resilience and endurance of the Chinese people. Wang and A-ha lost their homes and possessions, yet each took the fragments of their past and created beauty out of the pain. The right place was in their hearts. Xiao Wai took the precious parts of a mother's love and gave that love to those around her, at just the right time. She was there for me. After we left China, we got a letter from A-ngaan. It was uncharacteristically emotional—she used the words literally translating to "shatter spirit" to convey her feelings that she missed us and she missed the baby. I, too, felt as if my heart had shattered when I left those dear friends. But I see that I now possess many wonderful shard boxes created from each experience and each person that touched my life in a special way.

These experiences are beautiful and eternally useful. The lessons we learned from our Chinese friends—that only they could teach us—are forever embossed upon our souls. They were the right people for us, China was the right place, and we were there at a remarkable time in history. The greatest miracle of the shard boxes is that the sum of the parts is more than the whole. We came back from our journey with so much more than we took—carrying treasures that we surely can carry home to heaven, from whence they came.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] President Ezra Taft Benson said that "every man eventually is backed up to the wall of faith." The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 206.
