Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

MY alternative DOZEN

Marilynn Thorpe Brockbank

Marilynn Thorpe Brockbank has made a lifelong career of homemaking. She feels privileged to have been able to choose a vocation on the basis of passion rather than remuneration. A business administration graduate, Marilynn is a substitute teacher in seminary and a writer. She serves as music chairman in her ward. She and her husband, Dr. Virgil W. Brockbank, have four children and nine grandchildren.

In 1952, when I was a tender thirteen-year-old, I went to a Myrna LoyÂClifton Webb movie called Cheaper by the Dozen, a heartwarming story of the trials and joys of a family with twelve children. The hopes and dreams of my preadolescent heart had, for some time, been focusing on my future as a wife and mother. I sat in the dark grandeur of the old Egyptian Theater, and a powerful conviction filled my soul that this was my greatest goal in mortal life. It has never once even wavered in the ensuing forty-three years. In fact, the inability to give up that dream has caused me nearly all of my life's pain.

Within a year of marriage, my husband, Virgil, and I had found that we would never have children by the usual method. My cherished dreams and goals, my carefully thought-out plans—marry a good man, build a big house with a big porch, plant flowers and trees, and placidly consume the moments and the years of my life bearing and rearing twelve beautiful children—shattered when reality backed me up against the wall of faith. [^1]

We turned to adoption. Many times, upon learning that my children were adopted, a miserably pregnant friend would glibly inform me that I had "done it the easy way." There was nothing easy about it. Our first roadblock was that we were too young; our second, that we had not been married long enough to prove stability. Once we had to move to be in "acceptable" housing. When it was time to finalize the adoption of our second child, we were temporarily denied because my husband had gone back to school full time to finish his education. That, we were informed, was "proof" that we had adopted children before we were sufficiently mature. We endured very personal questionnaires, soul-searching life histories, and intense scrutiny of every financial aspect of our lives. Home visits displayed us like cattle at the country fair hoping for a blue ribbon. It was not an easy way to "give birth."

So, while waiting for roadblocks to be removed, I embarked upon a lifelong service project of foster care. Our very first child, a thirteen-month-old named Randy, took a huge section of our hearts when he went back home. I wonder how we managed to try again. Before we were allowed to adopt our own first child, we had four foster children plus many of our friends' children come and go. Our friends looked to us as a temporary mom and dad for their children while they vacationed or went to the hospital for a new sibling. During that period, I fostered my first older child when we took in a terrified fourteen-year-old unmarried mother during her confinement and the emotional upheaval of surrendering her baby.

When we were finally able to adopt Paul, I gave myself completely over to the fulfillment of my teenage dreams. The reality was better than the fantasy, made sweeter still by five and a half years of bitter craving. It was, indeed, like playing house. I drifted through those first two years in my rose- colored haze like the ultimate mother with her perfect child living the happily-ever-after storybook life. When we were blessed with our second child, Karin, a stunningly beautiful but high-strung daughter, Heavenly Father abruptly set me back down on the real terra firma. After six months of our baby's constant colic, however, once more I became a contented, normal, happy young mother enjoying that especially precious season of life.

To keep us afloat during my husband's schooling, I began to babysit and take in foster children again. One day in early May, Social Services asked if I could immediately take in a baby that had been abandoned the previous evening in a bar. I could but unexpectedly added that I would do so only if I could adopt the child if parental rights were terminated. In their haste and need, the social worker immediately said yes, with the caveat that I shouldn't get my hopes up. Within half an hour, a social worker appeared at my door with a dirty, pale, sickly, and unresponsive baby girl dressed only in a wet diaper and filthy undershirt. Her eyes were fixed and glazed. I trembled as I took her in my arms, thinking that this child was going to die in my care.

She was four and a half months old and weighed an ounce over nine pounds. The back of her head was flat from lying in one position. She was somewhat jaundiced and nearly into the stage of marasmus that precedes death in a child who fails to thrive. She did not turn her head or focus her eyes when I spoke to her. The agency gave me their doctor's number to call for an appointment the next day and left.

I changed her cloth diaper, using one from the box I had on hand from my children's diaper days, wrapped her in a blanket, and headed with my little ones in tow for the Grand Central two blocks away. There I purchased several one-piece stretch-terry playsuits, undershirts, plastic pants, diaper liners, pins, powder, lotion, shampoo, and receiving blankets. Next I picked up canned formula and plastic liners for the baby bottles I had used with my children. Finally we headed home for a bath, rubdown, clean, soft clothes, and lunch. I don't know if she was hungry during any of these tasks because she never made a peep. No whimpering or lusty crying for food. She seemed entirely resigned, as if she simply did not care anymore.

After putting Paul and Karin down for naps, I fed and rocked the tiny waif, singing to her and caressing her while she slept peacefully in my arms. I pleaded with the Lord not to take her while she was in my care. I came to believe firmly during the course of that afternoon that had she been abandoned a day later, she would have died.

During the succeeding days and weeks, Catherin—the name we gave her—slowly began to respond. We discovered immediately that she was allergic to formula. After trying soy and other substitutes, I contacted the La Leche League and found nursing mothers willing to provide me with breast milk. Soon Catherin began to gain weight, focus her eyes on me, and communicate with coos and smiles. She was bonding and thriving.

During this four-month period, her mother was found and ordered to appear in court. On the first two court dates, she was in jail. When she appeared on the third date, the judge terminated her parental rights. That happens only very rarely, which is why the social worker had so quickly, and unfortunately, made her rash promise to me. In this case, however, the mother had two older children who had been in foster care for some time because of her alcoholism and neglect. The judge was through giving her chances and took all three children away.

The morning after the court hearing, I got a call from the Division of Family Services. "I have good news and bad news," were the case worker's first words. The good news was that, to her surprise, Catherin was available for adoption now. The bad news was we could not have her. She apologized profusely for her unauthorized promise and begged for forgiveness. Her superiors were adamant that because we were not on the waiting list for adoption and were approved only for foster care, this child could not be placed with us. She belonged to the next family on the list. I felt stunned, ill used, deeply wounded, and finally enraged. In the first few hours after receiving the news, I planned ways to abscond with Catherin and my family to the edge of the earth and hide until they were all grown up. Then I vowed to get a lawyer and fight this treacherous injustice. Then I fell to my knees and pleaded with the Lord to give me this child for my own, something I had not done before, nor have I done since, with someone else's child. Finally I realized, and admitted to God, that he was in charge of his world and knew what he was doing. I told him of my love for Catherin and my desire to keep her, but I knew that she was, first of all, his child, and he would send her where he willed.

Because the justice system allows for appeal when defendants believe they have been unfairly treated, Catherin could not be legally placed for thirty days. The couple who were to get her did not want to chance having her taken back in a month, so Catherin would stay in foster care for another four weeks. Out of respect for my anguish and need for healing, our case worker asked if I wanted her placed in another foster home during that time. I declined. Catherin was doing so well and had come so far. I feared that one move would be hard on her, let alone two. Thus it was that the Lord answered my prayer in a small way—I still had her in my home to care for and cherish a little longer.

During this time the agency, the adoptive parents, and I decided to smooth the way for Catherin's eventual move by getting her familiar with her new mom gradually. For their first meeting, I dressed her in a new, blue ruffled dress, with lace-trimmed panties and socks, and took her first to the photographer and then to her new parents. It was awkward at first, but they held her and looked her over. We made an appointment for the mom to come to my home three days later to spend the morning, give Catherin a bath, and feed and play with her for a few hours. Later she would take her for a short outing and, finally, keep her overnight a time or two.

The morning the adoptive mom was to arrive, the case worker called. "You are not going to believe what I have to tell you," she said. The future parents had decided they did not want Catherin for reasons that were hard to believe: she had blue eyes instead of brown, she was eight months old instead of six, she did not appear healthy enough, and she was not pretty enough. "Do you still want her?" The case worker had prevailed upon her superiors for a change of heart.

Father Abraham was called upon to demonstrate his faith in a way I had never been able to comprehend. How could someone sacrifice a son? While I could not imagine passing that test of obedience, I now understood the magnificent lesson the Lord taught him—and me: When we put aside our self-interest to say—and mean—thy will be done, then we receive the "peace of God, which passeth all understanding" (Philip. 4:7).

If this were a fairy tale, I could tell you that I now know how to wrestle with the Lord to get whatever I want. But my life is not a fairy tale. I never got my cheaper-by-the-dozen family. This time, like Abraham and Isaac, we lived happily ever after. Catherin became our beautiful, healthy daughter, who at twenty-nine is an expectant mother herself. But the magnificent lesson the Lord taught me was how to find peace, not how to get my prayers answered in the way I want. Although I have cared for many dozen foster children from twelve hours to twenty-one years old, the Lord has given no other ones to me when I expressed my desire to keep them. He has, however, given me Christlike love for them. He taught me how to take joy in them, influence their lives, and then let them go peacefully.

Once having discovered the key to finding peace, it would have been be nice if I had been able to make universal application of it in my life. Alas, I have found myself kicking against the pricks quite persistently along my journey. Whenever the answer is no and the assignment hard to live with, I have to exert much effort to remember and apply the principle I learned half a lifetime ago.

Take comfort, then, in Christ's words in Gethsemane: "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt" (Matt. 26:39). Jesus surrendered himself to the Father's will in Gethsemane and thereafter, regardless of whatever else he went through until he said "It is finished," he was at peace. After his trial in the Garden, Jesus went to Calvary in pain, in humiliation, and in agony. Notwithstanding, Jesus went to Calvary in peace.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Richard G. Scott, "To Be Healed," Ensign, May 1994, 7.
