Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

WHEN ONE DOOR CLOSES, ANOTHER OPENS

Teri H. Taylor

Teri Hansen Taylor serves as a member of the Autism Society of Utah Board of Directors. She has served as a missionary in the Tennessee Nashville Mission. She and her husband, Matt Taylor, are the parents of three children, the youngest of whom has autism. She serves as a Webelos leader in the Scouting program.

In November 1993 on Thanksgiving day, my family's life changed forever. Spencer was twenty months old and normally developed. He could say more than sixty words and loved playing with his older brother and sister, Carlton and Candice. My husband, Matt, and I were very pleased with his development, and I had even written in his journal how well he was doing. He was starting to put two words together, like "good morning" and "hop down." He loved the horses behind our house and would point and say "horsie."

On that Thanksgiving day, all three of our children became ill with a virus. The two older children recovered within a few days, but Spencer continued to seem lethargic and stopped talking and responding to his name. We consulted our physician and other specialists over the next few months, trying desperately to find out what was wrong. We ourselves detected changes in Spencer's language, social skills, and behavior.

At first we thought Spencer must have a hearing problem because he no longer looked at us when we called his name or talked to him. We had his hearing tested; it was fine. Over the next six months, Spencer's language regressed until he could say only five words, but even getting him to do that was a struggle. Eventually he lost all of his language.

Though he had once enjoyed others, he now became afraid of people. If I was holding him and talking with friends, he would cry and try to push them away. He stopped playing with Carlton and Candice and avoided eye contact with everyone. Other unusual behaviors soon became apparent. Spencer ran around the sofa for long periods of time. He stared at his hands a lot and walked around the perimeter of our yard repeatedly. He became fixated on videos and would watch them continually if we allowed him. We felt confused and panicked. What was happening to our son?

In May 1994, we met with a pediatric neurologist, who diagnosed Spencer as autistic. Though we had heard the word, we didn't really know what it meant. Over the next few weeks we did a lot of reading. What we learned was not very hopeful or helpful. Autism is a lifelong neurological disability that appears in a child before age three. In many children, the symptoms are apparent from birth. Others, like Spencer, may have a period of normal development before symptoms appear. There is no known cause of autism, and no cure. Special-education programs and speech therapy offer the only treatment available.

Matt and I were stunned. For the first few days and weeks after the diagnosis, we sat at the kitchen table, cried, and wondered what was ahead for our son and family. I couldn't face my daily responsibilities of cleaning, cooking, and laundry. I couldn't eat. Every morning I awoke with a heavy feeling. I was grieving the loss of my healthy son. It was hard for me to accept that Spencer, who had been totally normal six months ago, now had a lifelong disability.

I searched everywhere I could think of for help. I found treatment services, but frustrating waiting lists denied us access to many of the programs. I also read everything I could about autism. Finally Matt told me to stop reading the medical information because most of it made me despair. He encouraged me instead to search for hope. I turned to the Ensign and the scriptures. I looked up hope in the Bible Dictionary and read all the scriptures listed.

By March 1995 I was exhausted and demoralized. In sixteen months I had not taken any time or thought for myself. All my mental and physical effort had gone to help Spencer and to keep up with my family and household responsibilities. But I knew I couldn't continue at this pace. My most discouraging realization was that no matter what I did, I could never cure Spencer. I had believed that if I worked hard enough with him, I could make the autism "all better." That was a heavy, impossible burden to carry, and I had to put it down. I couldn't let go of it easily, though. I got into bed and started to cry. Then I sobbed. I knew that Heavenly Father loved Spencer as much as I did, and that if it was his will, Spencer could be healed. I prayed and sobbed to Heavenly Father to ease my burdens, and I put Spencer's care in his hands. "Let thy will be done," I said.

Two days later, a national television program featured a boy with autism who had had normal development but, like Spencer, had then regressed. A group of physicians in Philadelphia had treated him, and he was regaining his language. Matt and I had a strong feeling that this information could be important for Spencer.

The next day I made many phone calls and found the phone number for the physician in Philadelphia. I called over and over, but the number was always busy. My strong feeling that I needed to speak with this doctor persisted. That night I prayed that I would be able to get through to the doctor and that, if this was important for Spencer, everything would come together. I woke up the next morning and continued to feel an urgency to pursue this information. Again I phoned, and again I could not get through. Finally I tried another phone number in the neurology department. I got through to a secretary, Cathy Butler, and explained my situation. She said that their phones had been jammed for two days with more than ten thousand calls. The doctor she worked with was also part of the team that had treated the boy featured on the program. She promised to give my name to the doctor but couldn't promise that he would call me. Nevertheless, I felt calm throughout the day. At 3:30 p.m. the phone rang; it was Dr. Kollros from Philadelphia. We spoke for more than half an hour as I explained Spencer's medical history. I knew thousands of people were wanting appointments, and I was worried that it would be a year or more before I could get in. Dr. Kollros told us what to do to expedite the visit. Within three months, Spencer and I were in Philadelphia. The treatment has been very helpful for Spencer. He is now saying some words, and his language continues to improve.

Let me share with you some words that gave me hope when it seemed there was no hope. Elder Richard G. Scott, in his April 1994 conference address, said: "Recognize that some challenges in life will not be resolved here on earth. Paul pled thrice that 'a thorn in the flesh' be removed. The Lord simply answered, 'My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness' (2 Cor. 12:7Â9). He gave Paul strength to compensate so he could live a most meaningful life. He wants you to learn how to be cured when that is His will and how to obtain strength to live with your challenge when He intends it to be an instrument for growth. In either case the Redeemer will support you. That is why he said, 'Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me. . . . For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light' (Matt. 11:29Â30).

"It is important to understand that His healing can mean being cured, or having your burdens eased, or even coming to realize that it is worth it to endure to the end patiently, for God needs brave sons and daughters who are willing to be polished." [^1]

Elder Boyd K. Packer had this to say in his April 1991 conference address: "You parents and you families whose lives must be reordered because of a handicapped one, whose resources and time must be devoted to them, are special heroes. You are manifesting the works of God with every thought, with every gesture of tenderness and care you extend to the handicapped loved one. Never mind the tears nor the hours of regret and discouragement; never mind the times when you feel you cannot stand another day of what is required. You are living the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ in exceptional purity. And you perfect yourselves in the process." [^2]

These words gave me hope. I prayed for strength and guidance in finding a way to help our son.

Doors started opening up for Spencer, though we had to expend a great deal of effort and perseverance to access the opportunities. We discovered the TEACCH Program, which helps parents work as co-therapists with their children at home. In an eight-week training session, I learned to do daily educational exercises with Spencer to help him gain the skills that come to most children normally, such as teaching him how to point to something he wanted. I began to feel more comfortable being Spencer's mom. Knowing how to work with him gave me a self-confidence I had not had before, and I began to better understand what autism is all about.

We were able to get Spencer into a speech therapy program with a therapist who had experience working with autistic children. This therapist taught our family sign language, which has enabled us to communicate more easily with Spencer. We also discovered a preschool program (CBTU) in Salt Lake City that specializes in educating children with autism, and we enrolled Spencer in it.

All of these discoveries changed my life dramatically. Before I had an autistic child, I had been majoring in interior design and had nothing in my life that I was passionate about. I felt very unfulfilled. Now I feel intense passion about autistic children. I have found work that makes a difference in people's lives and gives me great satisfaction. This past year I have been actively involved in getting special-education services for autistic children. Until last year, the only specialized program for children with autism in Utah was in Salt Lake City. In September 1995, through a cooperative effort with the district, parents, and local businesses, an autism kindergarten classroom was started in the Alpine School District in Orem. This past legislative session, I worked with a few other parents and obtained increased state funding for the autism preschool program. In September 1996, a preschool classroom will open in the Alpine School District. Autistic children in Utah County can now attend school close to home. No longer will their parents have to drive to Salt Lake City every day. I am also serving on a state task force, the RAINMAN committee, to develop a state plan to better serve individuals with autism and their families. I also served for a time as executive director of the Autism Society of Utah.

What I have learned from all my experiences is that none of us will escape tragedy in our lives. We will feel despair, sadness, and grief. It's important to allow ourselves to feel those emotions. Then we each need to find a way to move on, to pass through the pain, and to find happiness again. I originally had a plan for my life, but the plan was changed. The change wasn't my idea. But with the Lord's help, I have been able to move forward with faith.

Spencer is doing well. He's learning to talk—gradually. He still has autism and will for the rest of his life. But I worked through the grief and have found joy in my life again. We feel so happy to have him in our family. Our elder two children are kind and loving to him. The devastation that I felt at first has been replaced by hope and happiness.

One day, not long ago, Matt and I were driving together, reflecting on our lives and our feelings about what has happened with Spencer and our family. Matt commented that we must know pain and sorrow to experience joy. "Imagine," he said, "the two of us standing in the next life, watching Spencer walk towards us with open arms. 'Mom and Dad,' he will say, 'Mom, Dad, I love you,' and he will be whole again."

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] A good article to help assess the degree of depression a person may be dealing with is David G. Weight, "Why Is My Wife (Or Husband) Depressed?" Ensign, March 1990, 27-29.
[^2] Ezra Taft Benson, "Do Not Despair," Ensign, October 1986, 2Â5
