Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

"AWAKE, MY SOUL": AWARENESS AND TREATMENT OF DEPRESSION

Judy Norman

Judith Norman is associate professor of social work at Brigham Young University. She practices as a licensed clinical social worker and is involved in research, training, and treatment related to depression. She serves as a Relief Society teacher in her Salt Lake City ward.

Abby was a nineteen-year-old college sophomore who reported difficulty sleeping, trouble concentrating in school, withdrawal from friends, constant fatigue, and thoughts of "giving in" or "just giving up." In addition, Abby described at times feeling trapped in a black hole or as if dark clouds were closing in around her. She had not always felt this way. Family and social relationships had usually meant a great deal to her, her grades had been excellent, and she had felt purpose and direction in life.

At age sixty, Elizabeth found her life had changed dramatically. "My world was suddenly darker," she noted. "I found I couldn't see very well. I was constantly cleaning my glasses and adjusting the lamp to shine better on what I was reading. I couldn't seem to understand what I was reading and had to go over everything at least twice, sometimes more." Elizabeth had returned to school three years earlier at age fifty-seven and had been enjoying learning, but when she turned sixty, something changed. "I had always enjoyed staying up late to read or study. Now staying up required energy I no longer seemed to have. I worried constantly about getting enough sleep. . . . I was so tired all the time. School was difficult. I sat against the wall and hoped no one would notice me. I just wanted to get through, go home, close the blinds, and shut out the world."

Confused and fearful, both Abby and Elizabeth suffered from depression. Fortunately for both of them, they sought and received help. As Elizabeth noted, "One Friday morning I awoke and found my bedroom was light! The darkness had gone. I knew the depression had lifted, but a total 'coming back' took a little while." Though some symptoms and sources of their depression varied, both women experienced many similar symptoms.

The term depression covers a wide spectrum of problems from feeling sad to long-term negativism to severe chemical imbalances. Part of the problem in discussing depression is that a single term is used for everything from mild mood disorders to severe, suicidal despondency. Another difficulty is our own lack of ability to assess readily the type or severity. The person experiencing severe depression—feelings of hopelessness and deep despair—may not recognize how different her experiences are from depressions that don't require medical intervention, partly because a depressed person's thinking is usually distorted. [^1]

One sure resource in dealing with depression is counseling with the Lord and with priesthood leaders. President Ezra Taft Benson, in a classic general conference address, identifies twelve activities the Lord has provided to help us overcome "despair, discouragement, depression, and despondency," namely, repentance, prayer, service, work, health, reading, blessings, fasting, friends, music, endurance, and goals. [^2] If acting on these resources does not lighten the blackness of despair, the sufferer might consider seeking medical assistance as well. She may be dealing with a clinical depression that needs medical intervention along with these spiritual measures.

Understanding the causes of depression may help individuals avoid blaming themselves for conditions that are often beyond their control. Depression is no respecter of age, gender, race, socioeconomic class, culture, or religious affiliation, although women are treated for depression almost twice as often as men. It is a common, complex, but very treatable illness. Unfortunately, studies indicate that only one in five individuals who suffer with severe mood disorders ever seeks help. Some are not aware of what is wrong with them, or they think it is normal to feel the way they do. Others equate depression with weakness, as something they should be able to conquer alone. Seeking treatment is regarded as another sign of weakness or spiritual failing. Not only is that untrue, but the layer of guilt it adds can actually deepen already painful feelings of despair. When symptoms of depression are sufficient to warrant a clinical diagnosis, depression should be regarded as an illness, even when individual weakness or transgression complicate the picture. The chemical imbalance needs to be addressed as well as the spiritual.

It's important to recognize that depression may be a medical condition. Treatment may need to include medicine as well as therapy and spiritual counseling. From 4 to 8 percent of United States citizens experience at least one clinical depression, and depression is a common cause of suicide. Over their lifetimes, approximately 21 percent of women and 11 percent of men in the United States can expect to experience a significant depression. Once depression occurs, it will likely recur. Research has found that 50 to 80 percent of those experiencing depression, even these properly and effectively treated, will experience another episode. [^3]

The common and core features of clinical depression include biological symptoms (sleep and appetite changes, physical agitation or retardation, decreased sexual drive); psychological symptoms (reduced ability to concentrate, indecisiveness, feelings of worthlessness and self-reproach, excessive guilt, and feelings of helplessness and hopelessness); and environmental or interpersonal symptoms (loss of interest, social withdrawal). It is the complicating interaction of these biological, psychological, and environmental symptoms that makes depression so difficult to battle.

Research has shown that recurrent depressions have strong familial or genetic pathways. One woman reported that nine of her fifteen first cousins had suffered from various forms of anxiety or depression. Life experiences—often outside the control of the individual—also trigger depressive episodes. For example, the unexpected death of a close family member, unemployment, a serious illness such as cancer, or troubling relationships may lead to depression through no fault of the individual. Not all women experience depression similarly. Each case should be diagnosed and treated individually.

Some factors that can precipitate serious depression are avoidable. Drug and alcohol abuse both have high physical and psychological costs. Alcohol is a depressant and will further fuel other potential sources of depression. Lying, cheating, and betrayal will eventually damage relationships, resulting in psychological anguish and related physical symptoms such as headaches, stomachaches, fatigue, and nervousness. Choosing wisely and choosing well can foster, though not completely ensure, more healthful biological and psychological functioning.

Women are particularly vulnerable to depression. This well-established fact may be related to reproductive issues, including childbirth, birth control, adoption, and postpartum depression. Some speculate that women's higher vulnerability may have to do with women's social roles and expectations conflicting with personal goals or personal values. Women also suffer higher rates of victimization—rape, assault, sexual and physical abuse—and higher rates of poverty and powerlessness. To their benefit, women are also more likely to acknowledge problems and to seek help.

Latter-day Saint women may face many problems common to women in the population at large: divorce, abuse, limited financial resources, victimization, and discrimination. In the late 1970s, a controversial Salt Lake City television special conjectured that Mormon women were more likely to be depressed than women of other religions. That is false. Numerous subsequent studies found "Mormon women to be no more or no less depressed." The studies did find that women in general "were more prone to feel guilt and shame [than men], though this is not specific to being either religious or Mormon. It may have more to do with women's greater moral sensitivity to disturbances in relationships." [^4] In other words, a wife may feel greater unhappiness over marital conflicts than her husband does, more troubled by a disagreement with a friend, or more anxious over disapproval from a mother-in-law.

Skewed perceptions and a self-imposed burden of expectations may also promote and maintain depression. Many people struggle with the ideal of "perfection" and feel guilty, unworthy, and unacceptable when they recognize that the reality of their own lives and families doesn't match their ideals. "Sunday is my most difficult day," says one struggling mother of five. "My children complain about attending church, my husband always finds an excuse to go to the grocery store, and NBA play-off games are never-ending. I seem to be the only one worried about where we are headed." Latter-day Saint doctrine and principles, however, allow for gradual, paced progress in our endeavors. Elder Neal Maxwell reminds us to "contemplate how far we have already come, . . . look neither back or around, comparatively, . . . make quiet but honest inventories of our strengths," and "allow for the reality that God is still more concerned with growth than with geography." [^5]

But depressed individuals often have trouble reaching that kind of perspective. Despite good advice, they are often unable to see the temporariness of their experience, predicament, symptoms, or situations. And failed efforts to change are likely to deepen their feelings of hopelessness and depression. A person with depression is very different from the same person free of depression. Yet, in the midst of a depression, a person may believe the symptoms of depression are personality traits. A depressed woman may believe, for instance, that she is inherently indecisive, worthless, sluggish, incapable, friendless and a poor companion, guilty, and prone to failure. When setbacks, temporary declines in performance, or particular disappointments come, depressed individuals frequently blame themselves, feeling they are failures, without looking at past successes or even current accomplishments.

Among high-achieving women, the sense of not doing it all or not doing enough, provokes much guilt; and guilt (often manifest as self-criticism, self-blaming, and self-reproach) is a common experience for the depressed. Guilt may not cause depression, but it may compound other depressive symptoms or may follow in the wake of depression. Whereas a healthy conscience beckons individuals to evaluate and possibly modify behavior, excessive guilt suppresses an individual's ability to be honest, open, and repentant. As one clinical social worker pleaded: "I wish we were more open. . . . Then we could talk about our pain, understand it better, and move toward acceptance of whatever we are dealing with. Acceptance does not mean we give up. It means we accept where we are and start making changes, finding solutions—no longer paralyzed by guilt, denial, depression, or anger." [^6]

Everyone involved with a depressed individual—including anxious spouses or friends, well-meaning visiting teachers, and the person herself—must remember to be patient. When energy, appetite, sleep, and mental functioning are still significantly impaired, suggestions for more physical activity or social contact can lead the person to feel more helpless, more guilty—yes, even more depressed. Reminding her how blessed she is may well have the same effect. We can listen, and we can encourage her to do what she is able to do. Balanced meals, appropriate amounts of sleep, and modest exercise should be goals.

We can look to the Savior's life for balance. At times Jesus went to "a desert place" to pray and meditate (e.g., Mark 6:30Â31), sometimes sent his followers away so he could be alone (e.g., Matt. 14:23; Luke 5:15Â16), prayed (e.g. Matt. 26:39, 42), sought the support of friends—"watch with me" (e.g., Matt. 26:36, 38, 40), regularly walked, and let Martha care for some of his physical needs (Luke 10:38Â40). The depressed person will benefit from similar activities.

For individuals whose symptoms indicate they may have clinical depression, professional assessment is paramount. Doctors or therapists will look for contributing medical conditions and should evaluate symptoms and sources of depression. Help for individuals with clinical depression comes through treating as many of the psychological and biological symptoms as possible. A combination of medications and counseling has proven to be an immediately effective means of alleviating acute clinical depression. Excellent, nonaddictive antidepressants are widely available. Addressing the overwhelming biological and psychological conditions will get the individual to the point of being able to avail herself of sustaining spiritual help, such as prayer, fasting, scripture reading, priesthood blessings, and a "doing whatever you can from where you are" attitude. "Sometimes the crisis is one of personal survival," Ann Madsen said in this women's conference. "God also hears self-centered prayer, when survival is all that matters. As we work our way out of depression, we move thankfully from focusing on our own coping to noticing once more the needs of others around us." [^7]

In 2 Ne. 4 Nephi records his awareness of personal weaknesses and afflictions, yet rests secure in the knowledge of a loving, caring God: "Rejoice, O my heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul" (v. 28). Despair and depression are clearly enemies of the soul. There are many things we can give up or give away or do differently when we have the health and emotional energy to do so.

Family, community, church, and national education about depression can benefit us all. Dispelling myths about depression, early intervention, and interpersonal support can add to our arsenal against this particular enemy of our spiritual powers. With a willingness to seek treatment and increased understanding of the illness, many so afflicted can awake one morning and see that the room is light once again.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Sharon Begley, "Your Child's Brain," Newsweek (19 February 1996): 55Â56.
[^2] Strickland Gillilan, "The Reading Mother"; quoted in Ezra Taft Benson, The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 516.
[^3] Emily Dickinson, "There Is No Frigate like a Book," Modern American Poetry, ed. Louis Untermeyer (New York: Harcourt, Brace, World, 1964), 97.
[^4] Gregory Stock, The Kids' Book of Questions (New York City: Workman Publishing, 1988), 56, 144.
[^5] John Marks, "The American Uncivil Wars," U.S. News and World Report (22 April 1996): 71.
[^6] Ibid., 72.
[^7] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Bring Up a Child in the Way He Should Go," Ensign, November 1993, 59.
