Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

HORIZONS

Sydney S. Reynolds

Sidney Smith Reynolds received her bachelor's degree from Brigham Young University and did graduate studies in history and educational psychology. She and her husband, Noel B. Reynolds, are the parents of eleven children. She has served on the organizing committee of the Brigham Young UniversityÂRelief Society Women's Conference and is a member of the Primary General Board.

An energetic musician in our ward once assembled all those who had ever played in a band to perform at the ward talent show. The audience members were good sports, the amateurs sounded pretty good, and one trumpeter was truly outstanding, but the man standing next to me joked, "Do you have any idea how many thousands of dollars in music lessons are represented here?" His comment implied "wasted here," but that is wrong. Whether in the fine arts or the sciences or sports, learning is almost always more important than a one-time, tangible result. What a person learns, for instance, about music, about discipline, about playing in an ensemble, about learning a part, being prepared, and associating with other musicians makes lessons a worthwhile investment even though few students ever approach concert level.

A 1996 Newsweek article reported that "a baby's brain is a work in progress, trillions of neurons waiting to be wired into a mind. The experiences of childhood . . . help form the brain's circuits—for music and math, language and emotion. . . . Once wired, there are limits to the brain's ability to create itself. Time limits. Called 'critical periods,' they are windows of opportunity that nature flings open, starting before birth, and then slams shut, one by one, with every additional candle on the child's birthday cake." [^1] Even if we are not interested in rearing a John Stuart Mill, who could read Latin at age three, we are interested in training up our children in the way they should go and in seeking learning, even by study and also by faith (see Prov. 22:6; D&C 88:118).

To find out how parents can best do this, I called, wrote, and interviewed many friends and associates. Several things were mentioned again and again. Here, then, is a "top five" list of things some families are doing to help their children expand their horizons, things that most of us can do, too. One or more might work for you.

READ

We're probably all familiar with the couplet: "Richer than I you can never be— / I had a mother who read to me." [^2] Reading to our children doesn't take dollars or advanced degrees, but it does take time. It is probably the single most important factor in encouraging your children to be lifelong readers themselves. But even if you don't read to your children, and I didn't always, it helps if they see you reading. Studies claim that if a child's parent just held a book (right side up and as if reading) for thirty minutes a day, that child's interest in books, stories, and reading improved dramatically. Other studies indicate that if you have a critical number of books in the house—about fifty—your children are much more apt to be readers than those from homes in which books are not available.

The families I talked to shared experiences of reading at bedtime, reading aloud in the car, scheduling when the TV would be off, or requiring reading hours for TV hours. Parents ordered magazines from National Geographic World for children to Scientific American for teens. They all were well acquainted with their public libraries.

TRAVEL

Mentioned most often after reading was travel, whether for work, vacations, or planned learning adventures. Parental consensus seemed to be, "If you have the chance to travel, it's almost always worth the effort." Some parents had family members write up reports on different points of Church history before traveling to Nauvoo or other sites. Whoever had written the report on an area was the expert "guide" when they arrived at each place. Jerusalem Center students take turns giving similar "site reports" as they visit in the Holy Land. A greater depth of understanding and appreciation can result from knowing something about what you're going to see. But just a willingness to keep eyes and ears open accomplishes much.

Living abroad helps family members understand a different culture, promotes family cohesion, helps children appreciate the plight of the "new guy in town," and develops understanding that people are people and "different" doesn't mean "wrong." One couple who lived in Great Britain for a time quickly realized that explaining to their children that the British drove on the "other" side of the road, rather than the "wrong" side, set a tone with their family that carried through most of their years there.

One relative of mine, who said good-bye to his twenty-one-year-old son in Cairo one summer, remembered feeling that he really wasn't sure he would ever see his son again. But he and his wife had always encouraged their children to follow their dreams, as his mother had encouraged him. (His father had died when he was young.) It was a formative family value. The son traveled down the Nile River, through the Sudan on public transport, and on into Kenya. When he returned home he decided to get a master's degree in public health and is pursuing a medical education, hoping to do something about the serious health problems he saw in those developing nations. Dreams open doors.

If you can't travel far, there are ways of letting "far away" come to you. Books, of course, are a great way. As Emily Dickinson pointed out long ago: "There is no frigate like a book, / To take us lands away." [^3] But, you might also consider some of the following ideas. Many people talked about the influence of having others in their home—for dinner, to visit for family home evening, to live. Some regularly invited returning missionaries to share experiences with their children. Others invited business associates or foreign-exchange students from their children's schools. Just having a mix of people in the house lifts the conversation level, changes the awareness level, and exposes children to relationships that encourage development of social skills and understanding. Many commented on learning from house guests—cousins for a summer, students for a term, friends for a weekend.

TALK

Many people consider dinner table conversation a decent index of broad horizons. Three of our oldest children once had the good fortune to be invited to dinner at a friend's home after an afternoon of skiing. The table was lovely, the food was savory, and as the meal began, the distinguished father said something like, "I would like to propose for our topic of conversation tonight, the impact of political neutrality in the latter half of this century." A stunned silence followed. Our son's desperate hope that he might slip under the table and escape unnoticed only underscored the fact that this sort of thing rarely happened at our house! But the host and hostess graciously included everyone, opinions were respected, and my children had fun after all. I love this story and wish dinner table conversations like that happened more often at our house.

The year my husband attended law school as a visiting professor, he brought home "law cases" for the children to debate and discuss. That was fun. But good talk can happen without a resident law or philosophy professor to provide topics. One family pulls out The Kids' Book of Questions at least once a week. Questions range from number 53, "What is the biggest difference between what happens on television and what happens in the real world?" to number 182, "Have you ever—without telling anyone—let someone beat you at a game you could easily have won? If so, why?" [^4]

Another friend said that in desperation to curb the ongoing contention at their dinner table, she brought cards with American history information to the table. The cards included questions that became the focus of attention. "I had to do something," she said. "And sometimes it worked." Even though eliminating contention was her purpose, all her children learned to enjoy debate, all are notably well educated, and some are pursuing careers in history and political science.

Another stimulant to good learning can be the experiences a mother has volunteering. One good friend started out telling stories to her children and enjoyed it so much she volunteered to tell stories at the Children's Hospital. She ended up traveling to Jonesboro, Tennessee, for the National Storytelling Festival and organizing a story festival in her hometown to benefit the local library. It's no surprise that two of her children have won local storytelling contests. "Tell me a story" can be successfully requested of almost anyone at their house, but more important, the children are learning something about the blessings that come from helping others. Whether in the public school, the children's hospitals, the homeless shelter, or the local library, our experiences spill over into good conversation and new horizons of learning.

BE THERE

"Be there" means at least two things: traveling in your own area and keeping your eyes and ears open for significant events wherever you are—especially in your hometown. One woman I talked to, a world traveler herself, was grateful that her daughter, a young mother with limited means, was taking her children around Utah for the Centennial Celebration, visiting each Utah county and getting their "passport" stamped. At a minimal cost, her grandchildren are getting many of the advantages of travel, and they are able to do most of it on Friday-to-Saturday stints. We've all heard of New Yorkers who've never visited the Statue of Liberty, people from Cody, Wyoming, who know little about the Buffalo Bill Museum; and Salt Lakers who haven't bothered to tour Temple Square. It is important to put down your roots; respect for your own cultural heritage enhances your appreciation for others'.

Bev Plester, an American friend now married and living in England, wrote, "Believing the family tradition that a Plester was chief of the archers at Banbury Castle several hundred years ago and that a Plester was blacksmithing at Banbury till early this century, it's enticing to imagine that a Plester forged the weapons used by the rebels in the Battle of Edge Hill [in the English Civil War]. Every year we can, we go on October 23rd to Edge Hill outside of Banbury, less than one hour away, hoping to see or hear ghostly soldiers. This past year, I took John's brother Alan, his daughter and her friend, and my son, Sam, and his friend at 1 p.m. to observe. The four children were quickly into the spirit of things, finding artifacts and seeing shadows in the hedgerows, hearing noises that were unbovine in the middle of the cowfield, hearing the crackle of fires where they couldn't see any. . . . If it gets them into history, why not? I will never tire of living so close to so much history."

The corollary to visiting historical spots is to be there when history is being made. My mother took me out of school to watch President Dwight Eisenhower's motorcade drive through our town. In recent years presidents Reagan and Bush have visited Utah Valley, and Margaret Thatcher was also here not long ago. If you can expose children to world figures and do some explaining about who they are, it brings history out of the books and into their everyday lives.

Another way to be there is to encourage exploring. Open your doors and close the books. There's a whole beautiful world out there. One family mentioned having learned through backpacking not only a love for nature and the mountains but the joy of "making it to the top of the mountain" in whatever they were doing. Environmental consciousness became their heritage, but the desire to "go the distance" became ingrained. Our missionary son wrote that his father, a university professor, raised his horizons by running a farm and raising a large variety of fruits and vegetables.

Don't limit learning to academics. A child's tastes and abilities may run to carpentry, mechanics, building, and gardening, not to mention theater, dance, music, and art. Learning these important skills will give them immediate rapport with people who have similar skills. For example, friends of mine who are quilters find common ground and new friends among other fabric artists wherever they go.

ENCOURAGE GOOD MANNERS

Good manners allow us to move comfortably in any situation and are an important part of raising our children's horizons. Many of us were taught and now teach the old rhyme, "Politeness is to do and say / The kindest thing in the kindest way." In the past, women, especially mothers, have been responsible for the civilizing of society. The April 1996 U.S. News and World Report cover laments "In Your Face" attitudes and asks, "Whatever Happened to Good Manners?" The article suggests that we need to strengthen our commitment to civility in the family, the neighborhood, the community, the world. The box office success of Little Women and the Jane Austen movies indicates new interest in an era when "manners and restraint played a dominant role in society." [^5] Unfortunately, high-tech violence and low-budget blood and gore still predominate in the theaters.

So what can we do? Last month our home teacher gave a fun back-to-basics lesson about respect for others. We discussed standing when being introduced or when an older person enters the room, opening doors, saying "excuse me," and so on. A parent can also stress the practical value of social graces. Understanding good manners has future benefits in the world of work. "Manners are the new status accessory," says Marjabelle Young Stewart, an etiquette consultant for corporations, "pricier than a Rolex, more portable than a Day-Timer, and shinier than handmade shoes. Polished graces can get you where you're going faster than a speeding BMW." [^6]

Good manners are a matter not just of which fork to use but of civility and respect for all our Father's children.

So there's a list of five ways to start to expand our children's horizons—obviously not an exhaustive list, but perhaps it may be helpful in giving you an idea or the courage to try something that others have found useful. Let me conclude with a true story.

Virginia Noel was the middle child in a family of fourteen children who grew up on a farm in Vernal, Utah, during the Depression. Few of her family were interested in pursuing an education, but Virginia was. For a year after high school, she worked hard raising turkeys. The next fall, with one suitcase, twelve dollars, and a new hairbrush, she was off to the Agricultural College in Logan to become an elementary school teacher. She worked her way through college, graduated, started teaching, and married a handsome young man who, after the death of his mother, had dropped out of high school to help support his family. After serving in World War II, he homesteaded in Wyoming. There they reared a family of seven children with lots of work, no running water or electricity for years, and very little money but with regular trips to the library, the purchase of a piano, and high expectations. The children in that family were bilingual—they spoke "cowboy" and, because of their mother, they spoke grammatically correct English. All seven children attended college. I will always be grateful that my mother-in-law helped her children lift their sights to the horizon beyond the metaphorical haystack.

President Gordon B. Hinckley emphasized: "It is not enough simply to provide food and shelter for the physical being. There is an equal responsibility to provide nourishment and direction to the spirit and the mind and the heart." [^7] As we look at ways to stimulate learning in the home, it is important to recognize that we can't start too early. The opportunities for learning are there whatever our circumstances. The need is obvious, the implications are eternal, and the home is the best place for us to begin.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Relief Society Handbook (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1988), 2; emphasis added.
[^2] My eyes have been opened by this experience to note how often the scriptures talk about administering to the wants of the poor. See, for example, Mosiah 4:26; Mosiah 18:27Â29; Alma 35:9; D&C 42:33; D&C 84:112.
[^3] Emily Dickinson, "There Is No Frigate like a Book," Modern American Poetry, ed. Louis Untermeyer (New York: Harcourt, Brace, World, 1964), 97.
[^4] Gregory Stock, The Kids' Book of Questions (New York City: Workman Publishing, 1988), 56, 144.
[^5] John Marks, "The American Uncivil Wars," U.S. News and World Report (22 April 1996): 71.
[^6] Ibid., 72.
[^7] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Bring Up a Child in the Way He Should Go," Ensign, November 1993, 59.
