Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

LOOK TO THE WANTS

Carol Lee Hawkins

Carol Lee Hawkins has served as chair of the women's conference at Brigham Young University and is a member of the Relief Society General Board. She directs special projects in the David O. McKay School of Education at BYU. She has lived in various parts of the world with her anthropologist husband, John P. Hawkins, and their four children.

Not long ago a Relief Society assignment took me to visit a sister in her home to learn who she was, what her circumstances were, what her challenges and needs were, and what she wanted in life. It was a fairly typical visit for any Relief Society president or counselor, visiting teacher, just plain friend, or family member. As I drove up to this sister's home, I felt a bit uneasy being in an unfamiliar neighborhood. Next door, music was blaring and teenagers were shouting. In the driveway stood a rusty car with a flat tire. The front lawn displayed numerous bald spots. I saw no evidence of shrubs or flowers. A single dented pop can served as a bird feeder. The paint on the front door was chipped. By the time I reached that front door, in my mind I had quieted the noisy teenaged neighbors, repaired the car, reseeded the lawn, chased away the birds, and redecorated the front porch. My list of things that needed doing around this house grew by the second. I worried about this sister's visiting teachers; I hoped that they wouldn't be completely overwhelmed with the number of things that needed to be repaired and refurbished. What a job they had on their hands!

A moment later I was greeted by a well-groomed child with obvious severe physical and mental disabilities. Her smile was broad, though her words were unintelligible, and her gesture welcomed me into her home. A brother and two sisters joined her. "Have a seat. Mom will be right with you," the little boy said. I glanced around the room. The only furnishings were a sofa and a bookshelf. On the wall hung a family photo and a picture of the Savior. The bookshelf was crowded with numerous books, Church magazines, and five sets of scriptures.

In a few moments the mother came out and greeted me warmly. I relaxed and began my interview. I had in mind a list of suggested questions. "Tell me about your life," I began, "your family, your conversion to the Church." Out poured an incredible story of faith and gratitude for a Father in Heaven who loved her and her family. Tucked in between the lines of thanks were tidbits that wove a story of poverty, a struggle to gain an education, the birth of a severely handicapped child, and a husband who had recently left her.

In light of this, I worried about asking the final questions: "What are your challenges? Your problems? Your needs?" I feared the list would be overwhelming. She replied simply, "The only thing I need and want is to have more time with my children. They are the most precious thing I have, and the greatest gift I can give them—especially right now—is my love and my time."

Her answer took my breath away. Here was a woman of enormous faith with a peace and happiness not dependent on temporal circumstances. The list of what I thought this sister needed was long, detailed, and very specific. Just by walking to the front door, I had compiled an enormous mental to-do list based on my own cultural biases, values, and assumptions. How grateful I am that my assignment was to listen, to interview and ask questions.

I have reflected over and over on this experience. Was exploring the needs of this sister an easy process? Not for me, it wasn't. The process forced me to discover another's strength and confront some of my own deficiencies. When the Relief Society was first organized in Nauvoo in 1842, the Prophet Joseph Smith said that its purpose was to help "in looking to the wants of the poor—searching after the objects of charity, and in administering to their wants." [^1] I had been busy assessing needs—as defined by myself—when I should have been discovering wants. [^2]

As I sat on her frayed but serviceable sofa that day, a flood of shame washed over me. I took a good hard look at myself and didn't like what I saw. I found a self riddled with prejudice and biases, a self quick to judge and criticize, a self who viewed the world with too many unimportant and temporal "shoulds" and "oughts." The self I found needed to change; and the sister I had come to help ended up helping me. Through reflection and repentance, I am a different person, a better self because of that experience.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Personal communication with Dlora Dalton, 6 September 1996, in possession of the author.
[^2] At the time of this presentation, I was unaware that Nina had come to Provo for the 1996 BYUÂRelief Society Women's Conference. After my presentation, LaRene Gaunt of the Ensign asked me if the woman I had referred to was the one who had addressed the women's conference earlier that day. I told her I didn't know. The more Sister Gaunt described Nina Bazarskaya to me, the clearer it became that she was indeed the woman my parents had met in Russia. I was able to meet Nina later that day. As soon as I introduced myself, she held open her arms and, weeping, said, "Your parents brought us light when all we had was darkness."
