Various authors, Clothed with Charity: Talks from 1996 Women's Conference ( 1997)

WRITING IS BELIEVING

Marilyn Arnold

Marilyn Arnold, professor emeritus of English, Brigham Young University, has served as dean of graduate studies and as assistant to the president of BYU under Dallin H. Oaks. She is the author of many articles and several books.

One of Moroni's endearing character traits is his very human concern for how latter-day Gentiles would receive the record he and his predecessors had prepared for them. Specifically, he worries that stylistic deficiencies will persuade skeptical Gentiles to dismiss the record out of hand. Moroni takes his concern to the Lord: "Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing. . . . Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words" (Ether 12:23Â25).

Even the first Nephi, powerful and able as he was, had a similar concern: "And now I, Nephi, cannot write all the things which were taught among my people; neither am I mighty in writing, like unto speaking; for when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men" (2 Ne. 33:1).

As these two early prophets see it, those present and spiritually attentive when the Lord speaks through his prophets participate actively in the event. They can be touched simultaneously by the same Spirit that moves the speaker. Centuries down the line, however, cold words on hard metal plates or paper might not enjoy the same reception. I would argue with Moroni; I would insist that he and his predecessors were mighty in writing as well as in speaking and that the Spirit touches their latter-day readers just as it touched their contemporary listeners. But I also know, as do most of you, the discomfort of feeling unequal to a task. I cannot help but think, however, that writing their faith—and more particularly in the case of Moroni and Mormon, writing their revelations and the revelations of others, abridging a record, putting the teachings of the Lord into their own words—greatly enhanced their personal understanding and their faith.

I say this about them because something similar, though on a much reduced scale, to be sure, happened to me. I am no prophet, but I know from personal experience how attempting to understand scripture by writing about it can change one's life for the better, change it infinitely and lastingly.

This is not a new idea. In 1988 noted writer, editor, and educator William Zinsser published Writing to Learn, in which he argues that "writing is a form of thinking, whatever the subject." [^1] "We write," he continues, "to find out what we know and what we want to say. I thought how often as a writer I had made clear to myself some subject I had previously known nothing about by just putting one sentence after another—by reasoning my way in sequential steps to its meaning. I thought of how often the act of writing even the simplest document—a letter, for instance—had clarified my half-formed ideas. Writing and thinking and learning were the same process." [^2] In fact, writing is simply "thinking on paper." [^3]

Zinsser summarizes his position this way: "Finally, in the national furor over 'why Johnny can't write,' let's not forget to ask why Johnny also can't learn. The two are connected. Writing organizes and clarifies our thoughts. Writing is how we think our way into a subject and make it our own. Writing enables us to find out what we know—and what we don't know—about whatever we're trying to learn. Putting an idea into written words is like defrosting the windshield: The idea, so vague out there in the murk, slowly begins to gather itself into a sensible shape. Whatever we write—a memo, a letter, a note to the baby-sitter—all of us know this moment of finding out what we really want to say by trying in writing to say it." [^4]

Very likely all of us have made notes in the margins of our scriptures, to capture some insight, to remind us next time around of what we thought, or what someone else said. We may have gone beyond that, writing about an insight for a talk or a lesson, perhaps. Some of us may have made journal entries exploring certain scriptural passages. Others may even have written about scripture for an article or a book. In this essay I intend to describe what happened to me when I moved beyond simply reading scripture to writing about it. I hope, thereby, to plant a seed in your minds that will expand into an irrepressible desire to reach new understandings and to reach them by writing about scripture. I hope you will begin honing your thinking by making good notes in your journals about scriptural passages, deepening your belief by including scriptural insights in your letters to friends and family, and sealing your testimony by shaping your thoughts to the Lord's words.

The story behind this essay begins perhaps ten years ago, when I was prompted by President Ezra Taft Benson's urgings to reread the Book of Mormon. Only this time, I wanted my reading to be more than a mechanical, X-number-of-pages-per-day thing. Up to then, though I was a loyal and active believer, my adult life had been focused on a career. As an English teacher at Brigham Young University, I naturally studied and wrote, but most of it centered on the secular literature I taught. Not that that was bad; people do have to earn a living, and working with literature is a lovely way to do it. It was simply too one-sided. I decided that it was high time I take whatever gifts the Lord had given me, combine them with the training he blessedly assisted me to acquire, and use them in the study of scripture. More than that, I was fired through with a new desire to turn those same gifts and acquired abilities to service in the kingdom.

The two desires merged into one as I began to study the Book of Mormon with new eyes, or more accurately, with an eye single to someone's glory besides my own. By the time I was midway through, the book had gripped me with such force that I felt very nearly consumed by it. I wanted to be with the Book of Mormon all the time; I hated to leave it for other things. I know, too, that I spent more time on my knees in those days than ever before. And in that process, I learned what it meant to submit my heretofore sometimes careless and stubborn will to the Lord's will. As I reread Alma's discourse describing the great change of heart that must happen for each of us, I wanted that more than I wanted any other earthly necessity or pleasure. Maybe for the first time in my life, I brought to the Father a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And in doing so, I felt the burden of countless mistakes, sins, and weaknesses lifted from me—and knew his love in a way I had never known it before.

It is a highly personal thing, this rebirth of the self as a spiritual child of Christ (see Moro. 7:19), and it is not easy for me to talk about. I only regret that I was so long in coming to it. In conjunction with this rebirth, or true conversion, came another desire: to write about the Book of Mormon. It seemed the only thing I could do, the only thing I wanted to do, the only gift I might somehow return to him who had so blessed me. It was more than a wish, more even than a strong desire. It nagged at me and gave me no peace. And so, I turned from Moro. 10 back to 1 Ne. 1 and started again. But this time I began trying to write as I read, to understand, to formulate distinct perceptions about the narrative and its teachings and people.

I thought that if I had any hope of creating a worthwhile manuscript, I ought to try to make a focused work of it—center on a theme or themes, trace an idea, follow a defined course. Though it sounded like a workable plan, I seemed to get nowhere. The Book of Mormon resisted me; and finally, I wound up simply writing about the books, one by one, from Nephi to Moroni. As I did that, I came to understand why I had to do it that way. I was not a Book of Mormon scholar, I had not spent my life in deep study of it, I had not read extensively in the work of scriptural scholars. I could come to know the Book of Mormon—to make it mine—only by writing about it chapter by chapter.

Struggling to put insight into words—and sometimes just working to get the narrative straight once the multiple complications entered—was the process that gave the book to me. It was in that struggle, to do all I could to understand, that the Spirit taught me as never before. I had previously been aided in the preparation of lessons or talks; I would not want to devalue those precious experiences. But this was different. Always before, the task was defined and had limits—usually time limits. And once the lesson or talk was over, the insight was shelved and largely forgotten. It never became part of a larger whole, was never assimilated into a meaningful design.

Now, however, the study had a larger purpose, and the idea could not simply be a jotted note. The idea had to be in complete sentences, submitted to the rigors of purposefully written language: it had to be precise, it had to make sense, it had to be true to the text. It seemed that I could discover what I really thought about a passage only by framing written language to convey it. At times meanings eluded me. But there were other times—only a few—when the Spirit was so strong that the words seemed to be placed in my mind, phrase by phrase. And those moments were so lovely that the tears flowed along with the words.

Another thing happened in this process. Not only did I come to know the book as the undeniable truth, as the greatest text I have ever encountered, as the most authentic record ever published, but I also came to love the doctrine. It grew to be so sweet to me that I began to hunger for it. I saw value in every part and aspect of the Book of Mormon, but the doctrinal discourses thrilled me in a way that I would not otherwise have thought possible. Coming to grips in writing with some of the doctrinal complexities was the most difficult part of the work, but it was the part I liked most—perhaps because of how much I learned as I labored to put the prophets' and the Lord's teachings into my words and to understand beyond the obvious.

The Book of Mormon, and the writing it inspired in me, became incredibly precious. Going to it became the reward I allowed myself after meeting other demands of the day. And then when I could give an entire, glorious day, or even several days, to uninterrupted work with the book, I grew, as Thoreau said, like corn in the night. I have never known such happiness. This phase of the work stretched over several years. And now that the writing is finished, I miss it terribly. There is another problem, too: every time I go to the Book of Mormon, I spot something I missed, I think of something I should have said, I see places where my thinking was shallow or ill- conceived. That is the way with scripture. Because we learn line upon line, precept upon precept, we can never be finished with it. As we change or need new instruction in our personal lives, scripture rises to meet our earnest inquiry, our changing needs, our growing capacity to understand.

Good as reading scripture is, writing about scripture is better. Let me just share a few insights I gained from putting my thoughts into black words on white paper. I'll begin with an obvious example, one of the most quoted sentences in Mormondom, from 2 Ne. 2:25: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." Now, taken by itself, that passage does indeed speak truth and offer hope. But perhaps like me, you have been inclined to isolate such passages, lift them from context to make a particular point—in this case, to suggest that the Lord wishes us to live joyfully. He does, yes, but that is not the only point of the discourse from which this passage is taken. What writing about the Book of Mormon compelled me to do was to consider every passage in context. I simply could not move through the book, one sentence at a time, without considering the surrounding territory of thought.

The passage takes on added significance when we examine where and when it occurs and what else is being said. Here, an aged Lehi is pronouncing a patriarchal blessing upon his son Jacob, a son born in the wilderness, who never knew the comforts and amenities of his father's home in Jerusalem. Moreover, as a tender youngster, Jacob experienced the deprivations of wilderness living and the demands and dangers of a long sea journey. Furthermore, on that journey he witnessed the murderous ill-treatment of one brother at the hands of two other brothers—and the severe suffering of his parents because of it. Lehi begins his blessing by acknowledging what Jacob has suffered: "And now, Jacob, I speak unto you: Thou art my first-born in the days of my tribulation in the wilderness. And behold, in thy childhood thou hast suffered afflictions and much sorrow, because of the rudeness of thy brethren. Nevertheless, Jacob, my first-born in the wilderness, thou knowest the greatness of God; and he shall consecrate thine afflictions for thy gain" (2 Ne. 2:1Â2).

Lehi then moves toward his principal subject, the necessity for opposition in all things, a subject Jacob had experienced in a highly personal way. The Fall and its broken law, which require punishment, Lehi explains, stand in opposition to the Savior's atonement, which answers the law's requirement. It is the principle of opposition that makes agency operative and mercy necessary. We could scarcely exercise agency—choice—Lehi declares, unless we had opposing alternatives to choose between. Lehi expands on the principle, explaining its broad application and the necessity of the transgression and Fall. The pattern was established in the Garden with Adam and Eve. Without the Fall "they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Ne. 2:23). This passage precedes (with one short comment between) and generates the familiar one: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy."

The context for that well-known passage, then, is the doctrine of opposition, in conjunction with the doctrine of agency. Without opposition, there would have been, first, no fall and no mortal experience. And second, there would have been no redemption and thus no reason for joy, nor any capacity for joy, nor any way to choose joy. Even as I revisit this passage and write about it again, I see beyond what I saw when I put my book to bed. And now I want to go back and rewrite that section.

Let me give you another example of something that might not have occurred to me if I had not been writing about the Book of Mormon. The text is so dense that it is difficult to keep details straight. Writing about them tends to plant them in the mind a little more solidly; it enables us sometimes to see echoes of earlier situations and circumstances in later events. One such "echo" experience occurred for me as I was writing about the brother of Jared's requests to the Lord for help with the eight vessels he was instructed to build. We are all familiar with that story, and we have rightly taken a valuable lesson from it: we are to pray for guidance, but we are also to exercise our own ingenuity in solving problems rather than simply presenting them to the Lord (or to our leaders) for solution.

Jared's brother had previously built some "practice" barges for local maneuvers and excursions before undertaking the long voyage to the new world. And when the work on the long-distance vessels was completed, he took three problems to the Lord: how were the vessels to be lighted, ventilated, and steered? The Lord readily answered the questions about ventilation and steering, but he required his prophet to solve, at least partially, the lighting problem himself: "What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels?" (Ether 2:23). Two verses later, the Lord asks the brother of Jared again what he wants Him to do. And, as we know, the prophet comes up with a workable scheme.

As I wrote about this, I recalled Nephi's response when the Lord similarly commanded him to construct a boat, and I returned to that passage. It is true that Nephi received much instruction from the Lord in building the ship, but Nephi was also prepared to exercise personal initiative in the project from the beginning. We see his initiative and assumption of responsibility even in the manner in which he answers the Lord's first injunction on the matter. Nephi is apparently asleep when the Lord speaks to him, saying, "Arise, and get thee into the mountain. And it came to pass that I arose and went up into the mountain, and cried unto the Lord" (1 Ne. 17:7). Nephi did not merely take himself to the mountain and then passively wait for instruction. Rather, he made earnest, and probably immediate, supplication—he "cried unto the Lord." In answer to Nephi's prayer to know his will, the Lord tells him to build a ship. Nephi's response is instructive. He is clearly ready to apply himself and all his capacities to the task. He does not ask the Lord to provide tools and building materials for him. Rather, he asks, "Lord, whither shall I go that I may find ore to molten, that I may make tools to construct the ship after the manner which thou has shown unto me?" (1 Ne. 17:9). He asks for guidance in finding ore so that he can make tools. The brother of Jared became one of the greatest prophets ever to walk the earth, but at this juncture in their somewhat parallel ministries, it appears that Nephi already knew something his early predecessor had not yet learned.

Let me share one more quick example of how writing about the Book of Mormon opened my eyes to new understanding. This one has to do, in particular, with awareness of language. Recall Lehi's marvelous vision of the tree of life, and remember also that Nephi, in answer to his great desire, was blessed with a vision of the tree—and of other things, too. Lehi's book was lost, but Nephi, fortunately, had included in his record on the small plates an account of his father's vision. He tells what his father said, representing Lehi's words: "And it came to pass that I beheld a tree, whose fruit was desirable to make one happy" (1 Ne. 8:10). And that is all Nephi records of Lehi's description of the tree.

As I was writing a little later about Nephi's vision, I was struck by the difference in tone—in energy, really—between the two passages. The one I just read was Nephi's reporting of a secondhand experience—in rather plain, straightforward terms. But there is a marked difference when Nephi is telling his own firsthand account of a similar experience. Note the lilt of the language, the joy that leaps off the page: "And it came to pass that the Spirit said unto me: Look! And I looked and beheld a tree; and it was like unto the tree which my father had seen; and the beauty thereof was far beyond, yea, exceeding of all beauty; and the whiteness thereof did exceed the whiteness of the driven snow" (1 Ne. 11:8).

By the same token, I notice now (for the first time) that Nephi does not say whether or not he tasted of the fruit. It is the tasting of the fruit that spurs Lehi to eloquence: "And it came to pass that I did go forth and partake of the fruit thereof; and I beheld that it was most sweet, above all that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen" (1 Ne. 8:11).

Let me emphasize that it is not necessary to write an article or a book, or even to prepare a lesson or a talk, to come to scripture with new eyes by writing about it. Thoughts given expression in a journal or a letter can do the same thing for us. I don't do this nearly often enough, but occasionally I overcome inertia and write a thought triggered by scripture reading in my sporadically kept journal. Often, such thoughts occur when I am studying in preparation for a Relief Society lesson. Let me take an excerpt from my unpolished scribblings dated "6/25/95—Monday" and "6/29/95":

"Started preparing my next R.S. lesson last night—subject: the fast. . . . As I was reading D&C 59:9Â19—a wonderful passage—vs. 13Â14 seemed to introduce a new dimension to the concept of fasting. Curiously, v. 13 speaks of preparing food in such a way ("with singleness of heart") "that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full." We generally think of fasting as abstinence from food, so why would the passage give instructions for food preparation? The footnote suggests something that had not occurred to me. The note attached to the word "fasting" in v. 13 says, "IE hungering and thirsting after righteousness." Fasting, then, is equated with spiritual hungering. . . . I take it to mean that we are to reach beyond physical hungering entirely and transform that physical sensation (of desiring or requiring food) into a spiritual one. After all, how could we know what hungering and thirsting after righteousness means unless we have something to associate it with?

"Since the subject of D&C 59, from v. 9 on, is the Sabbath Day, not specifically 'fast day,' the text implies that we should "fast," that is, spiritually hunger, every Sabbath day, not just one Sabbath a month—and, in fact, 'all days and at all times' (v. 11). Our Sabbath focus should be not on filling our stomachs—nor on any 'other thing'—but on filling our souls. And we can't stuff spiritual food into a soul that is not hungry. Unless the soul is hungry, it will turn away from spiritual feasts just as a full stomach has no interest in temporal food. . . .

"The focus of the Relief Society lesson, then, the only one I can settle on and teach, it appears, is this: Fasting is much more than abstinence from food and drink, though it may begin there, as a preparation for true observance of the principle of fasting, that is, of hungering and thirsting after righteousness."

If I had not written these ideas down as I worked with the pertinent scriptures, they would be as lost to me as countless other insights—surviving only in some virtually irretrievable state among a file of scratched notes from long-ago lessons. These entries I had made less than a year ago, and already I had forgotten them. But, because I wrote them down, I have now been able to repossess them and then share them with you. Whatever we write down can be recaptured. What we do not write is likely to be lost.

I have found, too, that these moments of insight, when scripture seems to open a door in my mind, when I am being taught by the light of Christ, or by the Holy Ghost, are the most joyful moments of my life. None of us lives on this kind of spiritual high continually. We have exceptional moments, and then we lose them in the busyness of everyday life. But if we formulate them in writing, we have not lost them. We can retrieve those moments and be lifted and renewed by them. They reinforce testimony and remind us of what we thought and felt when truth touched us on the shoulder. It is not enough simply to note that we experienced insight and joy. We must at the very moment write out, give words to, the insight itself. Otherwise, we will be retrieving only the confetti and empty plates of the celebration.

Let me suggest, also, to anyone who does not yet have an abiding testimony of the power and wonder and truth of the Book of Mormon, or any book of scripture—writing about it is a surefire way to get one. Encourage your children or grandchildren to work out the meanings of scriptural passages in their journals and share them with you or with the family. Knowing that they intend to write about what they are reading will change the way your children read and study scripture. It will also change the way you read scripture. Your reading will, I think, become more deep and attentive and less mechanical and superficial. Your appreciation will grow, and your life will take on new purpose.

To illustrate, let me share one more extract from my journal, this one recorded last November 28: "I just finished the final revision of the last chapter of my Book of Mormon manuscript. I will send it off to the publisher tomorrow. As I read the conclusion, I was overwhelmed with gratitude for the great blessing the work has been in my life. . . . It is easy to see why Joseph Smith, having received this book through the power of the Spirit, endured everything for his faith. He must have been so full of it, and his knowledge of the truth of it, that he felt like shouting 'Hosanna!' every day of his life."

Let me conclude with my witness that the Book of Mormon "is indeed a holy work, priceless, saving, comforting, lifting, and immeasurably dear. To read it is to find a still center of truth in a world spinning with confusion. To study it is to be blessed by the choicest gifts of heaven. To write about it has been to discover the illuminated chambers in my own soul. Sweet, indeed, is the word. And none sweeter than this word." [^5]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] William Zinsser, Writing to Learn (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1988), vii.
[^2] Ibid., ix.
[^3] Ibid., 11.
[^4] Ibid., 16.
[^5] John Marks, "The American Uncivil Wars," U.S. News and World Report (22 April 1996): 71.
