Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Preface

When the publication of the Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia was commenced in 1901, it was the intention to confine the scope of its contents to the Nineteenth Century, but, as the Church grew and its organizations and members multiplied, it was concluded to cover the first hundred years of the existence of the Church, beginning with 1830 and ending with 1930. With this object in view, two other volumes of the Encyclopedia were published, Vol. 2 in 1914 and Vol. 3 in 1920.

In the mean time the collection of life stories of leading men and women in the Church had been continued until there were upwards of 15,000 of these sketches on hand. This included at least one-half of the Bishops and other presiding officers who had figured prominently in the affairs of the Church both in the organized Stakes of Zion and in the missionary fields. Hence, with the approval of the First Presidency of the Church, it was decided to publish one more volume, in order to make the circle of information more nearly complete, and with this aim in mind the present book, Volume IV of the L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia, is now being issued.

Many of the brief outlines contained in Volume IV are based on more detailed manuscript biographies which, if published in full, would at least fill a dozen books. As it is, the four volumes now published might consistently be named a "Who's Who" in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, thus paraphrasing the "Who's Who in America" in a general way.

When a copy of Volume IV shall have been placed in every stake, ward, mission and district throughout the Church, considering the fact that only 2,000 copies are printed, there will only be books enough left to accommodate those who possess Volumes I, II, and III. A carefully prepared index, attached to Volume IV, will enable the student to find anything contained in all the four books of the Encyclopedia.

To all who have given us encouragement, or rendered assistance in our onerous labors of love, covering nearly a lifetime, we render sincere thanks, and it is now our pleasure to dedicate the Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia in its entirety to all students of Church History and Genealogy.

ANDREW JENSON.
