Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Anderson, John Forbes

Anderson, John Forbes, Patriarch in the Alberta Stake, Alberta, Canada, was born April 4, 1863, in Woodside, Aberdeenshire, Scotland, the son of John Anderson and Catherine Smith. Being of a religious turn of mind, he attended Sunday school in the presbyterian Church, to which his parents belonged; and becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized by Hugh Findlay, Jan. 3, 1879. Soon afterwards he was ordained a Teacher and commenced his labors in that capacity among the Saints in the Aberdeen Branch. In 1880 he was ordained a Priest, after which he did considerable local missionary labor which he enjoyed. In the meantime, his mother and the rest of the family, except the father, joined the Church and emigrated to Zion. Brother Anderson himself emigrated to Utah in 1882, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Nevada," and on Oct. 9, 1882, he married Mary Ann Ross, a girl who had been driven away from her home in Scotland because of her acceptance of the gospel. For a number of years Elder Anderson was engaged in quarrying stone for the Salt Lake Temple in Little Cottonwood Canyon. While residing in Spanish Fork, Utah Co., Utah, he took an active part in Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. work. He was ordained a Seventy by Andrew Ferguson and became a member of the 50th quorum of Seventy. In 1889 he moved to Scofield, Carbon Co., Utah, where he acted as president of Y. M. M. I. A. and as a Sunday school and ward teacher. There also he had a narrow escape from being killed in a mining explosion Recording his experiences in life, he refers to a number of other instances where his life was saved almost in a miraculous manner. His next move was to Grass Valley, Sevier Co., Utah, where he spent eight years endeavoring to build up pioneer settlements. At Burrville he was ordained a High Priest and acted as a counselor to Bishop Henry Teeples of the Burrville Ward. Later he succeeded Bishop Teeples as Bishop of said ward, being ordained a Bishop by Anthon H. Lund, Dec. 29, 1900. He held that position until he left for Canada in 1902. At Raymond, Alberta, Canada, he was employed by the Knight Sugar Company to lay the foundation for the Raymond Flouring Mill, and later of the Knight Sugar Factory. When the Taylor Stake was organized Sept. 2, 1903, he was chosen to preside as Bishop of the Raymond Ward, which labor he enjoyed immensely. When the Raymond Ward was divided into two wards in 1912, Brother Anderson was chosen as Bishop of the Raymond 1st Ward. This position he held until March, 1915, when he moved to Cardston, where he took an active part in the erection of the Temple, as a mechanic. In 1915 he was privileged as the master mason to lay the cornerstone of the Alberta Temple. In 1919-1920 he filled a mission to the Northern States, laboring principally in the City of Council Bluffs, Iowa. After returning home he was set apart by Apostle George F. Richards to act as one of the presidency of the High Priests quorum, May 9, 1921; and on May 3, 1923, Apostle Richards ordained him a patriarch. In 1923 he was called and set apart, together with his wife, as ordinance workers in the Alberta Temple. Brother Anderson finishes his narrative by saying, "This is the greatest calling which has come to us, and which we still enjoy, hoping that we may die in the harness and receive a heavenly welcome from our many friends in whose behalf we have labored."
