Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Andrus, Joseph Boyes

Andrus, Joseph Boyes, fifth Bishop of Marion Ward, Summit Co., Utah, was born March 6, 1885, at Big Cottonwood, Salt Lake Co., Utah, the son of Milo Andrus, jun., and Elizabeth Boyes. He was raised in Big Cottonwood and there received a common school education; later he became a student at the L. D. S. University in Salt Lake City and later at the University of Utah. He was baptized March 30, 1893, by William Bowthorpe and confirmed by Santa Ana Casto. From his earliest youth he was taught the principles of the gospel and became an active Church worker. Thus, he was ordained a Deacon, March 15, 1897, by Milo Andrus, jun.; a Teacher, Nov. 10, 1902. by Milo Andrus, jun.; a Priest, July 13, 1903, by Santa Ana Casto, and an Elder, Feb. 3, 1908, by Ensign Woodruff. While advancing in the order of the Priesthood, he acted as counselor in the presidency of a Deacons quorum and was also president of a Teachers quorum and a counselor in an Elders quorum in Big Cottonwood. He also took an active part in M. I. A. work. In 1915 he moved to Marion, Summit Co., Utah, where he continued his Church activities as award teacher, Sunday school teacher, etc, In 1908 (Dec. 23rd) he married Harriet E. Stevenson in the Salt Lake Temple. This marriage has been blessed with six children, namely, Joseph Wesley, Theron Roscoe, Millard Arwin, ,Ida, Iona and Ruth. Bro. Andrus was ordained a High Priest June 25, 1916, by Moses W. Taylor and ordained a Bishop Aug. 6, 1916, by James E. Talmage and set apart to preside over the Marion Ward. This position he still holds. He is a farmer and stockraiser by avocation and among the numerous positions he has filled in a civil capacity may be mentioned his service since 1918 as a member of the South Summit School Board. Bishop Andrus is known universally for his faithfulness as a Church member, his compliance with the counsels of the authorities of the Church and his characteristics as an honest, upright citizen.
