Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Andrus, Millard Burgess

Andrus, Millard Burgess, sixth Bishop of the Draper Ward, Jordan Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, was born Aug. 22, 1879, at Draper, Salt Lake Co., Utah, the son of Millard Andrus and Minerva Deseret Terry. He was raised in Draper, where he received a common school education, and was later a student for two years in the University of Utah. After being baptized by Joseph M. Smith, when eight years old, he was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher and Priest. He acted as president of a Deacons quorum and later as president of a Teachers quorum. After being ordained an Elder by John Heber Garfield at Draper, March 14, 1901, he acted as first counselor to John H. Garfield in the presidency of the 5th quorum of Elders in the Jordan Stake. He was ordained a Seventy March 31, 1903, by Rulon S. Wells and filled a mission to Switzerland, Austria and Germany in 1903-1905. On this mission he had many interesting experiences and was subject to considerable persecution. He was one of the first L. D. S. missionaries in the province of Anholt in Prussia and presided afterwards over a branch of the Church at Gera in the province of Reuss. After his return home, he acted as a home missionary in the Jordan Stake and as second assistant stake superintendent of Y. M. M. I. A. in the Jordan Stake. Later he acted as first counselor in the same stake organization. After that he presided over the Draper Sunday school four years, and for a number of years served as a president of the 73rd Quorum of Seventy. Being ordained a High Priest Sept. 13, 1914, by Orson F. Whitney, he acted as first counselor to Bishop Peter C. Rasmussen. After filling that position four years, he was ordained a Bishop by Orson F. Whitney, Oct. 11, 1918, and set apart to preside over the Draper Ward, which position he occupied until May 28, 1927. In 1908 (Sept. 3rd), he married Mary Mickelsen in the Salt Lake Temple. This union has been blessed with four children, namely, Nell Millard (deceased), Bertha Minerva, Mary Edith (deceased), and Belva. Bishop Andrus is a farmer by occupation, and he has filled a number of civil and political offices. Thus he served as a member of the Utah State Legislature in 1923-1924, chairman of the Republican Club at Draper and a member of the Salt Lake County Civic Club. Bishop Andrus is a man of affairs and takes a leading part in all matters pertaining to the progress and benefit of the community in which he resides. While on his mission in Germany he acquired the German language to a remarkable degree of perfection.
