Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Ashton, Edward Morris

Ashton, Edward Morris, president of the High Priests Quorum of Liberty Stake, was born Jan. 12, 1879, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Edward T. Ashton and Effie Morris. He was baptized when 8 years of age by Wm. Binder and later was ordained to the offices of Deacon, Teacher and Priest. He was ordained a Seventy in 1898, when only 19 years of age by George Albert Smith and set apart for a mission to Germany, where he served with great fidelity for over three years. In 1902 (Oct. 15th), Bro. Ashton married Louise Badger (daughter of Rodney C. Badger and Louise Ashby), to whom were born seven children, namely, Morris B., Virginia L., Beatrice, Richard E., David B., John H., and Mary Ruth.

On Oct. 1, 1911, Elder Ashton was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Apostle Anthon H. Lund and get apart to preside over the 31st Ward of the Liberty Stake. When this ward was divided and the east part organized as the Le Grand Ward, Bishop Ashton became Bishop of that ward, to which position he was set apart Sept. 7, 1913. In 1924 the east part of the Le Grand Ward was organized as the Yale Ward and Bishop Ashton was called to preside over that ward, to which position he was set apart Feb. 17, 1924. He served in this capacity until he had supervised the erection of a fine, modern chapel, when he was chosen as a member of the High Council of the Liberty Stake, and in 1930 became president of the High Priests quorum of the Liberty Stake.

In a civil capacity Bishop Ashton has acted as president of the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce, member of the U. S. Chamber of Commerce, president of the Salt Lake Real Estate Board, of the Utah State Real Estate Board and of the Utah Mortgage Banks Association; also as vice-president of the National Real Estate Board and member of the Salt Lake City Planning Commission. He is primarily interested in the development of the city's better residential districts and is vice-president of Ashton-Jenkins Company, manager of a large mortgage business in connection therewith and in the same connection, correspondent of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States and vice-president of four local building and loan societies. He was at one time a director of the Utah Savings and Trust Company Bank. Thus it will be seen that Bishop Ashton is an asset to the community in commercial and civil capacities, while giving liberally of his time and talents to his ecclesiastical duties. Bishop Ashton has a pleasing personality and commands the respect of his associates everywhere.
