Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Asmussen, Carl Christian

Asmussen, Carl Christian, a prominent Elder in the Church was born May 20, 1825, at Kjoge, Sjaelland, Denmark, the son of Carl Paulus Christian Asmussen and Petra Elizabeth Henrietta Johansen. He received his education in Denmark where he served his apprenticeship as a watchmaker. Later he established himself as a watchmaker in Germany and also in Holland. Still later he sought his fortunes in Australia, where he established himself as a successful watchmaker and jeweler, and acquired considerable wealth. Later, while sojourning in England, he became a convert to "Mormonism" and was baptized Sept. 1, 1864, by Elisha H. Groves. In 1866-1868, after being ordained an Elder, he filled a mission to New Zealand. Later he was ordained a Seventy by Joseph Young, and on May 1, 1897, he was ordained a High Priest by Thomas Duce. In 1865 he located in Salt Lake City where he carried on a successful watchmaking and jewelry business on Main Street. He filled a mission to Scandinavia in 1879-1880, during which he presided over the Copenhagen Conference. In 1886, while residing in Salt Lake City, he changed his name from Asmussen to Amussen. Investing in real estate in Logan, Utah, in 1890, he located there with his family where he resided until the time of his death which occurred at Logan Oct. 29, 1902.

Elder Asmussen married three wives by whom he raised a large family of children. His first wife was Anna Katrine Nielsen, a native of Saeby, Denmark; his second wife was Martha M. Smith, who was married to him Nov. 6, 1884, and his third wife was Barbara M. Smith, whom he married Oct. 4, 1885.

Elder Asmussen was a successful business man, and at the time of his demise was the owner of several business blocks in Logan and considerable property, also, in Salt Lake City. He was a man of few words, but every move he made of a practical nature was carefully considered and planned; hence the success of his life. Ever since he became a convert to the restored gospel, he gave his first allegiance to the Lord, his Church and his people and became known by his liberality and self sacrifice on many occasions. Among those with whom he became well acquainted he gained a reputation as an honest and reliable man who could be trusted under all circumstances to do that which was right. Both at home and abroad he gained many friends and had the confidence and good will of his associates. Most of his children are faithful members of the Church to which he gave his allegiance and among people of his own nationality he was widely known and respected.
