Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Borgeson, Anders (Andrew)

Borgeson, Anders (Andrew), an active Elder in the Church, was born June 20, 1832, In Dahlsland, Bralanda socken (parish), Elfsborglan, Sweden, the son of Borge Pehrson and his wife Maria Jansson. He was one of a family of five children, his brothers and sisters being Joseph, Anna Katrine, Martha Kaisa and Britta Maria. His father died when he was about three years old and his mother passed away about five years later. This caused the family to be scattered among relatives and friends, and his uncle (his mother's brother) took charge of the estate and little Anders lived in his family. During his boyhood days he suffered many hardships, being compelled to herd sheep in the fields until late fall and again in early spring, barefooted. While in the fields in this capacity he often earned a few pennies by opening and closing gates as members of the nobility crossed the estate in carriages. Later, he was employed as a sailor on a cargo ship on Lake Vennern.

In 1857, Anders Borgeson married Maria Olsson. They were both members of the Lutheran Church but becoming converts to the restored gospel they were baptized Aug. 13, 1860, by Sven Rosengren. From the date of his baptism, Bro. Borgeson was a faithful and energetic worker in the Church, first as a local missionary and later as president of the Rastock Branch of the Goteborg Conference in Sweden. Being an ardent missionary he baptized a number of converts, which alarmed the local sectarian ministers, who, in 1862, succeeded in getting him imprisoned for preaching. He served a term of 28 days in the Vennersborg prison on a bread and water diet. Here he was denied the usual privilege of being given regular prison fare every fifth day and the Saints feared for his health-but he was none the worse for his experience. Shortly afterwards he and his wife left Sweden with a company of L. D. S. emigrants bound for Utah. Crossing the North Sea in a steamer they proceeded by rail to Liverpool, England, where they boarded the good ship "B. S. Kimball" for New York, where they arrived June 15, 1863; they crossed the plains and mountains in Capt. John F. Sanders' ox train, which arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 5, 1863. Locating for a time in Provo, Utah County, Utah, Bro. Borgeson learned to make molasses. In January, 1864, he and wife moved to Santaquin, also in Utah County, where he secured some farming land, built a house and constructed a ditch over half a mile in length to bring water to his property. He also constructed a road to one of the canyons, in order to procure timber and wood; this canyon is still known as Borgeson Canyon. Bro. Borgeson built and operated the first molasses mill in Santaquin and constructed one of the first hand-looms in that locality; he also made adobies and farmed quite successfully.

Being active in the Church, Bro. Borgeson was ordained a Seventy Feb. 27, 1887, by Roger Openshaw and a High Priest, Dec. 11, 1889, by David John. For several years he acted as second counselor in the Scandinavian organization at Santaquin and served in the Black Hawk Indian war. He also acted for a long time as head water-master for the Summit Creek Irrigation Company.

Sister Maria Borgeson died in 1872 and on April 14, 1873, Bro. Borgeson married Nicoline Olsen, a recently arrived convert from Norway, the ceremony being performed in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. Eleven children were born to them in a home where the principles of the gospel were taught and practiced. Bro. Borgeson died at Santaquin March 21, 1902, loved and respected by all who knew him.
