Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Callis, Charles A.PPCallis, Charles A.

Callis, Charles A.PPCallis, Charles A., president of the Southern States Mission from August, 1908, until February, 1934, was born May 4, 1865, in Dublin, Ireland, the son of John Callis and Susannah Charlotte Quilliam.

Callis, Charles A.PPHis father died when he was a boy and his widowed mother moved to Liverpool, England, where Charles was baptized when eight years old. The family came to Utah in October, 1875, and resided in Bountiful, Utah, for about two years, then moved to Centerville, Utah, and later moved to Coalville, Utah. During the winter of 1892-1893, Brother Callis devoted all his time for five months filling a mission in Wyoming, which at that time was a part of Summit Stake. In 1893 Elder Callis was called on a mission to England, and while there acted as president of the Irish Conference. On his return to Utah he was appointed stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. of Summit Stake and acted in that capacity for nine years. On September, 1902, he married Grace E. Pack, a daughter of Ward E. Pack; eight children are the fruit of this union. In 1906 Elder Callis and his wife were called on a mission to the Southern States. They labored in Florida, over which conference Elder Callis presided. In August, 1908, while he was presiding over the South Carolina Conference, he was appointed to succeed Pres. Benjamin E. Rich as president of the Southern States Mission. Although he had no time to practice law while serving as mission president he was admitted to the Bar in South Carolina and Florida. This gave him prestige and admitted him to circles which otherwise he never could have entered. His wife was president of the Relief Societies in the Southern States for nineteen years. On Oct. 6, 1933, Elder Callis was chosen as one of the Council of the Twelve Apostles and ordained to that office Oct. 14, 1933, by Heber J. Grant. During his residence in Summit County he occupied the following offices respectively: Constable, member of the city council of Coalville, representative to the Utah Legislature, city attorney of Coalville and county attorney of Summit County.
