Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Child, George Newport

Child, George Newport, member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, was born Feb. 11, 1867, at Clover, Tooele County, Utah, the son of John Child and Elizabeth de St. Jeor. By the marriage of his parents was brought about the union of two families whose history shows the embodiment of the finest ideals both of the French and the English peoples. Bro. Child was therefore one of those fortunate persons whose education began as far back as the birth of his grandparents. The Child family moved from Tooele to Utah County when George was six years old. Here he was baptized June 1, 1877, by Jacob Bushman and lived in Lehi until he had reached the age of 40. Here also he received his early training in the Priesthood. Bro. Child passed through all the experiences of pioneer life in Lehi, and his early education also was of the pioneer order, but he made the most of his opportunity and became a great student. After attending the Brigham Young Academy at Provo, he chose teaching as his life's work, in which he was eminently successful. After years of teaching and supervising schools, during which he rose to the highest teaching and supervising positions in his home county, being county superintendent of schools a number of years, but obtained but meagre monetary remuneration, he entered into banking in which he measured up to every requirement made of him. But the lure of teaching drew him back to the field in which he was happiest and in which he was destined to reach the greatest heights obtainable in his state. In 1910-1911 he was chosen to fill the position of supervisor of grammar grades in the schools of Salt Lake City. In this position he won his way through difficulties. But he not only became skilful in diagnosing the ills and weaknesses of a school, but just as expert in applying the needed remedies, and became a master supervisor of instruction. In 1919 he was appointed by Gov. Bamberger, State Superintendent of Public Instruction, which position he held for one year. In 1920 he was chosen as City Superintendent of schools and filled the same with signal success until the day of his death. The record of George N. Child as superintendent of Salt Lake City schools is the crowning accomplishment of his life.

In a Church capacity Bro. Child was ordained successively to the offices of Priest, Elder and High Priest. To the latter office he was ordained by Heber J. Grant and set apart as Stake President of the Y. M. M. I. A. of Alpine Stake. He moved to Salt Lake City in 1911, and was chosen as a member of the General Sunday School Board of the Church. In 1891 (Sept. 23) he married Florence Willis, who was born July 23, 1871, and died Nov. 29, 1905. Six children blessed this marriage, namely, George P., Junius S., Florence A., Mildred E., Margaret A., and Edith. In 1908 (June 3rd) Bro. Child married Julia Alleman, daughter of Benjamin Alleman and Sariah J. Starr. This union resulted in three children, namely, Julia, John A. and Richard H.

Elder Child received a college education at the B. Y. University at Provo, graduating from the normal department and after that attended the University of Utah and graduated with the degree of A. B.

He died July 9, 1932.
