Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Coon, Isaac William

Coon, Isaac William, second counselor in the presidency of the Oquirrh Stake of Zion, was born Aug. 11, 1869, at Grantsville, Tooele Co., Utah, the son of John Coon and Mary Tabitha York. As an infant, he moved with his parents to Salt Lake City, where the family resided until Isaac was nine years old. The family then removed to Santaquin, Utah County, where they lived two years and then settled permanently in Pleasant Green, Salt Lake Co. With the exception of two years spent in Huntsville, Weber County, Isaac has resided in Pleasant Green ever since. He was baptized by John Cottam when eight years old, and, taking an active part in Church affairs from his early youth, he acted successively as a Deacon, Teacher, and Priest. After being ordained an Elder in January, 1896, by Walter Brown, he acted as second counselor to Thomas Turner, president of an Elders' Quorum in the Salt Lake Stake; later he presided over the 10th Quorum of Elders in the Pioneer Stake until he was ordained a Seventy May 14, 1916, by Seymour B. Young. He acted as president of the 92nd Quorum of Seventy about two years. On Nov. 25, 1919, he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Charles W. Penrose and set apart to preside over the Pleasant Green Ward, succeeding Bishop George A. Little. He held that position until June 3, 1923, when he was chosen as a member of the High Council of the Oquirrh Stake, which position he held until Feb. 3, 1929, when he was chosen as second counselor to Harry Edward Sutton, president of the Oquirrh Stake, which position he still occupies. Prior to being chosen as Bishop he acted as assistant superintendent of the Oquirrh Sunday school about three years and later as superintendent of that school for eight years. After that he was chosen as first assistant superintendent of the Pleasant Green Sunday school and later as superintendent of said school, which position he held until he was chosen Bishop of the Pleasant Green Ward. For twenty-four years he was a member of the Social Committee of the Pleasant Green Ward, acting as chairman of said committee ten years.

In 1896 (Jan. 15th) he married Mary Elva Bertoch, daughter of James Bertoch and Ann Cutlift. This marriage was blessed with five children, namely, Elva Marie, Isaac Warren, Vivian Bertoch, Stanley James, and Lilian. His wife died Sept. 5, 1905, and on June 9, 1915, he married Eliza A. Perkins, a widow, who has borne him four children, namely, George William, John Glen, Owen Frederick and Lyle Isabelle. Elder Coon is a man of affairs, who, besides filling so many ecclesiastical positions, has taken an active part in civil affairs and everything pertaining to the welfare of the community in which he has resided.
