Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Aylett, John Argent

Aylett, John Argent, first counselor in the presidency of the East Jordan Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, was born Sept. 28, 1868, at West Jordan, Salt Lake Co., Utah, the son of William Aylett and Hannah Argent. He was raised and educated in the West Jordan Ward and ever since his baptism on June 6, 1878, by James Glover, in West Jordan, he has taken an active part in Church affairs and was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher and Priest. He was ordained an Elder by John A. Egbert, June 6, 1896; a Seventy, June 15, 1898, by Seymour B. Young, and a High Priest and Bishop Nov. 30, 1915, by Francis M. Lyman. He presided as Bishop of the Midvale Ward until May 8, 1927, when the East Jordan Stake of Zion was organized. On that occasion he was released as Bishop of the Midvale Ward and chosen as first counselor to Heber J. Burgon in the presidency of the East Jordan Stake of Zion, a position which he still occupies. Bro. Aylett filled a mission to the Northern States in 1898-1900, laboring principally in Missouri, where he acted as counselor to a conference president. In West Jordan Ward he acted for a number of years as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. After moving to Midvale, he acted as an assistant Sunday school superintendent in the Jordan Stake and later as stake president of the Y. M. M. I. A., which position he held until he was made Bishop. In 1889 (April 27th) he married Martha Ann Egbert of West Jordan in the Salt Lake Temple, which marriage has been blessed with four children, namely, Vera Aleta, John Hollis, Kelvin William and Mattie Lorene. Bro. Aylett, after becoming a resident of Midvale in 1910, acted for several years as mayor of the city of Midvale. Being held in high esteem by his fellow citizens, he has filled many other positions of responsibility in the communities in which he has resided.

After returning from his mission in 1900, he engaged in the flour milling business with the Archibald Gardner Mill, now the West Jordan Milling Company, located in West Jordan Ward on the Bingham Highway, west of the Jordan River. Bro. Aylett has been there continuously since 1900 and has acted as manager of said company for the past 15 years. He has also served as a member of the Jordan School District Board two years and as director of the Midvale State Bank, which position he still holds. For a number of years he labored as a home missionary in the Jordan Stake.
