Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Elggren, Albert John

Elggren, Albert John, 10th Bishop of the Second Ward, Liberty Stake, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born June 29, 1876, in Malad, Oneida County, Idaho, the son of Adolph Frederik Elggren and Johanna C. Samuelson. When two years old he moved with his parents to Salt Lake City and resided first in the 16th Ward. Later he resided in Hooper, Weber County, Utah, where he was raised on a farm, but when his father was called on a mission to Sweden in 1897, the family moved to Salt Lake City, in order to get facilities for the children to get High School and University training. Albert attended the L. D. S. University in Salt Lake City one year, and after that two years in the University of Utah. He was baptized July 1, 1884, by John Cottam and ordained successively to the offices of Teacher and Priest. Being ordained an Elder Sept. 25, 1899, by Edwin F. Parry, he presided over the 4th quorum of Elders in the Salt Lake Stake and later as president of the end quorum of Elders in the Liberty Stake; he also served as an officer in the Y. M. M. I. A., and secretary of the Hooper Ward Sunday School. In July, 1901, he became a resident of the Second Ward in Salt Lake City, having married Vilate Elizabeth Lewis of Richmond, Utah, in the Salt Lake Temple, June 5, 1901. The issue of this marriage are the following children: Albert Lewis, Carl Adolph, Martha, Mary Elnora, John Elmer, Charles Allen, William Harold, Ralph Waldo, Richard Norman, Raymond Wallace and Joseph Earl. Brother Elggren was ordained a High Priest by Bryant S. Hinckley, Jan. 28, 1912, and acted as second counselor to Bishop Heber C. Iverson and later as end counselor to Bishop Henry B. Elder. Still later he acted as 1st counselor to Bishop Elder. On Sept. 25, 1921, he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Rudger Clawson and set apart to preside over the Second Ward, Salt Lake City, which position he held until 1935, when he was honorably released and chosen as a member of the Liberty Stake High Council, being set apart to that office Oct. 28, 1935.

He was for several years an employee in the office of Dr. John R. Park, Superintendent of Public Instruction, and later he was employed in E. F. Hanna's Mercantile and Brokerage business. In 1896 he started a mercantile brokerage under the name of Elggren Bros. and Co., of which he was the manager and his brothers Andrew Fred and Lorenzo E. as partners. The firm is still carrying on a successful business in Salt Lake City, with branch offices in Denver, Colorado, and Butte, Montana.

Bishop Elggren is known throughout the country as a successful business man and has been an active member of the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce for several years. In ecclesiastical positions he has labored with fidelity and marked efficiency.
