Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Felt, Charles Brigham

Felt, Charles Brigham, member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, was born Jan. 13, 1860, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Nathaniel H. and Eliza Ann Preston. Baptized by Albert M. Davis, and ordained consecutively, Deacon, Teacher, Priest, Elder, Seventy and High Priest. Filled a mission to Great Britain 1880 to 1882, serving as clerk of the mission and Emigration Clerk at mission headquarters in Liverpool. Active in Y. M. M. I. A. as president of the Association for several years in the 17th Ward. Served as a president of the Third Quorum of Seventy. Conducted the 17th Ward Choir.

It was the Sunday School which claimed his life's devotion. In 1892 he was appointed superintendent of the 17th Ward Sunday School and instituted the monthly officers and teachers meeting, class lesson outlines and other innovations in Sunday School work. He was called to the superintendency of the Salt Lake Stake Sunday School Board in 1901, later succeeding Josiah Burrows as superintendent. In 1906 he was made a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, actively serving in this capacity until the time of his death.

In addition to his other Church duties, he served in the Bishopric of Farmers Ward and as a member of the High Council of Granite Stake. At the instance of the Presiding Bishop's office he wrote a manual on "Ward Teaching", published by the Church.

His business career started at the age of 13 as a telegraph messenger boy. Shortly thereafter he joined the Gilmer & Salisbury Company, operating Stage Coach lines in Montana, Idaho and Wyoming, and was connected with the thrilling experiences incident to the opening up of the West. He was cashier of the Bank of Mercur when that mining camp was at its height. In 1903 he was elected city auditor of Salt Lake City, serving during 1904-5. After the dissolution of the Gilmer & Salisbury Company, he became secretary and later manager of the Salisbury Company, operating real estate and mining properties and dealing in mortgage loans, etc. The Felt Building was erected by the Salisbury Company, and named in his honor.

In 1884 (June 4) he married Georgena Spencer, daughter of Daniel Spencer and Elizabeth Funnell. Nine children were born to them; Elizabeth S., Naomi S., Charles Brent (deceased) Spencer P., Georgina S., Edwin S., Margaret S., Milton S., and Helen S.

Elder Felt was gentle and kind and beloved by all who knew him. He died March 1, 1929.
