Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Fetzer, Casper John

Fetzer, Casper John, 1st Bishop of the Jefferson Ward, Grant Stake, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Sept. 24, 1879, in Langenfeld, Bavaria, Germany, the son of Peter Fetzer and Anna Seifert. He was baptized Nov. 3, 1899, by J. Percy Goddard, in Munich, Bavaria, and ordained a Deacon before he emigrated to Utah in April, 1905. After locating in the Cannon Ward, Salt Lake City, he was ordained a Teacher, later a Priest, and still later an Elder by Gustaf Koplin. In 1906 (May 21) he married Bertha Butler in the Salt Lake Temple. The children by this marriage are: Percy, Leona, William, Joseph and John. Brother Fetzer acted for several years as president of an Elders Quorum, and also as president of the German meetings in the Pioneer Stake about fourteen years. He was ordained a Seventy and later a High Priest and served as a High Councilor in the Pioneer Stake, also taking an active part in scout work, and in the Y. M. M. I. A. work of the Stake. In 1923 he moved to Farmers Ward, where he built a cabinet fixture factory with an office on Richards Street, Salt Lake City. When the Grant Stake of Zion was organized in July, 1924, he was chosen as a member of the High Council, which position he held until the Jefferson Ward was organized, July 20, 1924, when he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Rudger Clawson and set apart to preside over that Ward. Brother Fetzer has been active in secular matters and now acts as president of the Salt Lake Cabinet and Fixture Company, which company he founded in 1909. He had learned the trade of cabinet-maker and draftsman in the military High School in Bavaria, and after his arrival in Utah took a business course in the L. D. S. University in Salt Lake City. He worked for five years as draughtsman in the Oregon Short Line engineering department. After the death of his wife March 20, 1929, Bishop Fetzer made a trip to Europe, where he spent five months visiting Bavaria and other parts of Europe. On June 9, 1930, he married Martha Seeberger in the Salt Lake Temple.
