Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Francis, Maria Banks

Francis, Maria Banks, a faithful Latter-day Saint and worker in the Relief Society, was born Feb. 25, 1838, in London, England, the oldest daughter of William Banks and Maria Lamprell. Her mother, a very accomplished woman, conducted a school for girls and here Sister Francis received an excellent education. Mr. Banks, a buyer for a dry goods firm in London, was a personal friend of Mr. Williams, founder of the Young Men's Christian Association, and some of the first meetings of that organization were held in Mrs. Banks' school rooms and Sister Francis remembered as a child singing for Mr. Williams and his young men.

When 18 years of age, Sister Francis took a voyage with her uncle, Captain Johnson Lamprell, and his wife, on the ship "Castle Howard," intending to visit India and China and return with them. But when the ship arrived in Calcutta, Maria begged to stay with friends there until her uncle should return. The ship, however, was lost in the China Sea and on June 9, 1866, she married Dr. Robert Francis of Allahabad, a native of Newtown, Wales. But her happiness was short-lived, for Dr. Francis died of sunstroke July 14, 1868, leaving her with an infant daughter; another daughter was born six months afterwards. Sister Francis then returned to her parents in London, taking with her the babies and a native "ayer". A year later she and her native maid went back to India, leaving the children with their grandparents. In Allahabad, in connection with another lady, Sister Francis opened a store for ladies' furnishings, in which venture she was very successful. In 1877 she returned to England and engaged in business, with success. She devoted herself to the education of her two daughters, giving them every advantage in her power and sending them to France for two years after they had completed their training in a ladies' college.

In 1892 Sister Francis attended a meeting of the Ethical Society in South Place, London, when Elder James H. Anderson delivered a splendid lecture on "Mormonism". Being much impressed, she sought further light upon the subject and was baptized Feb. 19, 1893, by Bishop T. A. Clawson of Salt Lake City, then president of the London Conference; her daughter Mary was baptized soon afterwards. Sister Francis' parents died, both in one week, in 1893, and her daughter Alice, having embraced the Catholic faith and entered a convent, Sister Francis and her daughter Mary emigrated to Salt Lake City, Utah, in 1894, and later in the same year the daughter was married to Elder Willard John Kelly, who, however, died early the next year. Sister Francis then became manager of the Women's Co-op Store from which she retired in 1902. During this time she was an active member of the Utah Women's Press Club, of which she later became president. She also gave illustrated lectures on life in India. After her retirement from business she devoted herself to Church work and made two converts while acting as a Relief Society teacher. Being a brilliant pianist she played for the radio when she was 86 years of age. She died in Salt Lake City, May 15, 1925, being survived by her two daughters and a grandson, John Kelly Pye. Her widowed daughter had, in 1907 become the wife of Elder Caleb E. Pye, of Salt Lake City, the younger remained in the convent in France.
