Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Jones, Willard Larson

Jones, Willard Larson, president of the Moapa Stake of Zion, was born May 19, 1879, in Washington, Utah, the son of Thomas J. Jones and Johanna C. Larson. He was baptized by his father on his eighth birthday anniversary and in due course he was ordained a Deacon and presided over a quorum; later he acted as a ward teacher and president of the ward Y. M. M. I. A. He grew up on the farm and, being the oldest of his father's six sons, worked with them, farming, riding the range and looking after cattle. When 18 years old, young Willard commenced to work for the White Hills Mining Company as a freighter, driving a six mule team. He continued at this work until he was 20 years old when he was called on a mission. After being ordained an Elder by his father Oct. 21, 1899, he received his blessings in the St. George Temple, Oct. 25, 1899, was ordained a Seventy by Pres. Jos. W. McMurrin and set apart for a mission to the Southwestern States. He labored in the Lone Star Conference, and was first counselor to the president of that conference for a year and a half. Returning from this mission in March, 1902, he took a government contract to carry mail from Moapa to Good-springs, Nevada. This position he held until the completion of the Salt Lake and Los Angeles Railroad in 1905.

Having become a resident of Overton, Nevada, Bro. Jones was sustained as 2nd Counselor to Bishop Bunker of that ward Sept. 6, 1906, whom he succeeded as Bishop of the Overton Ward, Sept. 18, 1908, being ordained and set apart to that position by Apostle George Albert Smith.

In 1912, Bro. Jones represented Clark County, Nevada, in the Nevada Legislature, being the first representative of that newly organized county.

At the organization of Moapa Stake, June 9, 1912, Bishop Jones was selected to preside over the new stake, which position he still holds.

On May 24, 1914, he married Lois E. Earl of Bunkerville, in the St. George Temple; this marriage has been blessed with seven children, one son and six daughters. Pres. Jones has been active in a number of important enterprises which have added to the development of southern Nevada.
