Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Judd, Robert Lund

Judd, Robert Lund, a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, was born July 6, 1885, at Logan, Utah, the son of Thomas Judd and Mary Lund, both of St. George, Utah. He was baptized at eight years of age by William T. Atkin in the St. George Temple, and ordained a deacon at the age of twelve. On July 8, 1898, his mother died, and he then went to live with his father's first family, where he was very happy. That same year Thomas Judd was called by Pres. Wilford Woodruff to colonize several large ranches the Church had acquired in White River and Steptoe Valleys, White Pine County, Nevada. Robert, with the family, moved to Nevada in the spring of 1899. Three towns known as Lund, Preston and Georgetown, were established on the ranches that had been acquired. During the following years up to the fall of 1903 young Robert received a real training in farming, freighting, cattle-raising and other pioneer activities. In the latter part of the last named year the family moved to LaVerkin, Washington Co., Utah. Having received a rudimentary education, Robert, in the fall of 1904, entered the Agricultural College at Logan, from which institution he graduated in 1909 with the degree of B.S. He studied law at the University of Chicago, graduating with the degree of LLB in 1910. Later that same year he was admitted to the Bar of the State of Utah and began practicing his profession in Salt Lake City. During the time he was attending law school in Chicago he was, in June, 1908, ordained an Elder by Pres. German E. Ellsworth of the Northern States Mission, and during the holiday seasons and one summer did work as a regular missionary in the field. Upon coming to Salt Lake he located in the 12-13th Ward, Ensign Stake, where he was active in the Church organizations, at one time being both superintendent of the Sunday School and president of the Young Men's Mutual. On March 4, 1919, he was set apart as a member of the General Board of the Deseret Sunday School Union. For twenty years he has been associated with Mr. E. M. Bagley in the practice of the law, and for ten years a member of the firm of Bagley, Judd and Ray In 1920 he was appointed one of the attorneys for the Church. Shortly after the passing of Franklin S. Richards, general counsel for the Church, in August, 1934, Elder Judd was appointed to that office as his successor. At the present time he is a member of the State Bar examining committee and chairman of the committee on arranging for the holding of a term of the Circuit Court of Appeals of the Tenth Circuit in Salt Lake City-annually if possible. He is a member of the Salt Lake City and County Bar, the Utah State Bar and the American Bar Association. On September 22, 1914, Brother Judd married Mary Grant, daughter of Pres. Heber J. Grant and Augusta Winters. This marriage has been blessed with seven children, namely, Thomas G., Augusta G., Marian G., Katherine G., Robert L. Jun., Ruth (who died in infancy) and Pauline G. Brother Judd served as a member of the Utah State Legislature in 1913, and a member of the Board of Trustees of the Utah State Agricultural College from 1920 to 1924. He is a member of the board of directors of the "Deseret News" and of the Deseret Book Company and has held many other positions of trust in the Church and in the community.

Just recently he has been appointed director and vice-chairman of the Metropolitan Water Board of Salt Lake City.
