Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Kooyman, Frank Iemke

Kooyman, Frank Iemke, a counselor in the presidency of the High Priests' quorum in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, was born Nov. 12, 1880, at Midsland, isle of Terschelling, Netherlands, the son of Daniel Kooyman and Neeke Kooyman-his parents having the same surname. He was the sixth child in a family of nine, three of whom became members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; attended common and advanced schools in the Netherlands, and L. D. S. Business College in Salt Lake City; was employed in the district court office in Amsterdam from his 17th to his 22nd year; accepted the restored gospel in his nineteenth year, and was baptized April 29, 1899, by Elder Alonzo A. Hinckley. He was called on a mission in his native land in 1902, and filled a full-time mission from July 12, 1902 (when he was ordained an Elder and set apart as a missionary under the hands of Mission President Sylvester Q. Cannon) until Sept. 12, 1905, laboring in Rotterdam, Arnhem, and again in Rotterdam. From April 27, 1903, until the day of his release he was assistant editor of the "Ster", the mission paper. He translated into the Dutch or Netherlands language, a brief history of the Church, by Edward H. Anderson, revised a translation of the Voice of Warning, by Parley P. Pratt, and also translated several L. D. S. hymns.

Elder Kooyman emigrated to Utah in the fall of 1905, locating in Salt Lake City; was employed as bookkeeper, first with the Lambert Paper Company, and later with the Anderson-Taylor Company, wholesale grocers. After his emigration, he was a steady contributor to the Netherlands mission paper, as well as to the "Utah-Nederlander," and also defended and explained "Mormonism" in several non-Mormon periodicals and newspapers in Holland, including the "Nieuwe Courant", "Studien," "Eenheid," the "Tempel," and the "Haagsche Post." He wrote numerous "Rympreekjes," or rhyming sermonettes, which ran through several years of the "Ster." On Oct. 16, 1907, Elder Kooyman married Elisabeth Jacoba van der Toore, daughter of Gerrit Peter van der Toom and Johanna Stolp, who bore him seven children: Raymond Vandertoom, Florence Julia, Lucile May, Hilda Louisa, Ruby Evangeline, Earl Midsland and Harold Stolp.

Elder Kooyman was ordained a Seventy by President J. Golden Kimball July 31, 1908, and served as a president in five quorums of Seventy in Salt Lake City successively. He was naturalized in the Third District Court of Salt Lake County, Dec. 18, 1911, the certificate of naturalization being issued Dec. 28, 1911. For four years, from Aug. 6, 1909, to Nov. 7, 1913, he presided over the L. D. S. Hollanders' meetings in Salt Lake City. He was ordained a High Priest under the hands of Elder Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve, and set apart as first counselor to Bishop John Longden of the 19th Ward, Salt Lake Stake of Zion, Oct. 30, 1927. In 1929 he was called to preside over the Netherlands Mission and was set apart for that labor by Pres. Heber J. Grant on Aug. 2 of that year, succeeding Pres. John P. Lillywhite, and landed in Rotterdam, with wife and three children (Ruby, Earl and Harold) Aug. 21, 1929. His sojourn in Holland lasted over four years (Sister Kooyman and the children remaining with him for three years) and left Rotterdam Nov. 22, 1933, having turned the affairs of the mission over to his successor, Thomas Edgar Lyon, and arrived in Salt Lake City Dec. 4, 1933.

He had the responsibility, not only of guiding the Elders' activties, but also of putting into effect the new Church policy of placing the branches and auxiliaries of the mission under the direction of local members. In addition to these labors, he edited, once more, the "Ster", changing its name to "De Ster van Nederland" (The Star of the Netherlands), started the "Peptomist," a monthly missionary paper, made translations of hymns and current Church literature, including "Rational Theology," by Dr. John A. Widtsoe, and contributed to influential non-Mormon papers, such as the "Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant," the "Heraut," the "Algemeen Handelsblad" and the "Utrechtsche Nieuwsblad."

Since the summer of 1934, Elder Kooyman has been employed in the Church Historian's office, and he has also continued his writing for both Mormon and non-Mormon publications. In the "Utah-Nederlander" he contributed a column entitled "Tempelstade Krabbels" (Temple City Scribbles) until its publication was discontinued in Oct., 1935. He was a teacher in the 19th Ward Sunday School until Dec. 9, 1934, when he was appointed to his present stake office. In the summer of 1935 he translated twenty-five Primary songs for the "Jeugdwerk" department of the Netherlands Mission, and is at present-Nov., 1935-translating hymns and Sunday School songs for a new edition of the Dutch hymn book-a spare time hobby.
