Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Kooyman, Elisabeth Jacoba van der Toore

Kooyman, Elisabeth Jacoba van der Toore, president of the Relief Societies and the Young Ladies' M. I. A. and Primary Associations in the Netherlands Mission in the years 1929-1932, was born May 19, 1877, at Amsterdam, Netherlands, the daughter of Gerrit Peter van der Toom and Johanna Stolp. When 18 years of age, she joined the Church in the city of her birth, and was baptized by Elder Hendrik DeBry. Alluding to an expression of the Apostle Paul, who referred to himself as one "born out of due time," Elder DeBry called his candidate for baptism "born in due time," ready with all her heart, as eager for the message of the restored gospel as the hungry baby is for the mother's milk.

At that time Sister Kooyman then Miss Van der Toom-was following a course to become a trained nurse, going through the extensive studies and exacting training required by old world hospitals. Having successfully passed every test, she consequently devoted several years to her labors of mercy, both in institutions for the sick and in private homes. In the spring of 1907, urged by fervent longing to gather with the Saints in the Rocky Mountains, she emigrated to Utah. Here she met her future husband, Elder Frank I. Kooyman, to whom she was married in the fall of that same year, seven children resulting from this union. In 1929, when her husband was called to preside over the Netherlands Mission, she accompanied him to their native land and for three years devotedly and efficiently took charge of the mission groups of women and girls mentioned above, starting the Gleaner Girls' and Primary groups in Holland. With her husband she attended the European Mission presidents' conferences held in Basel, Switzerland, in 1930; in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1931, and in Prague, Czechoslovakia, in 1932, being one of the speakers at the dedication of the magnificent L. D. S. meeting house erected in Denmark's capital at the time of the conference there. Traveling to and from the countries named, she also visited Belgium, England, France, Switzerland, Germany and Sweden. With the youngest three of the children, who had accompanied their parents, she returned to Salt Lake City in the fall of 1932, her husband remaining in the Netherlands 15 months longer.

At home Sister Kooyman has been connected with the Relief Societies of several Salt Lake wards, and is at present-Nov. 1935-serving as the secretary of the 19th Ward group. She is intensely interested, also, in Temple work, having procured many names of her kindred dead. Her first convincing and soul-satisfying impressions of the Lord's great latter-day work have been deepened and sanctified by years of unselfish service.
