Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Margetts, Phillip

Margetts, Phillip, the dean of Western drama, was born Feb. 10, 1829, at Kineton, Warwickshire, England, the son of Thomas Margetts and Alice Bishop. His father was the oldest son of Thomas Margetts, a coach builder and wheelwright, as was his father and his father's father before him. They lived in a snug little corner of Oxfordshire, England, known as Woodstock. They owned property adjoining the estate of the Duke of Malborough. In 1827 his father moved to and commenced business in the little town called Kineton, about eight miles from Stratford-on-Avon, the birthplace of the immortal Shakespeare. After remaining some time in Kineton, his father moved with his family to London, where he commenced business as a contractor and builder. About this time the building of the first railroads in the world took place and about the year 1840 his father took a contract on the Manchester and Birmingham Railway. It was during this period that the Margetts family first heard the gospel of Jesus Christ as introduced and taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. All the family except his father joined the Church. He was a true believer in the doctrines of the Church, but his business at that time caused a delay. He was compelled to return to London where he was taken sick, and in a few weeks died. Bro. Lorenzo Snow, a dear friend of the family, visited him during his sickness, and afterwards preached his funeral sermon. This was in 1842. The family remained in London for some time, but later moved to different parts of England.

Phillip Margetts was one of the first locomotive engineers in the world. The railways on which he served were the London and Birmingham, Chester and Birkenhead, Chester and Shrewsbury, and at the time he left England for America he held a position on the London and North Western Railway. He often said that if it hadn't been for his faith in "Mormonism" he would not, at that time, have taken a thousand pounds sterling to give up his work, as he considered it as good as a position under the English government.

In January, 1850, in company with his mother, sister Ann, and two brothers, Richard and Henry, he left Liverpool, England, on the ship "Argo" for New Orleans, where they arrived on March 8, 1850, after being on the ocean nearly eight weeks. At New Orleans the company boarded the river steamer "Uncle Sam" and went up the Mississippi River to St. Louis. It took them two weeks to reach their destination. From there he crossed the plains with ox teams as far as the upper crossing of the Platte River, where he left the train by permission and started to walk to Great Salt Lake City with his brother. It took them nineteen days to make the trip.

Mr. Margetts was one of the minute men organized in Utah to protect the early settlers from the Indians, and during the years of 1850-52 often saw real fighting. Being also a blacksmith he made some of the first mill irons, assisted in making cane mills and many other necessary and useful articles during pioneer days.

In April, 1857, he started with 72 others on a mission to England, crossing the plains with handcarts, and to them remains the distinction of being the only party of handcart missionaries that ever left Utah. Dr. Seymour B. Young and David Wilkins were his handcart companions. In 1858 he returned home, the Americans being recalled from their fields of labor because of the Utah war. During his absence the so-called "Move" had taken place, and he found on his return that his wife and three children had been moved 300 miles south. When the trouble with Johnston's Army was over, Pres. Brigham Young furnished him with a wagon and horses to bring his family back to Salt Lake City.

Mr. Margetts was one of the cast of players that introduced the drama in Utah in the "Old Bowery," situated on the southeast corner of the Temple Block, in the spring of 1851. "Robert Macaire" was the bill. Ten years later he was one of the notable players who opened the "Social Hall" with "The Lady of Lyons." Ten years later, when the Salt Lake Theatre was opened, March, 1862, Mr. Margetts again had a foremost place, and from that time forward until he retired from the drama he was the most active figure in theatrical life that Salt Lake City has known.

Mr. Margetts married Elizabeth Bateman, daughter of Thomas and Mary Bateman, pioneers, Nov. 5, 1850. His wife died in June, 1896. Fourteen children blessed this union, seven sons and seven daughters.

At the 50th anniversary of the opening of the Salt Lake Theatre Mr. Margetts recited Othello's address before the senate. His rendition brought deafening applause from the large audience.

"In the histrionic chapter of Utah's early history the name of 'Phil' Margetts stands preeminent." "There is scarcely a phase of Utah history but would be shown in a complete biography of Mr. Margetts were such an account in existence."

The Salt Lake City daily newspapers of Sept. 1 and 2, 1914, announced "the passing of Utah's famed actor and Dean of Western drama just 64 years to the day from the time he first entered the Salt Lake Valley, Sept. 1, 1850. He was then a young man of twenty-one years of age. This youth, to fortune and fame unknown, was to play an important part in the drama of the west which had just begun, for he was to be remembered as few others have been among the list of those who made smiles take the place of tears in the trying days, who did so much to lighten the burdens of the pioneers, and who exercised an uplifting influence in the life of the people." For further particulars see: Tullidge's Magazine, Vol. 2; Juvenile Instructor, Vol. 38; A Romance of an Old Playhouse, by George D. Pyper; Lindsay's Mormons and the Theatre; Histories of Utah.
