Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Nielsen, Thor Christian

Nielsen, Thor Christian, Bishop of Long Beach Ward, Los Angeles Stake, California, was born March 25, 1872, in Brigham City, Box Elder Co., Utah, the son of Jens C. Nielsen, and Margarethe Frederiksen. The senior Nielsen joined the Church on the Island of Bornholm, and emigrated to Utah in 1871. At the age of eight years Thor became a member of the Brigham City Brass Band, and when twelve years old, he became a member of the Brigham City 3rd Ward Choir, and at fifteen its leader. Under the able instruction of his father he became proficient at an early age in the making of furniture and was placed in charge of the furniture department of the Brigham City Co-op. In 1890, he was ordained a Seventy, and filled a mission to Denmark in 1890-1892, laboring principally on the island of Bornholm, and in Aalborg. In the latter place he organized a choir which was largely instrumental in bringing many to the knowledge of the gospel. In June, 1893, he married Olivia Hansen in the Logan Temple, which union was blessed with three children, namely, Lydia Olivia, Thor Sherman, and Eugene Christian. In 1895 the family moved to Montpelier, Idaho, where Bro. Nielsen started the Nielsen Furniture Company, which has been conducted successfully until the present time, or nearly 38 years. On July 6, 1904, accompanied by his wife and two children, he went on a visit to Scandinavia. After touring Sweden and Norway, they were called to labor as missionaries in Copenhagen, where Elder Nielsen led the branch choir. A year later the family went to Christiania to direct the splendid choir there, Lydia, the daughter, being organist. In 1909, Bro. Nielsen was ordained a High Priest and called to act as second counselor to the Bishop of the Montpelier 2nd Ward. Two years later he was promoted to the position of first counselor. In 1910, he represented Bear Lake County in the Idaho State Legislature. In 1927, moving temporarily to Long Beach, California, he was chosen as Bishop of the Long Beach Ward, being ordained to that position Aug. 29, 1927. He held that position until his return to Montpelier, Idaho, in 1931. At present he is chorister of the Montpelier Stake Choir and superintendent of the Montpelier 4th Ward Sunday School. Lydia Nielsen Jones, the daughter, now functions as organist of the Los Angeles Stake Choir, the oldest son, Thor Sherman Nielsen, has acted as Bishop of the Wilmington Ward, Los Angeles Stake, California, and the youngest son, Eugene Christian Nielsen, has filled a mission in Denmark.
