Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Palmer, Asael Exile

Palmer, Asael Exile, second president of the Lethbridge Stake of Zion, was born Nov. 26, 1888, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of William M. Palmer and Christina Helen Larson. When about 3 years old he moved with his parents to Aurora, Sevier County, Utah, where he attended the district school, and in March, 1903, when 14 years old, moved with his parents to Raymond, Alberta, Canada, where he became a student at the Knight Academy from 1910 to 1913, and taking a High School course, he graduated from that institution. Before leaving Aurora, Utah, he was baptized Aug. 1, 1897, by George Payne, and when quite young was ordained a Deacon at Aurora, and later a Teacher, and still later a Seventy at Raymond. He presided over the Deacon's quorum at Raymond and also acted as president of the student body at the Knight Academy. He was the first president of the Raymond Second Ward Y. M. M. I. A., and later acted as second counselor in the Taylor Stake Y. M. M. I. A. organization. From 1913 to 1917 he attended the Utah Agricultural College in Logan, obtaining from that institution the B. S. degree. In 1916 (Oct. 5) he married Maydell Cazier of Nephi, Utah, in the Salt Lake Temple. This union has been blessed with four children, viz., Asael Adelbert, Maydell Camille, Eileen, and Byron Cazier. In 1928 he received a Master of Science degree from the University of Alberta at Edmonton. In 1917, he was employed as soil chemist by the Canadian Pacific Railroad. In 1919-1921 he served as principal of the Knight Academy at Raymond, and also held the position as stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Taylor Stake. On Nov. 10, 1921, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Pres. Hugh B. Brown of the Lethbridge Stake of Zion by Apostle Rudger Clawson, which position he held until 1926, when he succeeded Brother Brown as president of said Stake. This position he still holds. Prior to this he had been ordained a Seventy by Apostle Hyrum M. Smith and was a president of the 145th Quorum of Seventy. Bro. Palmer was appointed assistant superintendent of the Dominion Experimental Station at Lethbridge, Nov. 10, 1921, which position he still holds. Since his earliest youth, President Palmer has been active and successful in the discharge of his ecclesiastical as well as secular duties in the many public offices he has held.
