Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Palmer, William Moroni

Palmer, William Moroni, president of the Northwestern States Mission in 1880-1889 was born Dec. 10, 1846, in Lee County, Iowa, the son of Abraham Palmer and Patience Delilah Pierce. He emigrated from Iowa to Utah with his parents in 1852, and located in Ogden, Weber County, where his father became the owner of the land on which the present Union Station in Ogden now stands. Later he moved with his parents to Chicken Creek, Juab County, Utah, and on Dec. 13, 1868, he married Mary Ann Mellor who had crossed the Plains in Edward Martin's Handcart Company in 1856. She bore her husband nine children, namely, William Moroni, Patience Delilah, James Lindsay, Charles Abraham, Don Carlos, Parley Parker, Wilford Woodruff, Delbert and Francis Marion. In 1876-1877 Bro. Palmer filled a mission to Michigan. Shortly after his return he was again called to labor in Michigan, where other Elders were sent to work under his direction. These Elders were sent to various parts of that and surrounding states, resulting in the organization of the Northwestern States Mission (now the Northern States Mission). President Palmer .presided over the Northern States Mission from 1880 to 1889. Though Elder Palmer's opportunities of education as a child and youth had been exceedingly limited, he was successful on this mission, and later in life he obtained a good practical education and became a great scriptorian and an ardent missionary. In fact from the time he was called on his first mission until the end of his life he devoted the greater part of his time to preaching the gospel both at home and abroad.

In 1881 (Dec. 15) he married Christina Helen Larson, of Bergsjo, near Sundsvall, Sweden, in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. The result of this union was 11 children, viz., Helen Christina, John Melvin, Willard Taylor, Asael Exile (now President of the Lethbridge Stake of Zion), Ada Ann, Artie May, Fern, Leslie Larson (now second counselor in the Raymond Second Ward Bishopric), Glenn Cecil, Arlo Verlin (now President of the Wrentham Branch), and Margaret Lucille. Bro. Palmer traveled for a number of years throughout the Church as a representative of the Y. M. M. I. A. and located permanently in Raymond, Alberta. This was his home until the time of his death, which occurred Jan. 25, 1929. Brother Palmer was always true and faithful to his Church and to his people, and as a missionary he became an instrument in the hands of the Lord to convert hundreds of people.
