Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Richards, Emily Sophia Tanner

Richards, Emily Sophia Tanner, wife of Franklin S. Richards, was the daughter of Nathan and Rachel Tanner, who were friends of the Prophet Joseph Smith. She was born on the 13th day of May, 1850, at South Cottonwood, Utah. When she was six years old, her parents moved to Salt Lake City, where she attended the best schools until she was eighteen, and then she became the wife of Franklin S. Richards. Their first home was in Ogden, where three sons were born to them (Franklin Dewey, Joseph Tanner and William Snyder), two of whom preceded her to the Great Beyond. Her family was augmented later by two daughters, whom she adopted and upon whom she bestowed much care. The daughters were named Wealthy Lucille and Emily Helen.

Soon after her marriage, she became interested in Church work, which continued during her entire life. She was an officer in the Mutual Improvement Association and in the Relief Society. Her husband's mother, Jane Snyder Richards, was conspicuous in the organization of the Relief Society; for several years she was a counselor to President Zina D. Young, and she and Emily were both members of the General Board of the Relief Society for nearly thirty years.

After moving to Salt Lake in 1884, Mrs. Richards was a director of the Orphans' Home about thirty years, and a charter member of the board of directors of the Sarah Daft Home for many years. She was a trustee of the Utah Agricultural College ten years and a member of the Board of Trustees of the Salt Lake Public Library. For several years she served as a member of the State Peace Society and was president of the Mother's Congress of Utah. She was president of the Utah Board of Lady Managers to the Columbian Exposition at Chicago in 1893 and was hostess in the Utah building.

The chief executives of our state, from Governor Caleb W. West to Governor George H. Dern, were so familiar with her record that she was kept in mind and given appointments to many important positions. During the war, she was a member of the Utah State Council of Defense, a member of the Women's Liberty Loan Committee, and a member of the Executive Committee of the Red Cross. She was also one of the one hundred women who, led by Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt, went to the White House and offered to President Wilson the services of two million organized women, pending an outbreak of war.

Mrs. Richards was an ardent democrat and suffragist. She led the fight for the adoption of suffrage by the Constitutional Convention of Utah. When triumphant, party leaders asked her to accept the honor of being the first woman to be elected to a state senate, but she declined. When the National Suffrage Amendment was passed in 1920, the League of Women Voters was organized in Salt Lake City under the direction of Mrs. Catt, and Mrs. Richards was urged to become the president of the organization. She declined the honor, but was an active member of the league during the rest of her life. In the League's beautiful home at Washington, D.C., is a "Roll of Honor," consisting of bronze tablets bearing the names of women who were prominent in promoting the cause of equal suffrage. Emily Sophia Tanner Richards is the first name on the Utah tablet, having been placed there by the leading women of the nation, with the sanction of the leading women of Utah.

Her husband's professional duties required him to spend much time in Washington during several years, and while there, Mrs. Richards became acquainted with the leaders of women's movements, as well as with the wives of cabinet officers, senators, and other prominent people. Among her acquaintances were the leading suffragists, Susan B. Anthony, Anna Howard Shaw, Rachel Foster Avery and Carrie Chapman Cart; also, Clara Barton, founder of the Red Cross, Frances Willard, president of the Temperance Union, and Belva A. Lockwood, the first woman lawyer admitted to practise in the Supreme Court of the United States. She attended many receptions given by distinguished women, and did excellent missionary work. As they were eager to know about Utah affairs, she imparted to them much valuable information concerning the people and the religion of the Latter-day Saints.

In 1888, a congress was held in Washington which was known as the World's Congress of Representative Women, who met to organize an International Council. This meeting marked a very critical time in the lives of the Latter-day Saints because of the intense prejudice existing against them. Mrs. Richards, as the representative of the Relief Society, the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association and the Primary Association, delivered an address to the Congress which was described by an able newspaper writer, who was a stranger to Mrs. Richards, as follows:

"At this juncture it was announced that a Utah lady would address the World's convention. It was perfectly natural that the immense concourse of people attending the convention should forecast the character of the lady who should address them, as some masculine heroine who could yield a battle-axe or any other weapon in keeping with their own distorted notions of Utah life. And the lady herself, at the hour that she had to appear, could but feel the extreme tension in the public mind; for the morning papers were bristling with denunciations of Utah institutions. There was an ominous pause in the mighty throng when it was announced by the presiding officer that the lady delegate would address them. Soon a lady appeared, moving forward among the throng on the rostrum and taking her place beside the narrow reading desk. What an apparition! It was not a feminine Amazon, but a delicate, refined lady, trembling slightly under the scrutinizing gaze of the multitude, yet reserved, self-possessed, dignified, and as pure and sweet as an angel. Her appearance was a powerful antithesis to their preconceived impressions, and the change of feeling in the audience was almost instantaneous. The lady's voice began its utterances on a scale of greatly tremulous pathos, and without rising into high pitch, its tenderness subdued every whisper until its words reached every ear in the auditory. The tenor of the address was what might have been expected by Utah people, an orderly, scholarly presentation, such as would serve to recite facts and principles and disarm prejudice. It was not the words themselves, but the gentle spirit that, like the morning dawn, went with the words, and carried winning grace to every heart. It was wonderful how sympathies were engendered and asperities removed. When the lady concluded, after half an hour's reading, there was many a moist eye, and many a listener felt thankful that this lovely apparition had given them a new, more refreshing and more kindly impression of Utah people and institutions. It was the mighty force of the gentle sunlight that unlocks the iceberg from its moorings and sets it afloat upon the broad ocean."

Mrs. Richards had a charming personality of graciousness and dignity. Her cheery optimism and fine sense of humor enabled her to scatter sunshine along the pathway of life. She had a keen appreciation of the divine law of service and always did her part, with the help of her devoted husband, who was proud of her achievements. They were loving companions and helped each other in every way to attain success in their respective lines of work. On the 19th day of August, 1929, her sweet spirit took its departure from her mortal body and went to its heavenly home.

It is remarkable how much one person can accomplish when the head and heart are set in the right direction. Mrs. Richards was a leader born, and to the very last exhibited characteristics of leadership. She inspired in the minds of those who knew her great admiration on the one hand and tender devotion on the other. One of the choicest of women, she has served her family and friends, her State, Nation, and Church, nobly and well. She has made her place one of sacredness and honor, leaving a memory that is lovely and ideal.

(Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. 4: 604-606. Relief Society Magazine, Vol. 16, pp. 521-526. Women of Deseret.)
