Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Wood, Edward James

Wood, Edward James, 3rd president of the Alberta Stake of Zion, in Canada, was born Oct. 27, 1866, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of William Wood and Elizabeth Gentry. In 1867, as a member of his father's family, he went on the Dixie mission. After his father's release from that mission the family lived for a short time at Meadow Valley and Panaca, Nevada, and in Beaver, Utah. About 1872 the family moved back to Salt Lake City and located in the 11th Ward; later in the 19th Ward. His home as a boy was for some time in a part of the "Old Bath House." About 1877 the family moved one block east, where his father built "Cave Cottage," in 1878. Here Edward's boyhood days were mostly spent and he was educated in the public schools and he also attended Prof. Regars' private school. He was baptized Feb. 20, 1875, in the "Old Bath House," was ordained a Deacon at the age of 11 and a Priest when 15 years old. While living in "Cave Cottage" he worked with his father in the butcher business and had charge of a small shop near the old Utah Central Railroad corner. He took an active part in auxiliary work, was manager of the 19th Ward Dramatic Club, and captain of the "Star B. B. Club." At 18 years of age he worked in Judge Van Zile's law office and also attended the Deseret University. At 19 he worked in the Pacific Express office and at 20 began a service of many years in the Dinwoodey Furniture Company. He was ordained an Elder and later (Sept. 13, 1888) a Seventy. In 1888-1892 he filled a mission to Samoa and, together with Bro. and Sister Dean, became a pioneer in opening up the work of the Lord on that group. During his mission he had many thrilling experiences on sea and land and witnessed many manifestations of the power of God. He learned to love the natives of the islands and baptized many of them into the Church. He also did some translating, and composed a number of hymns. Returning home in 1892 he stopped en route in Hawaii, where he visited places of interest. In 1892 (Sept. 7th), he married Mary Ann Solomon and made his home in the 22nd Ward, where he acted as counselor in the ward Y. M. M. I.A. In 1893 he moved to Eureka, Juab Co., Utah, where he engaged in the butcher business. There he acted as superintendent of the ward Sunday school and as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. In the fall of 1896 he was called on another mission to Samoa, this time to preside over the mission. He traveled a great deal on the islands, wrote several tracts which he compiled into a small volume, and also translated parts of the Book of Mormon for Sunday school purposes. On his return home in 1899 he visited, en route, the Friendly Islands, New Zealand, Australia, .Fiji, Hawaii, etc., and landed in America at Vancouver, B.C. After his return home he again became an active worker in the auxiliary organizations, and in ward teaching, and while residing for a short time in the Sugar House Ward, he acted as Sunday school superintendent. In 1900, he was chosen as a counselor to Bishop Apollos G. Driggs of the Sugar House Ward and later acted as a counselor to Bishop Atwood of the Salt Lake City 13th Ward. In November, 1901, he moved to Cardston, Alberta, Canada, where he acted as ward Sunday school superintendent, and in 1902 was appointed an alternate member of the Alberta Stake High Council. When Pres. Charles O. Card was released on account of sickness and Heber S. Allen succeeded him as president of the Alberta Stake, Bro. Wood was chosen as one of the counselors in the stake presidency. In September, 1903, Pres. Joseph F. Smith and several of the Apostles visited Canada and organized the Taylor Stake of Zion, with Bro. Allen as stake president, and Bro. Wood was then chosen and set apart to preside over the Alberta Stake of Zion with Thomas Duce and Stifling Williams as counselors. Bro. Wood still holds this position. When the Cardston Temple was dedicated Aug. 26, 1923, he was chosen as president of the Temple, which position he still occupies. Pres. Wood's marriage has been blessed with eight children, namely, Glen, Fern, Ivy, Myrtle, Forest, Olive, Dale and Vi. In 1909 he went on a business trip to England, and he also visited many places of interest on the continent. In 1916 he was called to make a third trip to Samoa to look into the advisability of organizing the Tongan Mission, which was done in February, 1917, by setting apart Elder Willard L. Smith and his wife Jeanette, who were laboring missionaries on Samoa at the time, to go to Tonga and reopen that mission. Bro. Wood returned home from his third mission to Samoa in May, 1917. He is the first Elder of the Church to fill three missions to Samoa.
