Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Wright, Elias Smith

Wright, Elias Smith, an active Elder in the Ensign Stake of Zion, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born July 23, 1860, in Brigham City, Utah, the son of Judge Jonathan C. Wright and Caroline Olsen. He was a direct descendent of Daniel Shead who faithfully served the colonists during the revolutionary war with the New Hampshire forces under the command of Col. Alexander Schammel. Bro. Wright was educated in the public schools of Brigham City, the University of Utah (then designated the University of Deseret) and was later graduated from the Medical School of the New York University with the degree of M.D. in 1890. After his graduation he returned to Salt Lake City, where he practiced surgery and medicine until his death. He was a leader in his chosen profession, his associates holding him in high esteem as evidenced by his election to serve as president of the Salt Lake County Medical Society and the Utah State Medical Association respectively. He was the surgeon-general of the Utah State National Guard during the encumbency of Gov. Wm. Spry of Utah. He also served as county physician of Salt Lake County for a number of years. He was a charter member of the Utah Society of the Sons of the American Revolution and a short time prior to his demise he was elected an honorary vice-president of the society; during the year 1925 he acted as president of the organization.

Being born of Latter-day Saint parents he was baptized Feb. 28, 1869, by William Neeley, and was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest, Elder and Seventy. While serving as an L. D. S. missionary in the Southern States in 1886-1888, he, together with four other Elders, was dragged from his bed and fearfully beaten by a mob near Belts Station, Tennessee, for preaching the gospel. In 1889 (April 4th) Dr. Wright married Elizabeth Sophia Richards, daughter of Samuel W. Richards and Helena Robinson, in the Logan Temple. This union was blessed with five children, namely, Elias Spencer, Verda, Virginia, Helen and Afton.

Dr. Wright was a man of even temper, ever true and loyal to his friends and tolerant of the views of those who disagreed with him. His love of country and his citizenship in this great nation were emphasized through his activities during all his life. His demise occurred in salt Lake City, Feb. 14, 1928, but he will live long in the memory of his many friends for his generous service to the needy and his willingness to answer every call made upon him to relieve suffering humanity.
