Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Austin, John

Austin, John, a pioneer settler of Lehi, Utah, was born Dec. 3, 1822, at Studham, Bedfordshire, England, the third child of Joseph Austin and Ann Mills. He was early taught to be industrious and frugal, and on March 20, 1847, he married Emma Grace, daughter of Thomas Grace and Mary Jayce, of Whipsnade in Bedfordshire. After residing a short time in Whipsnade, the young couple moved to Kinsmouth, Hartfordshire, and there the young wife became a convert to the restored gospel, being baptized Jan. 5, 1850. On the same date, two years later, John Austin was baptized. The young couple lived quiet, industrious lives, raised a large family and kept out of debt, but always before them was the hope that some day they might gather with the saints in Zion. When the family numbered eleven children, they felt that their hopes could never be realized, so they decided to spend the little money saved towards their emigration in sending their oldest daughter (Harriet), 18 years of age, and their oldest son (George), 17 years old, to Utah, that the family would at least be represented among the saints there. These young people left London, England, May 5, 1866, on the ship "Caroline" in a company of 389 emigrating Saints, and arrived in New York, June 11th. Thence the company proceeded by rail and river steamers to Wyoming, Neb., the outfitting place for the L. D. S. emigration that year. Harriet and George crossed the plains in Wm. Henry Chipman's train and settled in Lehi, Utah, where their father's brother, George, already resided. In 1868, Sister Austin read in the. "Millennial Star" that part of the ship "Minnesota" had been chartered for the benefit of saints who expected to emigrate and felt impressed that she and her husband and family would go in that ship, and so commenced to make preparations for the voyage. Just two weeks before the ship sailed, Bro. Bartel Turner, a neighbor, offered to lend Bro. Austin the money to emigrate his entire family. At first Bro. Austin hesitated to accept this generous offer, fearing that he might never be able to repay the loan, but finally became convinced that the prayers of himself and family had previously been answered in a miraculous way, and that they might trust their Heavenly Father to aid them in paying off the debt. So Bro. and Sister Austin with their ten children sailed from Liverpool, England, June 22, 1868, on the ship "Minnesota" which arrived in New York, July 12th. Thence they proceeded by rail to Laramie, Wyoming, where they were met by Capt. Joseph S. Rawlins with a mule train with which they made the journey to Salt Lake City and then proceeded to Lehi, where they established a permanent home. At this time the Union Pacific Railroad was .nearing its completion and men were being hired for grading, etc., so Bro. Austin with his two oldest boys obtained work, and at the end of that season they were enabled to pay their friends the money borrowed for their emigration. The following year Bro. Austin took up farming land at Lehi and later he and his sons were among the first to take up land on the bench north of Lehi, under the North Bench Ditch. The father and sons were eminently successful as tillers of the soil, and when the sugar factory was located at Lehi, the Austin brothers were among the foremost to bring about the successful cultivation of the sugar beet. As a consequence a number of the sons of John Austin became superintendents of agriculture at different factories of the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company, one, George, being the general superintendent of agriculture over all the factories of the company, a position later occupied by his younger brother Mark at a time when the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company was one of the most important corporations in the West.

Bro. Austin's loving wife and faithful companion during his days of adversity died in 1893, aged 66 years, and afterwards Bro. Austin married Elizabeth Pead, who preceded him just a few days to the Great Beyond. Bro. Austin died Feb. 13, 1907, as president of the High Priests of Lehi. He was dearly beloved and respected by all and left a family which is noted for thrift, industry and business sagacity, members of which are filling positions of trust and honor both in Church and State.
