Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Barnes, Harold Sansom

Barnes, Harold Sansom, fourth Bishop of Wasatch Ward, Granite Stake, was born Feb. 14, 1895, in Salt Lake City, Utah, a son of Arthur F. Barnes and Elizabeth H. Sansom. He was baptized May 28, 1903, by John W. Grice and educated in the public schools of Salt Lake City, the L. D. S. High School and the L. D. S. Business College and was awarded the Heber J. Grant scholarship at the latter institution in 1911. Being ordained to offices in the Aaronic Priesthood, he served in an official capacity in each, was later ordained an Elder and was ordained a Seventy, March 31, 1919, by Robert S. Campbell. In his youth he served in the Superintendency of the Sunday School and in the presidency of Y. M. M. I. A. in the 17th Ward. From 1914 to 1917 he filled a mission to the Eastern States, presiding part of the time over the Massachusetts Conference. Originally his call was to the South African Mission but his field of labor was changed on account of the World war.

On Jan. 1, 1918, Elder Barnes married Allie Josephine Rasmussen of Redmond, Utah; this marriage has been blessed with four children, namely, Harold Sansore, Barbara Josephine, Clifford Rasmussen and Aleerie Merle. After his marriage Brother Barnes moved to the Wasatch Ward of the Granite Stake, where he acted as president of Y. M. M. I. A., chairman of Genealogical Committee, chairman of Recreational Committee and in other capacities. After being ordained a High Priest by Joseph F. Smith he was set apart May 24, 1924, as a counselor to Bishop Isaac C. Thunell of the Wasatch Ward and held this position until 1927 when the bishopric was reorganized. On May 4, 1931, he was ordained a Bishop by James E. Talmage and set apart to preside over the Wasatch Ward, which position he held until 1935. During his term of office the debt on the ward chapel was paid and the chapel dedicated.

After leaving school Brother Barnes worked in a law office and in the accounting department of the Utah Power & Light Company until called on a mission. After his return he was appointed clerk of the newly created Public Utilities Commission of Utah and later served as secretary of that organization. In 1921 he entered the employ of the Inter-Mountain Life Insurance Co., becoming a director and manager of the Investment Department. Subsequently he had charge of the local properties of the California-Western States Life, and on April 1, 1933, was appointed superintendent of the Dr. W. H. Groves L. D. S. Hospital, which position he still holds. At present he is a member of the High Council of the Highland Stake.
