Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Barrett, Georgianna Pacific

Barrett, Georgianna Pacific, was born on board the ship "Brooklyn" on the Pacific Ocean, June 14, 1846, one week before the historical vessel touched at the Hawaiian Islands. She was the daughter of John R. Robbins and Phebe Ann Wright. It was the express wish of the captain that she be named Helena Brooklyn Pacific, the first name being that of the captain's wife, but the little lady escaped with the above name. Her parents had joined the Church in New Jersey in 1839 and after enduring many of the trials which fell to the lot of the saints in Nauvoo, the Robbins family were advised by the Prophet Joseph Smith to return to their home in New Jersey on account of their poor health. In 1846, when it was understood that some of the saints in the Atlantic States would migrate overland to the Rocky Mountains, Samuel Brannan, who presided over the saints in the East at that time, chartered the ship "Brooklyn" to take a company of saints around Cape Horn to California to unite with their co-religionists where and when a permanent location should be selected by the leaders of the Church for the saints to gather. During this long ocean voyage Bro. and Sister Robbins lost two little sons by death and the daughter, Georgianna, was born. After remaining in California four years, the family returned east for a time. The route taken, via the Isthmus of Panama, was one of considerable adventure, little Georgianna being carried across the isthmus on the back of a native, while her mother and baby sister Emma rode a hammock, also carried by natives. After residing for a short time in New Jersey, the family came to Utah in 1853 and settled in the 17th Ward, Salt Lake City, where Georgianna completed her education in the schools and, later, together with her sister Emma, taught school. In 1870 Georgianna married Dr. Clarence Barrett in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. This union was blessed with four children, namely, Ellen Louisa Barrett, born Jan. 14, 1871, in Salt Lake City, Utah, and married Caleb E. Summerhays in 1893; John R. Barrett, who died young; Isabella Barrett, who was born Dec. 6, 1874, and married Joseph Parley White, and Daisy Barrett, who died young. Mrs. Barrett died in Salt Lake City, April 10, 1929. She was survived by her two daughters, Mrs. Summerhays, and Mrs. White, two grandchildren, namely, Dr. V. P. White and Dr. L. S. White, four great-grandchildren and a niece, Mrs. David O. McKay.
