Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Brown, James Cross

Brown, James Cross, pioneer, missionary and pony express rider, was born March 3, 1837, in Manchester, England, a son of William Brown and Jane Hardman Brown. He was baptized in 1845 by Moses Martin. On Feb. 10, 1852, when 14 years old, he sailed from Liverpool, England, on the ship "Ellen Marie", together with his mother, brother John Bradford and sister Elizabeth, Isaac C. Haight being leader of the company. The emigrants landed in New Orleans, April 6, 1852, and the Brown family crossed the plains in Capt. Abraham Smoot's company, arriving in the Valley August 26, 1852.

Brother Brown served on the Pony Express division that went west from Salt Lake City, through old Camp Floyd, Rush Valley, the Deep Creek section, Ruby Valley to Smith Creek, where the next division began. This route was under the command of Major Howard Egan, who had under his command such men as Peter Niece, Washington Perkins and Bill Egan.

Those were the days when Indians were continually on the warpath. They seemed to consider the Pony Express riders their special targets, and by their treacherous attacks many lives and pouches of mail were lost and stations burned.

Bro. Brown was known among his Pony Express riders as "Little Jim," because of his small stature. Once, Little Jim, taking a short cut, rode right into a group of hostile Indians, who surrounded him and demanded that he give them a note, to the station master, for provisions. He stalled for time with various excuses; he had no paper; they handed him a piece of wrapping paper; he had no pencil; they handed him a leaden bullet. Having no further excuses, he began to write, which so interested his captors that they relaxed their watchfulness and let go of their hold on the stirrups and reins. With a yell, Little Jim stuck spurs into his pony and rode away, leaving half of the warriors on the ground, bowled there by the pony's leap.

The Indians pursued in haste, but he out-rode them and reached the next station with no other damage than an arrow in the calf of his leg.

It was the Pony Express that relayed the news of President Lincoln's first election from the Missouri river to the Pacific Coast, Little Jim riding the Deep Creek section which carried the news. He took the mail pouch from the incoming rider, Bill Fisher, and dashed west over forty-five miles of his division. At the end of the ride, instead of a warm station, a husky rider and fresh pony to carry on, he came upon four bodies, bullet-pierced and scalped, and the station burned to ashes.

There was no time to wait-weary horse and weary rider must carry on-forty-five more miles to ride-fired on along the way by ambushed savages. Reaching the next station he fell from his staggering pony, with three arrows in his back and a bullet wound in his leg. Instantly his successor grabbed the mail pouch, mounted a fresh pony and was off. The mail must go through. Three different times he had his pony shot from under him and he was forced to carry the mail to the station. Brother Brown later took part in the Black Hawk war and other Indian troubles in the southern part of Utah. He became personally acquainted with Indian Chief Black Hawk, who often visited the Brown home.

When news was received that Johnston's army was approaching the Valley, he was among those sent out to Echo Canyon to meet the invaders. For a short time he drove the stage coach for Wm. F. Cody (Buffalo Bill). He was in the crowd that witnessed the driving of the Golden Spike at Promontory Point, Utah, when the Union Pacific and Oregon Short Lines joined on May 10, 1869. He also hauled rocks from Little Cottonwood Canyon for the foundation of the Salt Lake Temple.

James C. Brown was ordained a teacher in 1852 by Joseph L. Heywood. In 1867 he met Miss Ellen John, recently of Wales, and in November, 1869, they were wed in the Endowment House.

In 1873 he was ordained a Seventy by James Livingston. In 1895-1898 he filled a mission to the British Isles, laboring in the Welsh and Manchester conferences. On this mission he had the opportunity to gather his wife's genealogy. Thus he again visited the home he had left so many years before. He was honorably released from his mission, returning to Utah in April, 1898.

Elder Brown held the office of a High Priest when he died in Sandy, Salt Lake Co., Utah, Dec. 27, 1904.
