Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Burton, Thomas Hyrum

Burton, Thomas Hyrum, first counselor in the presidency of the Juab Stake from 1924 to 1930, was born Aug. 28, 1878, at Nephi, Utah, a son of Herbert Burton and Mary Ellinor Pass. He was baptized June 1, 1887 by James D. Paxton and after attending school in Nephi and the Brigham Young University, he studied law, being graduated from the Lincoln-Jefferson University of Indiana in 1910 with the degree of Bachelor of Laws. He was admitted to practice in the State of Utah, Oct. 9, 1911, and in the United States Federal Courts, Nov. 13, 1911. He practiced as attorney for the cities of Nephi, Levan and Delta, was judge of the Juvenile Court of the Fifth Judicial District, attorney on the Council of Defence of Juab County during the World war and District Judge of the Fifth Judicial District, comprising the counties of Juab, Millard, Beaver, Iron and Washington during the years 1923-1929. He was a member of the Law Committee which drew the first good roads law ever placed on the Utah Statute Books and for ten years was chairman of the Law Committee of the Municipal League of Utah, which comprises all of the cities and towns in the State of Utah. Under his direction and supervision the Local Option Law and final the Prohibition Law of the State of Utah was prepared and presented to the Legislature, and he was a member of the House of Representatives of the State of Utah in 1929 and during a special session in 1930. On Aug. 8, 1900, Bro. Burton was ordained a Seventy by B. H. Roberts and set apart for a mission to the Northern States, during which he labored principally in the Southern Illinois Conference; he returned home Sept. 5, 1901, being honorably released on account of the death of his father. On Aug. 17, 1924, he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Rudger Clawson and set apart as first counselor to President Albert H. Belliston of the Juab Stake. This position he held until his death, which occurred Aug. 13, 1930, following a surgical operation. On Jan. 14, 1903, he had married Hannah May Pexton, daughter of Jos. D. Pexton and Mary Ellen Grow. Six children were born of this marriage, namely Dr. Marcus H. of Washington, D.C., Florence, Blanche, Clarence G., Alma P. and Lee Clark. Previous to being called to the Stake presidency Judge Burton had presided over the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Juab Stake. At the time of his death he was superintending the remodeling of Several meeting houses in the Stake including the Juab Stake tabernacle.
