Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Call, Israel

Call, Israel, a Patriarch in the Davis Stake, was born at Fillmore, Utah, July 2, 1854, a son of Anson Call and Ann Mariah Bowen Call. At the time of Israel's birth, his father had charge of the settlement of Millard County and for this reason his family was there. In the fall of 1854, when Israel was about seven weeks old, the family moved to Call's Fort, Box Elder Co., Utah, to again assist in the rounding of a new settlement. Two years later the family was moved to help settle Carson Valley, but returned the following spring, to Bountiful, their former home. Again in 1858 they were moved to Call's Fort where they remained until 1860. At this time, Anson Call having sold his interest in the Fort, returned to Bountiful where the family remained until the children were matured.

After attending the schools at Bountiful, Israel, in 1874, studied in the University of Deseret, which at that time was held in the old Council House with only three teachers. In December 1874, he married Medora White, daughter of John S. and Adelaide White of Farmington.

President Young having called him to go to Arizona with Lot Smith to help settle that country, he and his wife and one child, started on their journey, Feb. 2, 1876. After a hard trip they arrived at Sunset Crossing on the Little Colorado River, March 24, 1876.

Agreeable to the instructions of Pres. Young these Arizona settlers entered into the United Order, but the company broke up in the summer of 1884.

In 1880 (June 11th), Brother Call married Jane Lucinda Judd Knight, the daughter of Hyrum and Lisania Judd and the widow of Joseph Knight.

In the early spring of 1885, when the agitation against polygamy arose, he left both his families at Sunset so that the children could attend school, and went to Old Mexico. There he remained until August, when he returned to Salt Lake City in order to seek medical aid for his wife's eyes. He left his wife, Jane, and her family at Sunset and took his wife, Medora and family to Bountiful.

Apostle Erastus Snow, who had charge of the settlement of Arizona, told him that if he kept his families apart he would escape prosecution under the Edmunds-Tucker law. This he did, having one family in Utah and one in Arizona.

His wife Jane died July 1, 1918, at Mesa, Arizona, and his wife Medora died April 20, 1926, at Bountiful, Utah.

When the Davis Stake was divided, he was called to act as president of the High Priests Quorum of the South Davis Stake, and in 1910 he was chosen stake genealogical representative. In 1911 he was called to officiate in the Salt Lake Temple, and on July 13, 1930, he was ordained a patriarch of the South Davis Stake. (These last two positions he still holds at the time of this writing-May, 1936.)
