Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Callister, Thomas Clark

Callister, Thomas Clark, president of the Millard Stake of Zion, was born May 1, 1881, at Fillmore, Utah, a son of Thomas Clark Callister and Alice McBride. He attended the elementary and secondary schools of Fillmore, the Millard Stake Academy, the Brigham Young Academy and the Agricultural College at Logan, graduating from the latter school in 1903 with the degree of Bachelor of Science in civil engineering. He was baptized Aug. 1, 1889, by his father; ordained a Deacon, Nov. 12, 1893, by Frank Merrill; ordained a teacher Dec. 7, 1897, by Nelson S. Bishop; ordained an Elder July 25, 1901, by Thomas C. Callister; ordained a High Priest and set apart as first counselor to John A. Beckstrand, president of the Millard Stake, Nov. 13, 1921, by Apostle Richard R. Lyman. Brother Callister held this position until Sept. 16, 1928, when, under the hands of Apostle David O. McKay, he was set apart as president of the Millard Stake, which position he now holds. Pres. Callister has always been active in the Church, working in the Sunday School and the Mutual Improvement Association, and from Oct. 23, 1925, to May 9, 1926, filled a mission in California, being the first short term missionary to volunteer his services. On May 17, 1906, in the Salt Lake Temple, he married Millie Peterson, daughter of Andreas and Adelaide Mathews Peterson of Scipio, Utah. To this union were born the following children: Edith Helen, Leland Clark, Duane Harold, Blane, Rulon Andreas and Grant Thomas.

While Brother Callister has never sought political office, he has served as city engineer, city councilman and mayor of Fillmore City, county surveyor of Millard County and State representative to the Utah Legislature. Always being active in civic affairs, he was one of the organizers and the first president of the Fillmore Commercial Club; district chairman of the Liberty Loan Committee; chairman of the East Millard Chapter of American Red Cross; chairman of Millard County division of Utah Taxpayers Association; chairman of Millard County District of Boy Scouts of America; chairman of the Sevier Canal Water Users Association and member of the executive committee of the Sevier River Water Users Association.

Brother Callister has been active in his profession as an engineer. He has held positions with the U. S. Reclamation Service, doing work in Utah, Idaho and Nevada, and also with the U. S. Forest Service. He obtained his position with the Forest Service so that he might have a better opportunity to study water supply, erosion and flood control, and it was largely through his untiring efforts as an engineer and officer of Fillmore City that floods have been controlled in the Fillmore mountains. He has been successively resident and construction engineer for the Sevier River Land and Water Company; engineer and manager of the Pahvant Irrigation District; engineer and manager of the East Millard Canal Company; director and vice president and president of the Central Utah Water Company. He was one of the organizers of the Millard County Telegraph and Telephone Company and for more than thirty years has been its manager and engineer. This company has six exchanges in Millard County and more than two hundred miles of toll lines. Brother Callister has also been engaged in farming, stockraising and banking.

During the present year (1936) Brother Callister in company with his son, Duane, who had just completed a three and one-half year mission in Czechoslovakia, toured Norway, Sweden, Denmark (the birthplace of Duane's grandfather Peterson), Germany, Czechoslovakia, Austria, Italy, France, Belgium, Holland, England, Isle of Man (the birthplace of his grandfather, Thomas Callister), Egypt, Palestine, Greece, and Yugoslavia, gathering genealogical data, visiting many of the missions of the Church, and studying the political, economic and religious conditions of the people of these countries. When they returned home, they returned with the firm conviction that America is in very deed a favored land in which to live. "A land which is choice above all other lands."
