Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Critchlow, William

Critchlow, William, a Utah pioneer of 1851, was born July 8, 1808, in East Deer township, Allegheny Co., Pennsylvania, at the head waters of the Roaring Run, which empties in the Allegheny River. It seems that Wm. Critchlow was destined to endure a life of suffering; yet he was never known to complain, but felt that the hand of the Lord was over him. When he was about nine years old he received a shock from plunging into a river to bathe when his body was overheated. A white swelling in his ankle was the result and for about a year he was confined to his bed and walked with crutches for some time afterwards. After the death of his father on March 11, 1828, he was for four years the sole support of his widowed mother and eight children, as his elder brother was away training to become a Presbyterian preacher. His brother having returned home, young William married Harriet Hawkins of Indiana County, Penn., on Feb. 14, 1832, and moved to Leechburg, Penn., where he built a home. On July 27, 1838, while supervising the building of a draw bridge on the Pennsylvania Canal, at a point near Saltsburg, he fell a distance of eighteen feet, striking his back on a log, and sustained an injury to his spine which resulted in the complete paralysis of his lower limbs. Such a handicap, to most men would have been a stop to future progress, but to a man of Wm. Critchlow's caliber, it meant only another obstacle which must be overcome.

In the month of February, 1839, he first heard the Gospel preached by the Elders and was visited by Elder Freeman Nickerson, who left with him a copy of the Book of Mormon and one of the Doctrine and Covenants. Receiving a strong testimony of the truth of the Gospel by reading these books, Wm. Critchlow was baptized in May of the same year by Samuel James and ordained an Elder in the month of August following by Elder Peter Dustin. In May, 1840, Brother Critchlow was appointed to preside over the Leechburg Branch of the Church. On April 21, 1844, he arrived in Nauvoo on the steamer "Charlotte" and was met at the pier by the Prophet Joseph Smith to whom he was introduced by the Prophet's brother William. After the martyrdom of the Prophet, Brother Critchlow moved to a settlement 27 miles south of Nauvoo, where he purchased and operated a twenty-five acre farm, but in 1845, on account of mob violence, he fled with his family to Nauvoo, where he received his blessings and was ordained a Seventy and later in 1845 was ordained a High Priest. After the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo in 1846, Brother Critchlow and his family settled in Garden Grove, Iowa, where both he and his wife taught school. Here they remained three years and Brother Critchlow was appointed the first Justice of the Peace at Garden Grove and during the last year of his residence there, presided over the branch.

On Oct. 8, 1851, Brother Critchlow, wife and three children arrived in Utah and located in Ogden where he made his permanent home and taught school for a time. In August, 1852, he was elected Justice of the Peace, re-elected to this position in 1854 and also served as an alderman of the First ward in Ogden. In 1855 he was elected clerk and city recorder, which offices he filled with fidelity for eleven years. He then served as recorder for Weber County for twelve years.

Brother Critchlow never held a grudge against any who might have wronged him. On one occasion he was thrown from his buggy and lay in the road unable to get up without his crutches. A man passed whom Brother Critchlow, in his capacity of judge, had sentenced for some misdemeanor. This man jeered and laughed at Brother Critchlow in his pitiable condition and passed on without rendering him any assistance. But when, some time later, on account of drought many of the people in Weber County were destitute of bread stuff, this man was one of the first to receive a supply of flour from Brother Critchlow. On Oct. 24, 1880, Brother Critchlow was ordained a Patriarch by Pres. George Q. Cannon, and he died in Ogden, Utah, June 7, 1894. He was survived by two children, namely, Benjamin C. Critchlow (bishop of the Ogden First Ward), and William F. Critchlow. His only daughter, Charlotte Canfield, (with whom he made his home after his wife's death in March, 1887), died the year previous to his death, and two children (Lazarus and Charles) died in infancy. Brother Critchlow's life was very happy. During fifty-four years of married life, Brother and Sister Critchlow were scarcely separated for a day and they were greatly devoted to each other.

Wm. Critchlow was of Scotch descent. His grandfather, Wm. Critchlow, was called the Hero of the Battle of Saratoga in the Revolutionary war, because of distinguished service at that time. William's maternal grandfather, Lieut. Benjamin Coe, came to America about 1635 and his many descendants have been known throughout the United States ever since as citizens of outstanding character and accomplishments, numbering among them the subject of this sketch.

Brother Critchlow was paralyzed for fifty-two years from his waist down, but this handicap did not prevent him from accomplishing more than most men do who have the use of all their limbs. He not only took up land and supervised the work on it, but with his arms and hands did many things which were necessary to be done in pioneer times, and he became comfortably well off financially. He was a devout student of the Scriptures and the reading of the Bible was a part of the family worship strictly adhered to night and morning in his home. He made God his friend and one could not be in his presence long without being made aware of this close communion. He acknowledged the hand of God in all of his afflictions and felt that they were for his good.

The Gospel was uppermost in his mind and the desire to spread it paramount in his soul. He devoted much of his time writing to his relatives in the east explaining the Gospel to them. They, in turn, felt that his accident had affected his mind for in no other way could they understand his affiliation with such a despised people as the "Mormons." He sent his two sons and two grandsons upon missions before his death, and, through his correspondence was able to gather a considerable record of his relatives and have work done in the temple for them. His life was a benediction to his family and his memory will ever be cherished by them.
