Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Eriksen, Bendt Jensen

Eriksen, Bendt Jensen, a missionary to Scandinavia and to the Indians, was born Oct. 18, 1832, in Vasingered, Frederiksborg and, Sjaelland, Denmark, the son of Christian Eriksen and Dorthea Bendt. The early part of his life was spent with his parents in Copenhagen and vicinity. Receiving such education as the public schools of his country and time afforded, he made the best of his opportunity, as evidenced by his breadth of information and his unusual command of the Danish language.

He married early in life and became the father of three children, but a contagious disease very soon robbed him of his entire family. When he was yet a young man he joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and immediately became one of its missionaries.

In February, 1864, he sailed for America. The ship "Louis Napoleon," on which he was passenger, caught fire and was burned in mid-ocean. With other passengers, he lingered for three days in small life boats, but they were finally rescued. He, however, lost all his baggage, landing in New York almost penniless.

His westward journey was typical of the immigrant youth of his time. He worked a few days and used his earnings to carry him westward. After some weeks he arrived in the Middle West, where he joined a company of "Mormon" pioneers and secured transportation across the Plains, which was nothing other than an opportunity to walk beside an ox team.

In Utah his was the life of a typical pioneer. Arriving in Salt Lake Valley in the early 60s, he became one of Utah's frontiersmen. He first settled in Weber county, and later in Box Elder and Cache counties, and finally made his home in Preston, Idaho.

His entire life was dedicated to the welfare of his family, community and Church. He filled two missions in his native land, Denmark, and one among the Indians of Arizona in 1870. He was a courageous defender of his religious principles, and until his death active in civic and religious enterprises.

For a number of years Brother Eriksen was president of the Scandinavian organization in the Oneida Stake and traveled extensively among the communities of southern Idaho, giving temporal and spiritual assistance to foreigners, who were attempting to build homes in the new country.

He reared a large family. His wife, Anna Jepperson, whom he married while at Milton, died after giving birth to one child, Anna. He later married Ellen Jonasson, who bore him three children, namely, Marie (deceased), Peter and Moroni (deceased). Still later he married Anna Sophia Danielson who bore him three children, Eldena (deceased), Ephraim Edward, and Alma D.

Brother Eriksen has also numerous grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

Moral courage, a fine sense of justice, undying devotion to his family, his community and his church, marked his career. He died in October, 1906, at the age of 73.
