Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Fridal, Knud Hansen

Fridal, Knud Hansen, second Bishop of the Elwood Ward, Tremonton, Box Elder Co., Utah, was born Jan. 21, 1854, on the island of Fyen, Denmark, a son of Hans Olsen and Karen Marie Jorgensdatter. When about fourteen years old he heard the Gospel and was converted to its truth. He emigrated to Utah in 1873, with 976 Latter-day Saints, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Wisconsin" which arrived in New York, July 2, 1873. Continuing the journey by rail he arrived in Ogden, July 24, 1873. Soon afterwards he located in Bear River City and in 1875 was called by Pres. Lorenzo Snow to labor for two years in the United Order, which had been established in Box Elder County at that time. For a few months he worked in the tailor shop in Brigham City and then, at his own request, was given the position of chief herder of the Co-op dairy stock. During this time there were many Indians around and he became acquainted with some of them, who remained his friends long afterwards. It also gave him a chance to study and enjoy nature, which he so dearly loved. Brother Fridal remained with the United Order until it was dissolved. He also labored faithfully as a ward teacher, ward chorister, officer in the Y. M. M. I. A. and Sunday School, and as he was an excellent musician, his ability to play the violin and other instruments was a great help to the community. He was one of the founders of the Bear River Brass Band. From 1895 to 1897 he filled a mission to Denmark, laboring principally in the cities of Esbjerg and Copenhagen. When the Manila Ward was organized Dec. 16, 1900, Brother Fridal was chosen second counselor in the bishopric. On Sept. 6, 1908, he was advanced to the position of first counselor in the same ward, then called Elwood. On Oct. 11, 1908, when the Bear River Stake was organized, Elder Fridal was appointed Bishop of the Elwood Ward and set apart to that office by Apostle George F. Richards. He served as Bishop until Nov. 12, 1914, when the ward was divided into the Elwood and Tremonton wards, when he was honorably released. On Dec. 12, 1914, he was set apart as president of the High Priests Quorum of the Bear River Stake, in which capacity he visited the different wards of the stake each month with the High Council. In a civil capacity Brother Fridal served eight years as Justice of the Peace of the Manila Precinct. He passed away at his home in Tremonton, Oct. 25, 1933.

The following extract is taken from the local newspaper published at the time of his death: "He was a kind and loving husband and father, a man possessed of those characteristics admired by all-kind and charitable, gentle and forgiving, but firm in the right, he was a wise counselor and true friend, and was sought by many for his counsel and advice. He gave much of his time and means to assist in building up and developing this and surrounding communities."
