Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Gardner, James Hamilton

Gardner, James Hamilton, the first Bishop of the Lehi Second Ward (Alpine Stake), Utah Co., Utah, was born July 29, 1859, at Mill Creek, Salt Lake Co., Utah, the son of Archibald Gardner and Sarah Hamilton. His father was a Utah pioneer of 1847, a natural leader of men, resourceful, energetic, able to cope with new conditions, and as a mill builder and pioneer had but few equals in the West. The father being too busy with public works to spend much time with his children, James H. was compelled to depend largely upon himself from his early youth. Like most others of that period he had but little opportunity for education, his entire school life consisting of six winters in the common schools. The rest of his time was spent working upon the farm and, after he had reached young manhood, in the lumber camps. He was baptized when about eight years old and subsequently ordained to the Priesthood. In 1880-1884 he filled a mission to Hawaii and for three years and a half he was engaged in both missionary and secular labors in that "garden spot of the world." Arriving upon the islands just at the time the sugar boiler on the Laie plantation was about to return home, Brother Gardner was assigned to work in the sugar mill and thereby became a thorough master of the art of boiling sugar. After his return to Utah he was ordained a Seventy by Abraham H. Cannon and followed various kinds of employment. In 1886 (Oct. 15) he married Rhoda Priscilla Huffaker (daughter of Simpson D. Huffaker and Rhoda P. Barhum), who was born Dec. 30, 1864. This union has been blessed with nine children, namely, James Hamilton, Archibald Delos, Viola, Vera, Reid Huffaker, LeRoy Barnurn, Marian, Ferne, and Lois. Soon after his marriage, Brother Hamilton located in the great Snake River Valley in Idaho and struggled for several years to subdue this new country, making it fit for habitation. In 1890 the Lehi sugar factory was built, and as an immediate necessity of obtaining workmen to run it arose, Brother Gardner was summoned to Lehi and became a successful sugar maker, serving successively as sugar boiler, night foreman, general foreman, and finally as superintendent of the factory. Later he was made general consulting superintendent and a member of the technical board which controls the operation of the plants.

Since his residence in Lehi, Elder Gardner has given a large part of his time and talents to the work of public service, serving one term in the city council, and also as a commissioner of Utah County. He helped to establish new enterprises in Lehi, extending his activities to the mercantile and banking business, and to dry farming, fruit culture and stock raising.

In 1903, when the Lehi Ward was divided, James H. Gardner was chosen Bishop of the Lehi Second Ward.
