Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Bennion, Harden

Bennion, Harden, first counselor in the presidency of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, from 1923 to 1929, was born Oct. 7, 1862, in Taylorsville, Salt Lake County, Utah, the son of John Bennion and Esther A. Birch. In the fall of 1868, when 6 years old, he accompanied his parents and their three other sons on an overland journey by teams to West Point, a village rounded by Latter-day Saints on the Muddy in southeastern Nevada, to which place the family had been called by the authorities of the Church. The following 5 years were spent in that locality doing pioneer labors, including the handling of sheep and cattle in-trusted to the care of the Bennions by their neighbors. The herd-ground included what is now Long Valley, Meadow Valley, Eagle Valley (now in Nevada) and Desert Spring, near Modena, Utah. In the fall of 1873, the family with three additional members (Owen, Willard Richards and Ida) returned to the old home at Taylorsville, but the following year Harden went back with his father to Panaca, Nevada, and drove 400 sheep from there to Rush Valley, Tooele Co., Utah, a distance of 300 miles. In the spring of 1876 the family moved to Vernon, Tooele Co., Utah, which became their home for 30 years or more. Harden attended district schools for several years during the winter and worked on the farm in the spring and summer. He also herded sheep near Vernon and handled ranch cattle as occasion required. In October, 1878, he was appointed to the normal scholarship at the Deseret University, now the University of Utah, and at the close of the school year, he received a certificate of graduation and as a teacher. But instead of teaching school he went back to his Vernon home and for seven years worked on the farm or herded sheep in the mountains. Later, he accepted a clerical position in the office of George M. Cannon, then recorder of Salt Lake County, where he worked until May 31, 1893, on which date he married Miss Vilate Kimball Nebeker, daughter of George Nebeker and Elizabeth Dilworth, in the Salt Lake Temple. After his marriage he was employed by the Security Abstract Company in Salt Lake City, and later became manager of the Ashley Cooperative Mercantile Institution in Vernal, Uintah Co., Utah, where his brother, Samuel R. Bennion, acted as president of the Uintah Stake for 19 years. During this time, Harden assisted in the organization of the Bank of Vernal, of which he was made director and later a vice-president; he also became a stockholder and director in the Ashley Cooperative Mercantile Institution. At Vernal he acted as a member of the Board of Trustees of the newly incorporated town of Vernal, and also served as town clerk. Later, when the town became incorporated as a city, he acted as a member of the City Council. He also served as postmaster at Vernal, and in November, 1898, was elected a state senator to the Utah Legislature from the counties of Uintah, Carbon, Emery, Grand and San Juan. At the close of 4 years he was reelected in 1902 for another 4-year term in the same position. While acting in this capacity he was appointed by Governor Heber M. Wells to serve as a member of the Utah Arid Land Reclamation Company Fund Commission, which position he held for four years. After terminating his services with the Ashley Coop. Mercantile Institution in the spring of 1908, he devoted his time and attention to ranching and live-stock business, his ranch being located at Leota on Green River, about 25 miles south of Vernal. While thus engaged he was, much to his surprise, appointed by Governor William Spry in the spring of 1909 to serve as a member of the Utah State Board of Equalization. He acted in that capacity for the ensuing 8 years, with the exception of about 10 months of the years 1912-1913, during which time, at the request of the governor, he acted as a member of the Utah Commission on Taxation and Revenue. In the fall of 1916 he was elected secretary of State, in which capacity he served until the close of the year 1920. During the succeeding four years he acted as office manager of the Salt Lake City office of the Provo Reservoir Company and the Utah Lake Irrigation Company, and while so engaged joined with Joseph R. Murdock (president of said company) in the organization of the Wasatch Livestock Loan Company, of which he also acted as secretary-treasurer, and as a member of the board of directors, which latter position he held until 1930.

In the fall of 1924 he was chosen as state chairman of the Democratic State Committee and acted as such through the campaign of that year, with the result that George H. Dern, head of the Democratic ticket, was elected governor. In March, 1925, Harden Bennion was appointed Commissioner of Agriculture and served in that office during the following four years, and at the legislative session of the year 1929, he was elected to the same office and served for an additional term of four years.

Born and reared a member of the "Mormon" Church he has always taken an active part in Church affairs. He was baptized by his father, John Bennion, when he was about eight years of age. On July 31, 1887, he was ordained a Seventy by Lysander Gee. Soon after his removal to Vernal in 1893 he was made president of the ward Y. M. M. I. A., and in August, 1898, he was chosen as second counselor to Bishop John N. Davis of the Vernal Ward. Later he acted as first counselor to Bishop Davis. When the Uintah Stake of Zion was re-organized in 1906, he was chosen as a member of the stake High Council, and later became first counselor to President William H. Smart. Following his appointment by Gov. Spry to serve on the State Board of Equalization he was released from his position in the Uintah Stake presidency, and, removing to Salt Lake City, he served as a member of the High Council of the Salt Lake Stake. Due to his financial interests in the Uintah country, he spent part of his time there, and while looking after his interests in the Uintah Basin he was chosen as stake clerk of the Duchesne Stake in 1914, and acted in this capacity for a period of two years. Due to his election as secretary of state in the fall of 1916, and the imperative demands for his whole time in that position, he was released from his missionary call in the Uintah country and was shortly afterwards chosen as a member of the High Council in the Salt Lake Stake, which position he held until March 11, 1923, when he was appointed to serve as first counselor in the Salt Lake Stake Presidency. He held that position until June 16, 1929, when the stake presidency was re-organized, after which Bro. Bennion again became a member of the High Council of the Salt Lake Stake, which position he still holds. His marriage with Vilate Kimball Nebeker has been blessed with 5 children, viz., Aurelia, Ida, Florence, Esther and Bernice. With the exception of Ida, who died in infancy, all these children have been educated in the district and high schools of the state, and all have received graduation degrees from the University of Utah.
