Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Giles, James Arthur

Giles, James Arthur, seventh Bishop of the 14th Ward (Salt Lake Stake), Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Aug. 20, 1889, in Salt Lake City, the son of James Joseph Giles and Annie Grace Winter. He was ordained a Deacon, Jan. 31, 1902, by Joshua E. Salisbury; a Teacher, June 5, 1907, by Nels Monson; a Priest, Aug. 7, 1907, by Chr. N. Christensen; an Elder, Nov. 11, 1907, by Frank D. Jones; a Seventy, Jan. 31, 1915, by Seymour B. Young, and a High Priest, May 2, 1920, by Charles H. Hyde. In each of these quorums he held leading positions, being president of a Deacons' Quorum, president of a Teachers' Quorum, secretary in a Priests' Quorum and instructor in Elders' and Seventies' Quorum. From 1908 to 1910 he labored as a missionary in the Western States Mission, during which time he acted as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in Denver. He also served as president of Y. M. M. I. A. in the 26th Ward for two years, member of the Stake Board of Y. M. M. I. A. in the Pioneer Stake for ten years (part of the time as counselor in the superintendency, and later as stake superintendent of Y. M. M. I. A.) Bro. Giles also served as chairman of the 26th Ward Recreation Committee for three years and on the Pioneer Stake Recreation Committee for several years. He served as a member of the High Council in the Pioneer Stake and also in the Salt Lake Stake.

While residing in the 17th Ward (Salt Lake Stake) he acted as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. for two years, and as supervisor of Priesthood activity for one year, and, while still a member of that ward was called to succeed George Q. Morris as Bishop of the 14th Ward, being ordained a Bishop and set apart to that position, Jan. 13, 1924, by Melvin J. Ballard. After serving as Bishop of the 14th Ward for more than twelve years, Bishop Giles was honorably released at a ward conference held Oct. 18, 1936, having been called into the Salt Lake Stake High Council to supervise the labors of the Aaronic Priesthood, a position for which he is particularly fitted, having previously labored with such marked success in Y. M. M. I. A. work.

On April 24, 1912, Bro. Giles married Alice Margaret Stanley (daughter of Bishop Frank Stanley) in the Salt Lake Temple. This union has been blessed with six children, namely, Margaret Annie, Mary Alice, Shirley Grace, Jean Arline and James Arthur (twins who died within two weeks of birth), and Virginia Aleen. Bishop Giles has followed the printing business practically all his life, having commenced that work when only 14 years of age. Bishop Giles is blessed with a very genial disposition and seems to be specially suited to fill the position he occupies in the Salt Lake Stake.
