Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Grover, Thomas, Jr.

Grover, Thomas, Jr., a Utah Pioneer of 1847, was born Nov. 17, 1845, in Nauvoo, Illinois, a son of Thomas Grover and Hannah Tupper. During the exodus from Nauvoo in February, 1846, he was saved from drowning by his mother holding him on her shoulder as the ferry boat on which they were crossing the Mississippi river dipped water until the wagon boxes were full.

He came with his parents to the Salt Lake Valley, arriving Oct. 2, 1847, in Charles C. Rich's company.

In the spring of 1848 he located in Centerville, and later moved to Farmington, Davis Co. He accompanied his parents back to Iowa in 1850, and returned in 1853, having walked the greater part of the distance and helped to drive 150 cows from the Missouri river to the Salt Lake Valley.

He spent most of his boyhood herding cattle on the promontory west of Brigham City and farther south along the lake bottoms. Many times he assisted his father in butchering beef and cutting meat in pieces weighing from ten to twenty pounds each; and helped to distribute it to their neighbors in Farmington for Sunday or Christmas dinners.

In 1861 he drove a team back to the States in Captain Joseph Horne's company to help bring in the poor emigrating saints. The teamsters were five months on the road. Brother Grover was a member of the posse under Robert T. Burton who broke up the Morrisite camp on the Weber in 1862.

In the fall of 1864 he accompanied George Heiner and Wyman Parker to Morgan County, and spent the Christmas holidays with the family of Martin Heiner. On the 10th of February, 1865, he married their daughter, Elizabeth, being sealed in the Endowment House by Heber C. Kimball. Their first child, Thomas Martin Grover, was born in Morgan, Nov. 27, 1866.

Owing to the grasshopper depredations in Morgan County during the summer of 1868, Brother Grover took his wife and baby and went to Farmington to work on the threshing machine. There his second child, Evelyn Maria, was born. Soon after the October conference that year he was called to settle on the "Muddy," and thus became one of the founders of St. Joseph, Nevada. The "Muddy" Valley at that time constituted a part of Utah. On the journey down their mules were stolen by the Indians, leaving the travelers stranded nearly one hundred miles away from their destination, until help could be sent to them. They loved the country, and raised wonderful crops, but the Indian troubles and the excessive taxes of Nevada impelled President Young to release the colonists from their mission and instruct them to return home or go elsewhere, where conditions were more favorable. Brother Grover went back to Morgan, and spent a good part of the time in 1871 and 1872 in the Endowment House doing baptismal work for his dead kindred on his mother's line.

He moved to Nephi, Juab Co., in 1872, where he remained until August, 1879, when he again returned to Morgan. During his sojourn at Nephi he served as town constable and worked at blacksmithing and farming. For three years he presided over the Mound's branch of the Church. In 1877 he and his mother went to St. George and did work for the dead in the temple. At that time he married Louisa Ann Picton.

In 1883 he was set apart by William W. Taylor to preside over the 35th Quorum of Seventy, which position he held with honor until 1910. Shortly after that he was ordained a High Priest, and was called to officiate as an ordinance worker in the Logan Temple, where he rendered very faithful service, which especially endeared him to Pres. M. W. Merrill. He performed 9090 baptisms in that Temple. In 1885 (May 7), he married Ann B. Saunders, who became the mother of two sons and one daughter.

Three years (1901 to 1904) he spent in Rexburg, Fremont Co., Idaho, to which place his older children had removed. While there he labored as a stone mason, helping to erect the Rick's Academy, the Rexburg Central School and several other public buildings. He also did extensive building construction in Afton, Wyoming. In 1880 and 1881 he worked as overseer for Grover, McCune & Reed in railroad construction in Colorado. He also helped to build the Utah Central Railroad through Juab County.

His character was outstanding for integrity, honesty and true charity. The widow, the down-trodden and the missionary's family were always objects of his special care. He was rigidly punctual in all his affairs, a conscientious worker, a faithful observer of the Word of Wisdom, extremely temperate in all his habits and true to every trust.

He was the father of six sons and thirteen daughters, all faithful Latter-day Saints.

Elder Grover died May 24, 1931, at the home of his daughter, Hannah G. Hegsted in Salt Lake City, Utah.
