Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Heaton, Charles Carroll

Heaton, Charles Carroll, president of the Kanab Stake of Zion, was born Dec. 4, 1880, at Cotton Farm, Washington County, Utah, the son of Jonathan Heaton and Lucy E. Carroll. When about three years old he moved with his parents to Orderville, where he was raised and attended school. He was baptized July 7, 1889, by Alvin F. Heaton, ordained a Deacon, Feb. 6, 1897, by Charles W. Carroll, and an Elder, Nov. 28, 1900, by Edward Carroll. From his earliest youth he took an active part in the Orderville Sunday School, acting at one time as its superintendent and he also held the positions of secretary and first counselor in the ward Y. M. M. I A. He moved to the Moccasin farm in 1900, soon after marrying Margaret Cox, Nov. 28, 1900, in the St. George Temple. This marriage has been blessed with ten children, namely, Charles Leonard, Jennie, Clifford K., Richard, Keziah, Jonathan Grant, Grace, Melvin Kelsey, Margaret Alice, and Lavina Ann. Prior to 1900 President Heaton's parents had located at Moccasin Springs, in fact when the United Order in Orderville was dissolved and the property previously owned by the corporation was distributed, the Heaton family received as their portion the Moccasin Farm. In due course of time some of the family moved to other parts of the country and Jonathan Heaton and his sons became the sole owners of the Moccasin Springs property. After the death of Jonathan Heaton, the ranch was owned by his widow, Mrs. Lucy E. Heaton and her six sons, who now occupy seven beautiful homes at the Moccasin Springs and constitute the entire population of the Moccasin Springs Branch of the Church, numbering about seventy souls. Charles C. Heaton was appointed president of the branch when it was first organized. He held that position until 1913, when he was called on a mission to the Northern States. On that occasion he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. On his mission he labored eight months in the South Chicago Branch (or the Roseland Branch), later for eight months as president of the Wisconsin Conference and then nine months as president of the Manitoba Conference in Canada. After returning from his mission, he acted as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in the Kanab Stake and also as a member of the High Council. These positions he held until Feb. 25, 1934, when he was set apart as president of the stake.

In a secular capacity President Heaton has acted as postmaster, justice of the peace and state livestock inspector. He is a successful farmer and stock raiser and has from his early youth exhibited spiritual and civil leadership. Both in Canada and the United States he has taken an active part in the Boy Scout movement.
