Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Herrick, John Lester

Herrick, John Lester, president of the Western States Mission, from 1908 to 1919, was born in Ogden, Utah, June 2, 1868, a son of Lester James Herrick, and Agnes McQuarrie. His boyhood and young manhood were spent in the Second Ward of Ogden, where he served in the presidency of the Deacons' and Teachers' Quorums, and had charge of the Priests under the direction of Bishop Robert McQuarrie. He also acted as secretary and later as president of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association of the Ogden Second Ward, presided over the ward choir and served as business manager of the Second Ward Dramatic Club for many years. He was ordained an Elder in May, 1894, by John Scowcroft, and a High Priest in 1899 by Apostle Franklin D. Richards. In 1889 he was chosen secretary of the Stake Board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association and became superintendent of said board in 1899, serving in that capacity until the division of Weber Stake in 1908. Prior to that he was a member of the High Council for five years.

In the fall of 1908 he was called to preside over the Western States Mission with headquarters at Denver, Colorado, and assumed the duties of that position, Jan. 1, 1909. During his administration he built the present chapel and mission home at Denver. After being released in July, 1919, he acted as president of the Denver Branch in 1928-1934.

In 1894 (June 1) he married Jane Richards West in the Salt Lake Temple, Apostle Franklin D. Richards performing the ceremony. This union has been blessed with three children, namely, Josephine, John West, and Lester James.

Brother Herrick started work as an office boy in the Z. C. M. I. at Ogden in 1885 and remained with that institution for five years; he was assistant bookkeeper when he resigned to go to the First National Bank of Ogden as bookkeeper. Five years later he was appointed assistant postmaster at Ogden, which position he occupied for six years. He resigned to join the Boyle Furniture Company as secretary-treasurer, and two years later he entered into a partnership with George J. Kelly as "Kelly & Herrick Real Estate & Insurance." This partnership continued for five years or until he was called on a mission to the Western States in 1908. After being released from his mission, he remained in Denver with his family and engaged in insurance brokerage; continued in that line until he received his present appointment as guide in the Church Office Building, April 15, 1936. His wife died in Salt Lake City, Sept. 11, 1936, at the age of sixty-two, following an operation.
