Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Jensen, Hans Peter

Jensen, Hans Peter, presiding Elder of Mantua Ward, Box Elder County, Utah, was born in Ny Hegested, Sjalland, Denmark, March 3, 1815, and learned the blacksmith trade when a very young man. He joined a religious movement in Copenhagen in 1834, and became a member of a faction of the Lutheran Church, called "Kirketroende." In 1839, when the first Baptist missionaries came from Hamburg to Copenhagen, he became fascinated by the Bible doctrines taught by them, was shortly afterwards baptized and made a member of the first Baptist church in Scandinavia. Shortly afterwards he went as a Baptist missionary to the city of Aalborg, Jutland, where he succeeded in raising up a branch of that church, of which he was appointed president, or "Forstander." About the same time he laid the foundation of a flourishing foundry and blacksmithing business in the adjacent town of Norre Sundby, in which he was very successful, and soon became a man of considerable means and influence.

In the fall of 1850, Elder Geo. P. Dykes arrived in Aalborg, as the first "Mormon" missionary in Jutland, and began to preach the fulness of the Gospel. Hans Peter Jensen opposed him at first, but was soon convinced of the truth, after which he with his wife and six others were baptized Oct. 27, 1850, as the first fruits of Elder Dykes' labors in Aalborg. A flourishing branch sprang into existence in Aalborg a month later, mostly made up from persons who formerly were Baptists and Hans P. Jensen was ordained a Priest and appointed to preside over it. Almost immediately after this a severe persecution arose against the Saints, among whom Brother Jensen was the main object of the people's hatred and his life was sought several times. Upon one occasion the mob forced him to flee from his home and family, and run about 20 miles, to a place where he could escape on a steamer bound for Copenhagen. Subsequently he spent most of his time in the missionary field and traveled extensively in Denmark and Norway. He organized the two first branches of the Church in the latter country and also organized the first branch in the dukedom of Schleswig, which at that time belonged to the Danish monarchy. He was constantly subjected to severe persecution, and at one time very roughly handled on the island of Bornholm. At a conference, held in Copenhagen in February, 1852, he was ordained to the office of a High Priest by Erastus Snow and appointed a counselor to Elder John E. Forsgren, who at the same time was appointed president of the Scandinavian Mission pro tem. He subsequently occupied the same position to Elder Willard Snow, who was sent from England to take charge of the Church in Scandinavia. When Pres. Willard Snow took sick in August, 1853, and started for England, Elders Hans P. Jensen and Peter O. Hansen accompanied him and were with him on the steamer when he died and his body buried in the North Sea.

Elder Jensen continued his missionary career until the fall of 1853, when with his family he emigrated to Utah, after he had sold his valuable factory in Norre Sundby and spent the means derived therefrom for the benefit of the mission and the emigration of the poor. Shortly after his arrival in Utah he located in Brigham City, being one of the first settlers of that place. In the spring of 1863, about a dozen Danish families were called by the Church authorities to settle in the "Little Valley," three miles east of Brigham City, in charge of Hans Peter Jensen. The place was named Mantua after Pres. Lorenzo's Snow's birthplace in Ohio. Here Elder Jensen presided until 1877. During that time he had retained his home in Brigham City where he resided until his death, May 29, 1883. He filled numerous positions of trust and responsibility and was devoted in supporting Pres. Snow all through the period of the Brigham City cooperative movement. He left a large family, having 35 sons and daughters.
