Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Johnson, John Edward

Johnson, John Edward, first counselor in the presidency of the San Francisco Stake of Zion, was born Oct. 2, 1890, in Murray, Salt Lake Co., Utah, the son of John Johnson and Edla Wilhelmina Lundell. His parents being staunch Latter-day Saints, the boy, John Edward, was trained in the principles of the Gospel from his early youth and was baptized November 6, 1898, by Robert L. Campbell, and subsequently ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest and Elder. When a few months old, he moved with his parents from Murray to Benjamin, Utah Co., Utah, where he received a common school education, graduating from the eighth grade in the spring of 1906. At the age of seventeen, he entered the High School Department of the Brigham Young University at Provo, graduating from that school in 1911. He then entered upon college work in the Brigham Young University, graduating with the degree of A. B. in the spring of 1915. During his last year of study there he functioned as president of the student body. In 1912-1913 .he taught school in Hinckley, Utah, and later acted as principal of the Snowflake Stake Academy at Snowflake, Arizona. After moving to Berkeley, California, in the fall of 1917, he entered the School of Jurisprudence of the University of California, graduating with the degree of Juris Doctor in the spring of 1920. After being admitted to the bar in 1920, he commenced the practice of law in Provo, Utah, being associated with Alfred August Booth and Isaac E. Brockbank. Leaving Provo in December, 1921, he became a title examiner in the Federal Land Bank of Berkeley, at Berkeley, California. He became attorney for said bank in August, 1922, and attorney for the Federal Intermediate Credit Bank of Berkeley upon its organization in 1923. Resigning these positions in August, 1926, he became attorney for the Pacific Coast Joint Stock Land Bank of San Francisco and Mercantile Mortgage Company. In 1931 he became a member of the law firm of Johnson, Ruggeri and Harmon with offices in the Federal Reserve Bank Building. In 1932, Mr. Ruggeri returned to Utah, whereupon the firm became known as Johnson and Harmon. While attending the University of California, Brother Johnson acted as counselor to President W. Aird Macdonald for a short time in the Oakland Branch of the Church. When the Berkeley Branch was organized in November, 1929, he became the branch president and served in that capacity until July 10, 1927, when the San Francisco Stake was organized. Upon that occasion, he was chosen as first counselor in the presidency of said stake, which position he held until the stake was divided and Oakland Stake was organized, effective Jan. 1, 1935. He was ordained a High Priest and set apart to that position by Apostle George Albert Smith on July 10, 1927.

On June 22, 1916, he married Mamie Huish (Mary Elma Huish), daughter of James William and Mary Elizabeth Fillmore Huish, in the Salt Lake Temple. This union has been blessed with four children, namely, Robert Huish Johnson, Marion Huish Johnson, Carolyn Huish Johnson and Thomas Huish Johnson. On June 13, 1933, his wife, Mamie, passed away in Berkeley, where she is buried in the Sunset Memorial Cemetery. On Aug. 31, 1934, Elder Johnson married Miss Ethel La Von Brockbank, daughter of Taylor Park Brockbank and Sarah LeCheminant Brockbank, in the Salt Lake Temple, of which union there has been born a daughter.

Elder Johnson is a man of affairs, and with his study and natural ability he constitutes an important asset to the Oakland Stake of Zion.
