Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Jones, James Naylor

Jones, James Naylor, a Utah pioneer of 1849, was born April 3, 1810, at Baltimore, Maryland. He was residing in Ohio when L. D. S. missionary operations were commenced in that state. Becoming a convert to the restored Gospel he participated in the early activities of the Church in Ohio, and later became associated with the Prophet Joseph Smith, acting as his body guard upon many occasions in Missouri and Illinois. Brother Jones and his wife were the only members of the family who accepted the Gospel, the others being bitterly opposed to "Mormonism." While living in Nauvoo, James N. Jones and his wife (Sarah Ann Malerny Jones) suffered much persecution and mob violence, which on one occasion resulted in their house being burned and their only cow driven off, although it was known that Brother Jones had a family of little children to support. After being driven from Nauvoo, Brother Jones, with many of the exiled saints, located at Council Bluffs, Iowa, where he remained until 1849, when, crossing the plains with an ox team in a company of other emigrants, he arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley in the fall of that year. Soon after his arrival he located on Big Cottonwood Creek, but soon afterwards moved to Provo, Utah Co., where he was called to act as a counselor in the Utah Stake Presidency in 1855.

In 1859 he moved to Sanpete County to assist in rounding a settlement on the Sanpitch River. The site chosen was called North Bend because the river at that point changes its course to a somewhat southerly direction. Here the settlers quarried rock for the erection of a fort as a protection against Indians, and when a postoffice was established, the name of the settlement was changed to Fairview because of its pleasant location. Elder Jones was the first presiding Elder of the settlement, and under his direction a townsite was surveyed and city lots distributed, while farming land for each family was also designated.

Brother and Sister Jones raised a large family, one of whom, Thomas, was killed by Indians during the Black Hawk war while on picket guard. Brother Jones died at Fairview, Aug. 14, 1865, and his wife died there Feb. 14, 1886.
