Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Macdonald, Wallace Aird, jun.

Macdonald, Wallace Aird, jun., president of the San Francisco Stake of Zion, was born Jan. 10, 1887, at Mesa, Arizona, the son of Wallace Aird Macdonald and Sarah B. Brundage, and a grandson of Alexander F. Macdonald, the first president of the Maricopa and Juarez stakes. The boy, who was known as "Wallie," was baptized, March 7, 1895, by Warner H. Allen. After being active in his Church duties in Arizona, he was ordained an Elder, Sept. 28, 1905, by Morris C. Phelps, and from Oct. 15, 1905, to Feb. 5, 1908, filled a mission to the Southern States under the direction of Pres. Ben E. Rich, where he worked in the mission office and also labored as a missionary in the states of Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky and Ohio. He was active in Sunday School, M. I. A. and Priesthood organizations in the Maricopa Stake, where he held the offices of ward president of M. I. A., secretary of Sunday School, ward clerk and stake clerk. In 1911 he removed to San Francisco to follow newspaper work as an artist and reporter for the "Daily News," and later, the "Bulletin," and "Call." He was also associated with the N. E. A., a newspaper syndicate, for several years. From 1911 to 1915 he was active in Church work in the San Francisco branch, where he was a member of the Sunday School superintendency, and president of Y. M. M. I. A. In 1915 he moved to Berkeley, where he became active in the auxiliary organizations of the Oakland branch. In 1919 he was chosen second counselor to Pres. N. B. Phillips of that branch, and on May 5, 1920, was set apart by Pres. Jos. W. McMurrin as president of said branch, then belonging to the California Mission. The branch included all the East Bay district from Haywards to Vallejo. Under his direction, Sunday schools, and finally branches, were organized in Alameda, Elmhurst, Dimond, Berkeley, Richmond, Martinez, Haywards and Vallejo. On Jan. 24, 1926, he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle John A. Witdsoe; and when the San Francisco Stake was organized July 10, 1927, he was set apart by Apostles Rudger Clawson and George Albert Smith to preside over that stake.

On June 2, 1909, Pres. Macdonald married Nellie Lesueur, daughter of Pres. John T. Lesueur of the Maricopa Stake and Geneva Casto. The ceremony was performed by John R. Winder in the Salt Lake Temple. This union has been blessed with two sons, Clyde Lesueur (born March 23, 1912) and Keith Lesueur (born March 14, 1915), both in San Francisco,' California. Pres. Macdonald is a man of strong and pleasing personality, a capable leader and a devoted Latter-day Saint.
