Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Nielsen, Soren Michael

Nielsen, Soren Michael, third president of the North Sanpete Stake of Zion, was born June 4, 1886, at Viaborg, Aalborg amt, Denmark, son of Soren Christian Nielsen Gade and Johanne Marie Jensen (Renborg). He emigrated to Utah in 1895 with his mother and family, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Ethiopia." The family located in Mount Pleasant where the boy attended the public schools and where he was baptized when 11 years old by Henry Hasler and later ordained a Deacon. Brother Nielsen was ordained an Elder April 13, 1913, by Christian N. Lurid and acted as a counselor in the 1st Quorum of Elders in North Sanpete Stake from 1914 to 1917. In 1914 he was called to act as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in the Mount Pleasant South Ward which position he held for two years and was also a member of the ward Sunday School superintendency. After that he acted as Stake superintendent of Y. M. M. I. A. He was ordained a Seventy, July 15, 1922, and became a member of the 66th Quorum of Seventy. On April 1, 1923, he was ordained a High Priest by Rudger Clawson and set apart to preside over the North Sanpete Stake of Zion, which position he still held in 1930.

On April 16, 1913, Pres. Nielsen married Florence Ericksen, a daughter of Henry Ericksen and Wilhelmina Monson. This union has been blessed with five children, namely, Florence, Howard Soren, Don Ericksen, Grant Ericksen and Margerie.

In 1919 Pres. Nielsen moved into the Mount Pleasant North Ward, where he acted as an officer in the ward Y. M. M. I. A. and as ward scout master. In scout work he proved himself a most efficient officer and in 1921 led a successful excursion to Bryce Canyon with nearly 200 people, of whom 110 were regular scouts from the two Mount Pleasant wards. He also served as deputy scout commissioner for the North Sanpete Stake, and as president of the Bryce Canyon Council Of Boy Scouts of America. Later he was awarded the Silver Beaver award for distinguished service in scouting. From his boyhood days, Pres. Nielsen has been engaged in the sheep business, his interests extending into various parts of Utah and into Colorado, Wyoming and Idaho. In 1908 he became associated with the Ericksen Meat and Grocery Company as an employee and stockholder. At present he holds a controlling interest in the firm, is manager of the corporation and has charge of the company's store on Main street, Mount Pleasant. He is still interested in the sheep industry and also in banking .enterprises. Being deeply interested in civic affairs, he served for seven years in the Utah National Guard and in 1916-1917 did actual military service on the Mexican border as a captain of cavalry. He served as a member of the Utah Water Storage Commission under Governor Dern and Governor Blood successively, was president of the Snow College Board until that school was turned over to the State and served as chairman of the Board of county commissioners of Sanpete County in 1933 and 1934. Summing up we may say that Pres. Nielsen has distinguished himself as a successful business man, a good citizen and an energetic Church worker.
