Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Palmer, William Rees

Palmer, William Rees, eighth president of the Parowan Stake of Zion, was born at Cedar City, Iron County, Utah, May 7, 1877, the son of Richard Palmer and Johanna Rees. He was baptized July 25, 1885, by Charles Heyborne, ordained a Deacon by Bishop Wm. H. Corry and subsequently ordained a Teacher and a Priest. He was ordained an Elder by his father in 1897 and ordained a Seventy in December, 1897, by Apostle George Teasdale. In 1897-1900 he filled a mission to the Southwestern States, laboring principally in what was then Indian Territory (now Oklahoma) and Kansas, presiding part of the time over the Cherokee Conference, and serving as mission secretary during the latter part of his mission. From his earliest youth he was active in Church affairs; thus he acted as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in 1895-1897, and as superintendent of the Ward Sunday School for twelve years (1902-1914). He also acted as a president of the 63rd Quorum of Seventy, and filled the position of stake clerk from 1900 to 1909. On Sept. 20, 1908, he was ordained a High Priest and served as a member of the Parowan Stake High Council from 1909 to 1918. On June 22, 1918, he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Richard R. Lyman and set apart to preside over the Cedar West Ward. From 1909 to 1910 he served as county assessor for Iron County. Having received a good education he engaged in the banking business and for a number of years served as cashier in the Iron Commercial and Savings Bank, and later as a director in the Bank of Southern Utah. He also served eight years as book-keeper and assistant manager of the Cedar City Co-op Store. Later he acted as bookkeeper, secretary and treasurer, and still later as manager of the Cedar Mercantile and Livestock Co. and as secretary-treasurer of the Iron Springs Sheep Co. In 1918 he helped to organize the Cedar City Home Building Society and served as its president until 1931. Having in his youth learned the trade of saddle and harness maker, he worked with his brothers at that trade for several years, prior to 1900. Having served as Bishop of the Cedar West Ward for three years, he was chosen as second counselor to Henry W. Lunt in the stake presidency. On May 31, 1925, he succeeded President Lunt as president of the Parowan Stake of Zion. This position he still (1936) holds.

President Palmer seems to be a natural historian and has spent considerable time in collecting historical data of the early pioneer days of Southern Utah and has also paid considerable attention in that line to the Indian tribes inhabiting southern Utah and northern Arizona. In recognition of this ability he was appointed by Governor George H. Dern to serve on the Board of Control of the Utah State Historical Society, which position he still holds. He has published much new Indian material and has delivered many lectures on Indian and pioneer subjects. He has also served on the historical committee of the Utah Trails and Landmarks Society. In October, 1935, he became attached to the Church Historians Office. During the World war, by appointment from Bishop Charles W. Nibley he organized the first Red Cross Chapter for Iron County and served as its chairman until after the close of the war. During that troublous time he also served either as chairman or as secretary in every Liberty Bond sales drive in Cedar City. In January, 1918, he was appointed by General Crowder of the U. S. Army, a member of the soldiers legal advisory committee and in that capacity filled out most of the draft questionnaires for the Iron County men. When in 1932 the depression was settling heavily on the people, he was again elected president of the Red Cross and at the same time was appointed by the County Commissioners as Chairman of the committee to handle the newly created Federal Relief. He served in that capacity for over two years and in that time organized one hundred work projects and saw eighty six of them completed. In June, 1924, President Palmer took an active part in organizing a boy scout council for southern Utah, and became the first president of the Zion Park Scout Council of the Boy Scouts of America, which embraced Millard, Beaver, Iron, Kane and Washington counties in Utah and Clark and Lincoln counties in Nevada. On June 9, 1933, under the newly passed Debtors Relief law (Federal) he was appointed by Judge Tillman D. Johnson Conciliation Commissioner for Iron County, Utah. One year later his jurisdiction was extended to embrace Beaver, Iron and Washington counties. When the Church set up its Social Security Plan in 1936, and stakes were grouped into Regional units, President Palmer was selected as the first regional executive chairman for the St. George Region, embracing the Kanab, Zion Park, St. George, Moapa and Parowan Stakes. He is now (1936) active in this work. On May 7, 1901, he married Kate Vilate Isom, (daughter of George Isom and Alice Parker), who was born January 23, 1878, at Virgin, Washington Co., Utah. This union has been blessed with eight children, namely, Alice, George, William I., Vilate, Elizabeth, Eugene, Richard I., and Rodney.
