Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Peterson, Hugo Daniel Edward

Peterson, Hugo Daniel Edward, missionary, editor and translator, was born Aug. 14, 1860, in the city of Visby, Isle of Gotland, Sweden, the son of Isak Peterson and Anna Sophia Gardstedt. Being born of goodly parents, he was baptized May 11, 1873, ordained a Priest April 27, 1880, an Elder Aug. 31, 1881, by Niels Wilhelmsen, a Seventy Feb. 23, 1885, by Seymour B. Young, and a High Priest by John H. Anderson, Nov. 23, 1928. In the summer of 1879 he was called by Pres. Niels Wilhelmsen to Copenhagen, Denmark, the headquarters of the Scandinavian Mission, to become translator and associate editor of "Nordstjarnan." He held that position from February, 1881, to June, 1883, when he, with his brother Anton P. Peterson, emigrated to Utah and entered the parental home, in Scipio, Utah, where the parents had settled the previous year. After spending his first years in Utah laboring with his father and brother in the building trade, in farm work, and as clerk to Bishop Thomas Yates in the Scipio Co-op store, Brother Peterson went to Salt Lake City, where he engaged in his trade as a printer. After working for some time on "Svenska Harolden," and the "Salt Lake Herald," he became a compositor and later a linotype operator on the "Deseret News," until he in June, 1914, was appointed to publish "Utah-Posten," a Swedish weekly newspaper, one of four Church-owned foreign language publications issued in Salt Lake City, which position he held till May, 1923, when he was called to preside over the Swedish Mission, and while there, in addition to his other duties, he again translated, and edited the mission periodical, "Nordstjarnan." After returning home from this mission, he held a position in the Church Historian's Office, until he, in May, 1934, again was called to preside over the Swedish Mission, and while occupying this position supervised the printing of a third edition of the Book of Mormon in the Swedish language, a new translation of which was made a few years previously by Bro. Janne M. Sjodahl, and in which labor Elder Peterson had assisted. He also revised and prepared a number of booklets, pamphlets and tracts for the printers, and contracted for and watched some large improvements and repairs of the mission house in Stockholm. On May 23, 1884, he married Miss Axeline Manuella Nielsen, born in Copenhagen, Dec. 10, 1865, the wedding ceremony taking place in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. This union has been blessed with nine children, namely, Hugo C. A., Mrs. Alma P. Zobell (deceased), Walter A., Francis (Frank) E., Mrs. Norma P. Anderson, Mrs. Viola P. Kasteler, Mrs. Ella P. Clift, Earl L., and Mrs. Mildred P. Kinnersley. Sister Peterson and daughter Mildred accompanied Elder Peterson on his mission to Sweden in 1923-1925, when they labored in the several auxiliary organizations, Sister Peterson, besides, presiding over the Relief Society organizations in the mission, and in the Stockholm Branch, while Mildred functioned as the branch organist. Sister Peterson again accompanied her husband on his mission in 1934-1936, and took an active part in missionary work. Elder Peterson has from his youth been a faithful worker in the Church. He was for many years a president of the 4th Quorum of Seventy; choir leader for about twenty-five years in the early Scandinavian meetings, from the time they were held in the old Social Hall; presided over the Swedish organization in the Ensign Stake from 1906 to 1916, and has also presided over the Swedish Missionary Society. By appointment of the First Presidency in 1909 he compiled and published Zion's Sanget, in the Swedish language, and Zion's Sange, in the Danish-Norwegian language, both words and music. For some years he was a member of the force of Elders in Ensign Stake set apart to administer to the sick in the hospitals. He also labored as a missionary in the Ensign Stake among the non-"Mormon" population, and from his early youth served as a block teacher. Since returning from his last mission, Brother Peterson has again been employed in the Church Historian's Office.

Brother Peterson has always been an observer of the Word of Wisdom, and says that through thus living an exemplary life, he is enjoying such health and vigor as usually are enjoyed only by younger people.
