Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Peterson, Joseph

Peterson, Joseph, first counselor in the presidency of the Snowflake Stake, Arizona, was born April 10, 1874, at Lehi, Utah, a son of Andrew A. Peterson and Anna Maria Earland.

(Mary Ann Erlandson), who had emigrated to Utah in 1862 and settled at Lehi. There Joseph was baptized and ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Priest and Elder. As a boy he herded stock on the range in the summer and studied in the winter. He is an ardent lover of nature and also of books, and it was hard for him to choose his vocation in life. But by the advice of his parents he entered the Brigham Young University in Provo, in 1891, graduating from that institution in 1897 with the degree of Bachelor of Pedagogy. In 1898 he was called to go to Arizona, as principal of the Snowflake Academy, and has resided in Navajo County, Arizona, ever since. On Dec. 10, 1900, he was ordained a High Priest by Pres. Jesse N. Smith and set apart as a member of the Stake High Council, and on Oct. 19, 1924, was set apart by Pres. Rudger Clawson as first counselor to Pres. Samuel F. Smith of the Snowflake Stake, a position which he still holds (1936).

Elder Peterson was one of the founders of Lakeside, Arizona, by assisting to purchase a sheep ranch and laboring to convert it into a beautiful mountain settlement. He has held a number of important political positions including that of county superintendent of schools for three terms, representative of Navajo County in the territorial legislature and member of the county board of supervisors. During the World war he acted as secretary of the Navajo County Council of Defense, was one of the "Four Minute Speakers" and chairman of the county committee in the drive for funds carried on by the Y. M. C. A. and allied organizations. On Dec. 24, 1897, he married Amanda M. Andelin of Richfield in the Manti Temple; four sons and two daughters were born of this union before the mother passed into the Great Beyond, Aug. 16, 1919. On Aug. 21, 1924, he married Lydia Savage Smith, a young widow with two daughters. Sister Lydia has become the mother of five sons (one deceased).
