Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Porter, Roy Stillman

Porter, Roy Stillman, stockraiser and farmer, was born in Granger, Salt Lake County, Utah, Feb. 20, 1880. Roy spent his early life on the farm of his maternal Aunt and Uncle, Mary Stillman Porter and Moses Ross Porter in Granger. These were his kind foster-parents and the latter subsequently became senior partner in the ranching business with him. After graduating from the public school at Granger, Roy took the missionary course at the Latter-day Saint's University in Salt Lake City. In 1904 he graduated from the Normal course in that institution. The following year he taught school near his home. In the summer of 1905 he was called on a mission to the Southern States. Here, from the mission headquarters at Chattanooga, Tenn., he labored for 27 months. Most of his work was done in the state of Alabama, where, through his mildness and faithfulness, he won converts to the Church and friends to himself. On his return to Utah he entered into partnership with his Uncle, Ross Porter, a native of Kentucky, hay and grain merchant and fruit grower in Taylorsville, West Jordan, Granger, and Brighton, west of Salt Lake City. At his home ranch, "The Oasis," located midway between Salt Lake City and Magna, he conducted a successful cattle business and did valuable experimental work in the cultivation of alkali ground. He served on the Y. M. M. I. A. board of Granite Stake, also as a home missionary, was a member of the High Priest's quorum, and president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of Brighton ward for many years, as well as head of the boy scouts of this locality. While road supervisor of Brighton and North Point, the largest district in area in Salt Lake Co., he obtained the old railroad grade for gravel to surface the roads west of the city and also built a number of substantial bridges over the canals that intersect this country. He had charge of some of the drainage work of this section, acted as Democratic district chairman and was vice-president of the North Jordan Irrigation company as well as a stockholder in the Utah and Salt Lake Canal Co.

On July 17, 1912, he married Miss Elizabeth Rachel Cannon in the Salt Lake Temple, Prest. Anthon H. Lund officiating. She is the daughter of the late Angus M. Cannon, President of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, and Dr. Martha Hughes Cannon, Utah pioneer physician. The issues of this marriage were three children, namely, Roy, jun., who died in infancy; Martha Hughes Porter (Mrs. Bruce K. Arnold) and Mary Idelia Porter.

Elder Porter died at Buena Vista, Salt Lake Co., Utah, Aug. 8, 1919, aged 39 years.
