Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Pye, Mary Francis (Kelly)

Pye, Mary Francis (Kelly), a former member of the Salt Lake Stake Y. W. M. I. A. Board, was born Sept. 11, 1867, at Allahabad, India, a daughter of Robert Dolbey Francis and Maria Banks. Dr. Francis (a practicing physician and pharmaceutical chemist) died of sunstroke in 1869 and Mrs. Francis brought her two little daughters (Mary, two years old, and Alice, three months) to England. Here they were left with their grandparents (William and Maria Lamprell Banks) while Mrs. Francis returned to India later in 1869 to settle up her affairs. Under the care of their grandparents the little girls received instruction under private teachers until the return of their mother to England in 1875, when they were put into the public schools. Later, Mary and her sister attended the Gordon Academy for girls in Clapham, London, and then went to a convent school in France to take a "finishing course" abroad, a custom in England. This, however, led to Alice becoming a Catholic and later a nun. In 1892 the family met some of the L. D. S. missionaries and becoming converts, Mary and her mother were baptized in London and came to Utah in the fall of 1894, where on Nov. 28, 1894, Mary was married in the Salt Lake Temple to Willard John Kelly, an Elder whose acquaintance she had made in London. But the young couple were not long permitted to enjoy their happiness for Brother Kelly died suddenly Feb. 28, 1895, just three months to the day, after their marriage. Sister Kelly and her mother then engaged in the dressmaking business in Salt Lake City and finally had charge of the Woman's Co-op Store, belonging to the Relief Society. In 1903 Sister Francis retired from business and Sister Kelly became an instructor at the L. D. S. U., teaching French and sewing. She was the first instructor in the Domestic Arts department of the institution and, upon leaving four years later, had two assistant teachers, so popular was the course offered. In 1907 she was married to Caleb Enoch Pye, a widower, and endeavored to do her duty as a mother to his family and also became the mother of one son (John Kelly Pye). Brother Caleb E. Pye died of cancer, May 15, 1915, after which Sister Pye was engaged to work in the Historian's Office as a clerk, and later as secretary to Andrew Jenson, which position she still (1936) holds.

Sister Pye has occupied many positions of trust in the Church, having been a counselor in the 20th Ward Y. W. M. I. A., a member of the Salt Lake Stake and Ensign Stake Y. W. M. I. A. boards, chorister of the Salt Lake Stake Relief Society, superintendent of Religion Class, Sunday School teacher and class leader in the 14th Ward Genealogical Society, etc. She is the author of a number of short stories, poems and articles published in local journals and twice was the winner of the Deseret News Christmas Story contest.
