Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Rich, Alice MacLachlan

Rich, Alice MacLachlan, widow of Ben E. Rich, was born Feb. 21, 1869, at Salt Lake City, the daughter of William McLachlan and Caroline Filer, being the fifth child in a family of ten children. After having received the usual grade schooling, she attended the Deseret University. At the age of seventeen she applied for the position of teacher in the Primary grade of the West Jordan school, and was given charge of the entire school of three grades. Preferring another vocation, however, she later found employment in the R. K. Thomas store in the old Eagle Emporium building, on 1st South and Main streets, remaining with that establishment for fifteen years.

Beginning in the year 1906, Sister Rich served three and a half years as clerk in the State Treasurer's office, in 1914 for seven months as deputy county clerk for Davis County, and then for the following four years in the employ of the State Insurance Department. In December, 1917, she was called to take a position in the Presiding Patriarch's office, where she remained for ten years. In 1927 she became a member of the Historian's Office staff, which position she still (1936) retains.

During the year 1900, Sister Rich filled a mission for the Church in the Northern States. At home also she has been an active Church member, having served as the first secretary of the Primary Association, organized in 1882 in the 7th Ward of Salt Lake City, with Sister Permelia James as president. In the M. I. A. of the same ward Sister Rich later held the positions of secretary, second counselor, and first counselor. From the latter position she resigned when called on her mission. Having moved to Centerville in 1909, she served as a member of the Centerville Genealogical Committee until her appointment on the South Davis Stake Genealogical Board. As a member of the famous Tabernacle Choir, Sister Rich visited the World's Fair with that organization in 1893, and later accompanied that body of singers on its trip to California and Colorado. She also recalls with great pleasure the visits she has made to the several temples built by the Church, including those of Kirtland, Logan, Manti, St. George, Arizona and Salt Lake City.
