Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Seegmiller, Daniel

Seegmiller, Daniel, second counselor in the presidency of the Kanab Stake from 1887 to 1899, was born Dec. 6, 1836, in Preston, Canada, the son of Adam Seegmiller and Anna Eve Knechtel. As a youth he located in New York City, where he became a convert to the Church and was baptized there Sept. 3, 1853. He came to Utah in 1861 and the following year returned as far as the Missouri River with Church teams to assist in bringing L. D. S. emigrants to Utah. Altogether he crossed the plains six times in that capacity. He served on the police force in Salt Lake City and at times acted as body guard for President Brigham Young. He filled a mission to Germany and Switzerland from 1877 to 1879, during which he presided over the East Swiss, Zurich and Frankfurt on the Main conferences successively. Previous to, going on this mission he located in St. George, Utah, where he acted as Chief of Police and later as Sheriff of Washington County. Later he moved to Kanab, Kane County, where he operated a farm and raised choice stock. On May 24, 1887, he was set apart by Apostle Francis M. Lyman as second counselor to Edwin D. Woolley, president of the Kanab Stake, which position he occupied until his untimely death. For some time previous to this tragedy, a misunderstanding had existed between himself and a neighbor, Wm. Roundy, over land and water matters, their land being contiguous and their water interests vested in the same system. On July 23, 1899, Wm. Roundy, finding no water in the ditch, became enraged and going to the home of Bro. Seegmiller, he called him outside and a few minutes later shot him through the heart. The murderer then returned to his home and after bidding farewell to his family, shot himself with fatal result.

Bro. Seegmiller had three wives, 1st, Ellen Smith (daughter of Joseph Smith and Sarah Sailor), who bore him three sons and five daughters; 2nd, Artimesia Snow Woolley (daughter of Erastus and Artemesia Snow, and the widow of Franklin B. Woolley, who was killed by Indians in 1862), 3rd, Emma Isabella Carroll (daughter of Charles Negus Carroll) who bore him four sons and one daughter. Bro Seegmiller was a frontiersman with a commanding appearance and knowing no fear. But to his family he was a kind and loving husband and father and was highly respected by his associates in the Church. He died, as stated, July 23, 1899, at Upper Kanab.
