Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Smith, Nicholas Groesbeck

Smith, Nicholas Groesbeck, president of the California Mission, and eighth Bishop of the 17th Ward, Salt Lake Stake, was born June 20, 1881, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Apostle John Henry Smith and Josephine Groesbeck. He was baptized on the eighth anniversary of his birthday, June 20, 1889, by his father. When three years old he accompanied his mother to Great Britain, his father at that time presiding over the European Mission. After returning to Utah with his mother in 1884 he received a common school education, first in Salt Lake City and afterwards in Snowflake, Arizona, and Manassa, Colorado, where his mother's family spent about ten years while in exile on account of the anti-polygamy persecutions. Apostle John Henry Smith, during that period only had the opportunity of visiting that part of his family occasionally. Returning to Salt Lake City in 1897, Nicholas G. attended High School from which he graduated in 1902. From his earliest youth he took an active part in Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. work, acting as librarian of the Sunday school. He was ordained a Deacon and Priest successively and later ordained an Elder by his father; he filled a mission to the Netherlands in 1902-1905, during which he acted part of the time as president of the Amsterdam Conference and was the instrument of adding thirty new converts to the gospel by baptism. After his return from that mission he acted as a counselor in the 17th Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and as a Sunday school teacher. He was also ordained a Seventy and became a member of the Third Quorum of Seventy. In 1906 (Dec. 20th) he married Florence Gay in the Salt Lake Temple, which marriage has been blessed with four children, namely, Girard Gay, John Henry, Stanford Groesbeck and Nicholas Groesbeck. On September 1st, 1913, he was called by Pres. Joseph F. Smith to preside over the South African Mission. He left Salt Lake City with his family Sept. 15, 1913 and had charge of a party of missionaries crossing the Atlantic Ocean. He arrived in Cape Town, South Africa, Oct. 28, 1913 and succeeded Frank J. Hewlett, Oct 30th. During his administration the mission prospered and he reports with pleasure that the Saints in the South African mission rank at the head of the list of all missions in the world as tithe payers. After presiding eight years in South Africa he left Cape Town for home March 11, 1921, being succeeded by James Wylie Sessions. On his return with his family he traveled through war-stricken Europe and among other places visited the battle field of Verdun where everything seemed to be in ruins from the effects of the war. Soon after his return home (May 16, 1921) he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Rudger Clawson and set apart as a member of the Salt Lake Stake High Council which position he held until Oct. 22, 1922, when he was ordained a Bishop by James E. Talmage and set apart to succeed Franklin S. Tingey as Bishop of the 17th Ward with Harold W. Langton as his first and Amer E. Hartsen as his second counselor. Prior to this he was chosen as a member of the general board of Y. M. M. I. A. Bishop Smith's occupation in a secular way is that of manager of the Deseret Bank Building. Formerly he acted as manager of the Mountain States Telegraph and Telephone Company. As a Bishop, with the experience of a missionary abroad and president of a mission, he has become popular with the members of his ward, possessing the confidence and good will of the whole community.
