Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Sorensen, Christian W.

Sorensen, Christian W., second counselor in the North Sanpete Stake presidency from 1906 to 1914, was born Nov. 1, 1863, in Mount Pleasant, Sanpete Co., Utah, a son of Christian and Christine Sorensen. He was educated in the public schools of Mount Pleasant and the Brigham Young Academy, Provo, taught school in Mount Pleasant for fourteen years, was baptized when about eight years old, ordained to the Priesthood and filled a special mission in the Manti Temple in 1889-1890. He filled a mission to Scandinavia from 1892 to 1894, presiding part of the time over the Aarhus Conference, Denmark. When the North Sanpete Stake was organized in 1900 he was appointed a member .of the High Council and later acted as second counselor to Stake President C. N. Lund. He held this position until the stake presidency was reorganized in 1914.

In 1917, Elder Sorensen and his wife, Eva M., performed a short term mission in California and were assigned to labor in San Diego, where their daughter Ruby, who had been in the California Mission six months, was laboring. Bro. Sorensen's missionary field of labor was chiefly among the soldiers of the 145th Artillery, a Utah unit quartered at Camp Kearney. Many of the soldiers attended Sunday School (of which Elder Sorensen was superintendent) and took part in other Church activities. The Sorensen home, which was near the chapel at San Diego, was a rendezvous for many of the soldier boys, and Sister Sorensen proved herself a real mother to them while in their midst. Besides being a faithful Church worker, Elder Sorensen has held many civil positions, such as city recorder, assessor and collector, councilman, member of the House of Representatives in the Utah Legislature, member of the district school board and has followed the business of banking and farming. In April, 1886, he married Dina A. Hartsen, who died Sept. 27, 1888, after bearing two children. On June 24, 1891, he married Eva Madsen of Manti who bore him three children. Elder Sorensen is still an active and leading man in public affairs in Mount Pleasant. Since June 16, 1929, he has been president of the High Priests' Quorum of the North Sanpete Stake. He is also serving his third term as Conciliation Commissioner for Sanpete and Juab counties, under appointment by the Hon. Tillman D. Johnson, Judge of the United States District Court for the District of Utah under Act of Congress of March 3, 1933, known as the Debtors' Relief Law.
