Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Towler, Thomas Edgar

Towler, Thomas Edgar, president of the Wells Stake, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Sept. 3, 1885, in Mill Creek, Salt Lake Co., a son of Daniel Towler and Sarah Ann Durnford, the ninth of a family of ten children. His parents came to Utah in 1863, his father from Cardiff, Wales, and his mother from England. He was baptized by C. L. Miller, Oct. 5, 1893, ordained a Deacon October 22, 1897, and after continued activities in the Aaronic Priesthood was ordained an Elder, April 2, 1906. From 1906 to 1908 he filled a mission to Great Britain, where he served as secretary of the Leeds Conference for nearly eighteen months and had charge of the Clayton Branch of that conference for almost a year. He married Amy Bennion in the Salt Lake Temple, Nov. 18, 1909. From this union have been born four children, one girl and three boys; the three boys have died. After his marriage he served as a counselor in the Granite Stake Y. M. M. I. A. and at the same time was president of the Elders' Quorum in the Farmers' Ward and filled other positions from which he was released to become superintendent of the Granite Stake Sunday Schools, which position he held four years. On Feb. 12, 1922, he was ordained a High Priest, and on Sept. 11, 1923, ordained a Bishop and set apart by Apostle Richard R. Lyman to preside over the Farmers Ward. Upon the division of that ward, July 20, 1924, he was set apart by Pres. Rudger Clawson as Bishop of the Whittier Ward of the Grant Stake. This position he held until the organization of the Wells Stake took place on Dec. 31, 1934, when he was set apart as president of the new stake by Apostle George Albert Smith.

On May 8, 1936, he was chosen as second vice chairman to Pres. Harold B. Lee of the Salt Lake Region of the Church Security Program. This region included sixteen stakes in Salt Lake, Tooele and Davis counties. Later he became first vice president under Pres. Marvin O. Ashton. On Sept. 25, 1936, Pres. Towler was appointed Regional Work director and purchasing agent for the Salt Lake Region and to assist in making purchases for the Church Security Program. He is well fitted for his important duties, having served as secretary-treasurer of the Danielson Plow Company, and as manager of the Covey Investment Company. During ten years he operated a retail grocery concern, increasing the business from one to four stores and pioneering the cash and carry system. He is connected with the Brower-Towler Motor Company and the Towler Investment Company, of Salt Lake City.
