Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Walker, James Henson

Walker, James Henson, first Bishop of the Pleasant Grove 3rd Ward, Utah Co., Utah, was born Oct. 12, 1878, at Pleasant Grove, a son of Apollos Benjamin Walker and Sarah Jane Holman, and a grandson of Henson Walker, one of the original pioneers of Utah. On his eighth birthday anniversary (Oct. 12, 1886) he was baptized by his father and from then on took an active part in Church affairs suited to his age. He was ordained successively a Deacon, a Priest, and in due time was ordained an Elder by Bishop James Cobbley of Lindon. Later he became a member of the 44th Quorum of Seventy, and he also served in the superintendency of the Pleasant Grove Ward Sunday School.

In August, 1907, Bro. Walker was ordained a High Priest by Elder Abel J. Evans, and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Swen L. Swenson of the Pleasant Grove Ward. He held this position until May 6th, 1909, when Pres. Joseph F. Smith ordained him Bishop of the newly made Pleasant Grove 3rd Ward, where he served until 1923. Since the organization of the Timpanogos Stake, he has been active as a member of the High Council and he has been a most successful leader of the Stake Adult Aaronic Priesthood group.

James H. Walker's career as an educator has been just as intensive as his church life. His early education was received at Pleasant Grove, and then for one year he attended the high school connected with the B. Y. U. at Provo. He began his teaching career when a very young man, advancing his own scholastic training during the summer months and in extension work during the winter. In this manner he graduated from the normal course of the University of Utah in 1912, and received his B. S. degree from the same institution in 1916. He also took graduate work at the University of Chicago for two summers. His first three years of teaching experience were at Lindon; then for 15 years he taught in the Pleasant Grove schools, being steadily advanced from grade teacher to high school principal, and from this position to superintendent of the Alpine School District, where he remained six years.

At present Bro. Walker is a representative of the Macmillan Publishing Company of New York and as such he is an able factor in the educational field. He also finds time to promote worthwhile projects in his home community. He is a prominent figure on the Cannery Board and also of the Bank of Pleasant Grove.

In December, 1896, Elder Walker married Della Cobbley, daughter of Charles A. and Emma Cobbley of Lindon. Thirteen children were born of this marriage, namely: Charles Benjamin, Leo, Zola, Rowena, Thomas Arnell, Legrande, Calvin, Edna, Myron, Jane, Muriel, James Henson jun., and Emma. In July, 1923, Mrs. Walker died, and in August, 1925, Bishop Walker married Josephine Greenwood, daughter of Benjamin and Jane Greenwood of American Fork, Utah. One son, Benjamin, has been born of this marriage.

At the age of 57, Bro. Walker regards his 12 children and 18 grandchildren as his greatest asset. Twelve children have graduated from Pleasant Grove High School, four have college degrees, one is on a mission, and the rest are pursuing educational studies in various fields, and all are active members of the Church.

Bishop Walker is regarded by his many friends in the little community of Pleasant Grove, and throughout the state of Utah and neighboring states, as a valuable personality, a thinker, a man of keen intellect and broad understanding.
