Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Bramwell, E. Ernest

Bramwell, E. Ernest, field supervisor of L. D. S. seminaries, was born August 28, 1869, at Sheffield, England, the son of George W. Bramwell and Mary Ann Stevenson. He emigrated with his parents to Utah in 1870, and was baptized when eight years of age by Peter C. Green. After obtaining a good school education he attended the B. Y. College in Logan and later the University of Utah, from which institution he graduated with a B. A. degree. He also did graduate work at the University of Chicago and also in California. After teaching school in Salt Creek, Weber County, Utah, two years, he became principal of the Rexburg City schools in 1893, continuing in that capacity two years. In 1907, after completing his work at the University of Utah, he was called by Church authorities to take charge as principal of the Fielding Academy at Paris, Idaho, acting in that capacity three years. In 1910 he was called by Church authorities to Canada to begin Church school work under the British flag, in the Knight Academy at Raymond, Alberta. After serving thus four years, he was called to Snowflake, Arizona, and the next year to Ephraim, Sanpete Co., Utah, where he taught in the Snow College three years. In 1918 he went to Manti, and there opened what is now the Manti Senior Seminary. After moving to Salt Lake City in 1920 he continued his seminary work in different schools. Summing up his activities in the Church schools, Bro. Bramwell acknowledges the hand of the Lord in the success that has followed him in all his moves, and by being obedient to the call of the Priesthood he is actually one of the fathers of the Church school system. In 1929 the L. D. S. College in Salt Lake City organized a religious educational department, where he taught one year. In 1930 he became field supervisor of the seminary work throughout the Church, and in this capacity he is now doing a splendid work.

While residing in the Fremont Stake of Zion he acted as superintendent of Sunday schools, and later as stake superintendent of Sunday schools in the Taylor and South Sanpete stakes. He also served as the first Bishop of the Hillcrest Ward in Salt Lake County from October 13, 1924, to November 8, 1925. After that he served as head of the Grant Stake religion class and junior seminary work, and in 1930 he was chosen as a High Councilor in the stake, which position he held until September, 1932, when he moved to the Ensign Stake, where he now resides.

In 1895 he became deputy clerk of the District Court of Fremont County and later clerk of said court. In 1900-1902 he filled a mission to Great Britain, where he acted as president of the Manchester Conference. While on this mission he received an appointment from the governor of Idaho to represent the state at an international exposition held at the Crystal Palace, London. While attending that gathering, he labored as a missionary in the London Conference.

Bro. Bramwell is the author of several books. Among these, he wrote "The Teachers Manual" and "Noted Religious Teachers," used in the teacher-training department of the Church. Also, after 15 years research, he published a book entitled "Why Do I Believe?"-a special work .of reference and an aid to speakers. He also prepared the Old Testament outlines used in the Church schools for five years.

In 1896 (March 4th) he married Zilpha Ann Holman of Rexburg, Idaho, daughter of John G. Holman and Sarah Loader, born July 4, 1876. This union has been blessed with nine children, namely, Zilpha Viola, Ernest, jun., Clyde, Ruth, Ralph, Genevieve, Alberton, Vivian, and Helen; seven of these children are still living.

Bro. Bramwell says: "There is no such thing in our Church as duty; it should read privilege and blessing. In all Church work the law of compensation is evident. No matter what we are called to do in the Church, we get returns far greater than the investment. I have proved this to be safe and sound. The Lord told Joseph Smith the Prophet to get out of debt, and from Joseph Smith down to the present general authorities of the Church we have been given this counsel: 'Get out of debt, keep out of debt, and lay aside a little surplus for a rainy day.' This counsel I have followed to the very letter. It pays to do so; not only in the field of dollars and cents, but from the standpoint of joy and comfort and satisfaction in life. Such a course spells freedom, in the broadest sense of the word."
