Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

White, Lizzie Olivia Borgeson

White, Lizzie Olivia Borgeson, the first lady missionary called from Santaquin, Utah, and the second lady to labor as a missionary in the Eastern States Mission, was born April 25, 1889, at Santaquin, Utah, a daughter of Andrew Borgeson and Necoline Emily Olsen. Being the ninth daughter of a family of eleven children, her training from infancy was one of unselfish cooperation. Order and discipline. were a part of her home environment. There, family prayer was part of the day's routine, the Word of Wisdom was strictly adhered to, the Sabbath day observed as a day of rest and tithing paid by all the family to the penny. It was taken for granted that the children were to attend Primary, Sunday school and sacrament meetings, and being a natural leader, Lizzie, very early in life, became class leader in the Y. L. M. I. A., organist in the ward Primary Assn., and a member of the ward choir. As a young woman she attended the Utah Agricultural College at Logan, during which time she taught in Religion Classes in the Logan 7th Ward and was a member of the Stake Tabernacle Choir. Upon completing a commercial course at the U. A. C., she obtained employment as stenographer to Attorney Geo. E. Gray in Pocatello, Idaho, and while there served as junior class leader in the Y. L. M. I. A., teacher in the Sunday School, assistant organist, and choir member. Upon the demise of her employer she returned to Utah and entered the law offices of Judge A. C. Hatch and Chase Hatch of Heber City. In 1913, she was called on a mission to the Eastern States, on which she served as stenographer in the mission office in New York City. One other lady missionary was laboring there, but soon afterwards other sisters were called and it was Sister Borgeson's duty to instruct them in their duties and see them comfortably located in their respective districts. In addition, Sister Borgeson was expected to meet trains and boats, carrying female visitors to New York who had sent word to mission headquarters for someone to receive them on their arrival. In this way she became as well known to the government and railroad officials as any of the regular welfare workers from other organizations. On one occasion a faithful sister, who had presided over the Relief Society in Oslo, Norway, arrived at Ellis Island and was informed by one of the officials that "They could not land a Mormon." Fortunately, Sister Borgeson was at hand to see that the lady received proper consideration and in doing so was able, under the inspiration of the Lord, to explain to this official and others, many of the principles of the gospel and to remove some misunderstanding which had arisen, and from that time the "Mormons" were treated with due courtesy on Ellis Island. Sister Borgeson also had many opportunities to visit different parts of the mission in company with Pres. Ben E. Rich and wife. She also reported the mission news to the "Liahona," and wrote several articles for that periodical.

Upon her return from this mission she was employed by the Knight Woolen Mills, at Provo, for almost a year, during which time she successfully taught a group of boys in the Provo 4th Ward Sunday School. She was also engaged in home missionary work and was a member of the Stake Tabernacle Choir. Being offered a position in the office of the Z. C. M. I. at Pocatello, Idaho, she went north and remained there until the Z. C. M. I. building was destroyed by fire in 1916, when she became secretary to the State Prosecuting Attorney and had experience as a court reporter in criminal cases. During this time she was a member of the Stake Y. L. M. I. A. Board and organized and conducted a junior choir in the Pocatello 3rd Ward. In 1918 she became associated with the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company at Garland, Utah, as senior stenographer, boarding at the time with the family of Bishop Chas. Munns, where she met a Mr. Lucian Elmer White of Springfield, Ill., who was investigating the gospel and was soon afterwards baptized by Bishop Munns. The two young people having many interests in common, such as the enjoyment of music, literature and exercise in the great outdoors, their friendship culminated in a romance which led to their marriage in the Salt Lake Temple, March 31, 1919; a daughter (Venita Annette) was born to them, Sept. 15, 1920. In the spring of 1919, Bro. and Sister White located in Twin Falls, where Bro. White engaged in business and Sister White was secretary to J. C. Wheelon, of the Twin Falls Canal Co. She continued her Church activities, serving as a counselor in the ward Relief Society, teacher of the advanced theological class in Sunday School and assistant chorister and bee-keeper.

Her marriage, however, was not successful, and in July, 1922, the young couple obtained a divorce. Locating in Salt Lake City, Sister White was employed first in the office of Hyrum E. Crockett, Secretary of State, and later in the office of the Wm. J. Burns International Detective Agency. In April, 1924, she became secretary to the superintendent of the Dr. Groves L. D. S. Hospital, a position which she holds at present. Sister White was a member of the McCune School of Music Symphony Orchestra, of the L. D. S. Band and Orchestra and the Girls M. I. A. Band. Her daughter has inherited this artistic temperament to a marked degree and has made several public appearances in concerts as the star performer on several instruments. The greatest responsibility in life to Sister White, at the present time, is to guide this precious daughter into paths of righteous living, and she feels that the greatest mission in life for any woman is that of motherhood.
