Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Brown, James

Brown, James, first counselor in the presidency of the Woodruff Stake, Uinta Co., Wyoming, was born May 24, 1861, at Calderbank, Lanarkshire, Scotland, the son of James Brown and Isabella Dick. His parents being members of the Church, young James was baptized by his father in October, 1869, near Hamilton, Lanarkshire. He emigrated by himself to Utah in 1879, and after residing in Salt Lake City two years, he became a permanent resident of Evanston, in 1880, and to that place he emigrated his father and mother, with six brothers and two sisters. Having learned the trade of a blacksmith in Scotland, he obtained employment with the Union Pacific Railroad Co., in Evanston, where from the beginning he took an active part in Church activities. Thus he became a Sunday school teacher in 1880; later treasurer and still later president of the ward Y. M. M. I. A. and a ward teacher. He was ordained an Elder in Evanston by Bishop Wm. G. Burton in September, 1880, and on May 14, 1882, he was ordained a High Priest by Alma Eldredge and set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop Alfred Blackburn of the Evanston Ward. He held this position until Nov. 11, 1883, when he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Albert Carrington and set apart to preside over the Evanston Ward, succeeding Bishop Blackburn. On July 27, 1882, he married Christina Hunter, which union was blessed with seven children (four boys and three girls) namely: James, Elizabeth P., Isabella, Tiena, Adam H., Wm. G. and Frank H. Being called on a mission to Scotland he labored faithfully in the British Mission from 1904-1906.

Bishop Brown's administration as a presiding ecclesiastical officer for 43 years was a most successful one, during which time he gained the good will and confidence of both "Mormons" and non-Mormon alike. With his natural magnetism and exemplary life he gained the confidence of all his associates, and the non-Mormon population referred to the L. D. S. organization in Evanston as Bishop Brown's Church and the ward increased in membership, which, with Bishop Brown as an example, manifested a spirit of brotherly love throughout. A fine L. D. S. meeting house was erected in Evanston and all the Church auxiliary organizations prospered. Besides being a successful Church officer, Bishop Brown has filled a number of secular positions of honor and responsibility in the community. Thus he served from 1893 to 1894 as deputy county clerk, and after that (from 1893-1902) as county clerk. He also served as president of the school board for 25 years and at present is serving as clerk of the district court, a position which he has held continually for many years.

After serving 33 years as Bishop of Evanston, Brother Brown was set apart July 25, 1915, as second counselor to Stake President John M. Baxter. In 1918 he was promoted to first counselor in the Stake presidency, which position he held until July 1, 1928, when the presidency of the Woodruff Stake was reorganized. James Brown was ordained a Patriarch Oct. 26, 1919, by Apostle George F. Richards.
