Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Gates, Susa Young

Gates, Susa Young, a member of the General Board of Relief Society from 1911 to 1922, was born March 18, 1856, in Salt Lake City, Utah, a daughter of Brigham Young and Lucy Bigelow. She was educated in her father's private school, at the University of Deseret, the Brigham Young University and at the Harvard University. She was a woman of great activity of mind and body and wrote extensively for local publications from her youth to advanced age. Two years previous to her death she published a very valuable book, "The Life Story of Brigham Young"; this was only one of several books published by her, which included the "History of the Y. L. M. I. A." She was a member of the General Board of Y. L M. I. A. from 1899 to 1911 and rounded the "Young Woman's Journal," the official organ of that society, of which she was the editor for 11 years. Sister Gates also served as corresponding secretary and historian of the General Board of Relief Society and was editor of the "Relief Society Magazine" from 1914 to 1922. She represented the Relief Society and the Y. L. M. I. A. at the National and International Councils of Women on several occasions and was Chairman of the Press Committee of the National Council of Women for five years. She was an ordinance worker in the Temples at St. George and Salt Lake City, and author of text books on genealogy. Sister Gates was assistant organist of the Utah Society of the Daughters of the Revolution and organized Music and Domestic Science departments at the Brigham Young University, of which institution she was a trustee for forty years. She was also a trustee of the Utah Agricultural College, acted as president of the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers and rounded a Hall of Relics, the nucleus of the exhibit now displayed in the State Capitol. In 1880 she was married to Jacob F. Gates and was the mother of 13 children. Sister Gates died in Salt Lake City May 27, 1933. (See also Biographical Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, p. 626.)
