Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Horne, Mary IsabellaPPHorne, Mary Isabella

Horne, Mary IsabellaPPHorne, Mary Isabella, a member of the Relief Society in Nauvoo, Ill., and an officer of the General Board of Relief Society in Utah, was born Nov. 20, 1818, at Rainham, Kent, England, a daughter of Stephen Hales and Mary Ann Hales (maiden name of mother the same.) As a girl fourteen years of age, Mary Isabella came to America with her parents. On May 9, 1836, she was married to Joseph Home and two months later the young couple were baptized members of the Church. They were associated with the Prophet Joseph Smith at Far West, Mo., and at Nauvoo, Ill. With other exiles from Nauvoo they left their home in February, 1846, en route for the Missouri River, and at Mr. Pisgah, Iowa, a little daughter was born. They spent the winter of 1846-47 at Winter Quarters and arrived in Salt Lake Valley Oct. 6, 1847, as members of Edward Hunter's hundred, of which Joseph Horne was a captain of fifty. Sister Horne presided over the Relief Society of the 14th Ward, Salt Lake City, for 14 years, and was president of the Salt Lake Stake Relief Society for a long time. On July 1, 1880, she was appointed treasurer of the Central Board of Relief Society, and when that board, more fully organized, became the General Board of Relief Society in 1892, she was continued as treasurer, which position she held until 1901, but was continued as a member of the board until her death, which occurred Aug. 27, 1906. Sister Horne was called by Pres. Brigham Young to preside over the meetings of the Retrenchment Association (later the Y. L. M. I. A.) of the 14th Ward and assisted in organizing other associations. She was a member of the Deseret Hospital Committee for 12 years and established a Relief Society Nurse School in the Salt Lake Stake. She was a counselor to Sister Zina D. H. Young in the Utah Silk Association and did much to foster that industry. Sister Horne was the mother of fifteen children. (See also Biographical Encyclopedia, Vol. 1, p. 807.)
