Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Robison, Louise YatesPPRobison, Louise Y.

Robison, Louise YatesPPRobison, Louise Y., seventh General President of the National Woman's Relief Society, was born May 27, 1866, at Scipio, Millard Co., Utah, a daughter of Thomas Yates and Elizabeth Francis. She attended the public schools and Brigham Young Academy and, being a natural leader, held office in the auxiliary organizations, including that of president of the Y. L. M. I. A. in the First and Emerson wards of Salt Lake City. She served on the Granite Stake Genealogical Board, and was a member and first counselor in the Granite Stake Relief Society Board. Sister Robison has been a member of the General Board of Relief Society since April 2, 1921, serving first as second counselor and has been General President of Relief Society since Oct. 8, 1928. During her presidency the Relief Societies in Utah have vigorously supported the movement of a State Training School for the feeble-minded and was largely responsible for its establishment. The Relief Society has also placed a beautiful monument in Nauvoo, Ill., marking the site of the building, in the upper room of which the National Woman's Relief Society (first known as the Female Relief Society) was organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, Mar. 17, 1842. The dedication of this monument occurred July 24, 1933. Sister Robison supervised work of the Red Cross gauze room at the Gardo House, Salt Lake City, during the World war, and was instructor in surgical dressings. She is a director of the Utah Tuberculosis Association and member of the board of directors of the Visiting Nurses Association, and of the Utah State Public Welfare Board. She is a member of the board of directors of the Travelers' Aid Society and has attended two national conventions of this organization. She was a delegate to the National Conference of Social Work, to the National Women's Christian Temperance Union, to the National Council of Women, and to the International Congress of Women at the Century of Progress Fair at Chicago in 1933, where she presided at one of the general sessions of the Congress. She was also a delegate from the United States to the International Council of Women at Paris, France in 1935, and has traveled extensively in America and in Europe in the interest of the Relief Society, On Oct. 11, 1883, she was married to Joseph Lyman Robison and is the mother of six children.
