Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Bennett, John Foster

Bennett, John Foster, treasurer of the Deseret Sunday School Union since 1906, was born July 11, 1865, at Birmingham, England, the son of Richard and Maria Foster Bennett. Richard Bennett was not a member of the Church, but was honest and conscientious. With his wife and two little children (one the subject of this sketch) he came to Utah with his wife's family in 1868. The Foster family located in Bear Lake valley, but Richard Bennett found work in Salt Lake City. When John was eight years old he was taken by one of his aunts to visit his grandparents in Bear Lake Valley. Being naturally very active, he enjoyed life on the farm and insisted upon remaining there and found work herding cows in the summer and feeding stock in the winter. While there, with the consent of his father, he was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church. Upon his return to Salt Lake City, two or three years later, he attended Karl G. Maeser's school for a short time, but not being happy there he presented himself at Miss Cook's school in the Social Hall, where he earned his tuition by doing janitor work and gardening for Miss Cook in the summer. Later he attended the University of Utah for a short time. Like most boys he took a great interest in the Fire Brigade and served as the "mascot" of the Veteran Firemen's Association in his boyhood and was later given an honorary life membership in that organization. After working in a blacksmith's shop for a time he became associated with Charles R. Savage the pioneer photographer, where his sister Jane also worked, which gave him great joy. After ten years of service there he became associated with the S. R. Marks Furniture Company, and still later was a clerk and salesman for Dinwoodey Furniture Co. The death of Nathan Sears of the Sears Glass and Paint Company in 1896, was a great sorrow to Bro. Bennett as they had been close friends. Shortly afterwards he assumed the management of the business in behalf of the family of Bro. Sears and a new company was organized of which he became president. In due time he purchased the Sears interest and continued the business as the Bennett Glass and Paint Company.

On Nov. 17, 1897, in the Salt Lake Temple, he married Rosetta E. Wallace, daughter of Henry and Ellen Harper Wallace of Salt Lake City. This marriage has been blessed with five children, three sons (Wallace F., Harold H. and Richard S.) and two daughters (Elizabeth, wife of Elwood G. Winter, and Mary, wife of Kenneth E. Smith).

Bro. Bennett has always been deeply interested in Sunday School work and presided over the Sunday school of the 20th Ward for some years. Since 1897 he has been a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board and since 1908 has been general treasurer of that organization, and in addition is at present a member of the Church Auditing Committee. He is also a director of Z. C. M. I., Zion's Savings Bank, Utah State National Bank, Deseret Book Company, Home Fire Insurance Company, Zion's Benefit Building Society, Utah. Oil Refining Company, Consolidated Wagon Co., and many organizations away from his home town.
