Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Cannon, George M.

Cannon, George M., a member of the General Board of the Deseret Sunday School Union since 1901, and a son of Angus Munn Cannon and Sarah Maria Mousley Cannon, was born at St. George, Washington Co., Utah, Christmas morning 1861. There being no house in the town, he was born in a covered wagon, the box of which had been lifted from the running gears and set upon supports, which raised the bed a few inches above the ground. The family was recalled from the Dixie Mission and returned to Salt Lake City in the spring of 1869.

George M. was baptized by George Q. Cannon on his eighth birthday, Dec. 25, 1869, became a member of the 14th Ward, and there received successively ordination to the office of Deacon, Teacher, Priest, and Elder, the latter ordination was under the hands of the presidency of the 1st quorum of Elders, Edward W. Davis, John W. Taylor and Matthias F. Cowley. Later George M. Cannon became president of the First Quorum of Elders, and as such had charge of the furnishing of the Elders' room in the Salt Lake Temple at the time of its dedication in 1893. He continued in that position until the organization of the Granite Stake, when on January 28, 1900, he was ordained a High Priest by Francis M. Lyman and sustained as stake superintendent of Sunday schools. In November, 1900, he became a member of the general board of the Deseret Sunday School Union.

In business George M. Cannon has been active from early youth. He was bookkeeper and collector for his father in the coal business in Salt Lake City, selling coal from the old "Grass Creek Coal Mines" (near Coalville); engaged in the real estate business with his brother John M. Cannon from 1886 to 1891. On January 1, 1891, he became cashier of Zion's Savings Bank and Trust Co., a position held until Sept. 30, 1906, at which time he retired, and has engaged in private business since that date. He had active connection with mutual building societies of Utah; was a charter member of Zion's Benefit Building Society; organized the Deseret Building Society, the final draft for which was drawn by himself, Richard W. Young and Philip Maycock. He is now president and manager of the Prudential Federal Savings and Loan Association. In 1907, with greater opportunity for private work, he planted Rosedale Orchard, probably the most noted cherry orchard in Utah, which is still being enlarged and improved year by year.

In political circles George M. Cannon has had great experience and is widely known. He was in 1884 elected county recorder of Salt Lake County and held that position for six years. He studied the best methods of showing titles to real estate, and in 1888 copyrighted Cannon's System of Abstracts. This he gave to Salt Lake County upon retirement from office in 1890, and the system is still in use after more than forty-five years; and has been copied in many other counties of Utah.

Elder Cannon was elected to the Constitutional convention in 1895, and was chairman of two of its committees; one on taxation; the other on public debt. In 1895 he became chairman of the Republican State Committee, and had charge of the campaign which ratified the State Constitution, and elected to state office every man on the Republican ticket. Utah became a state on Jan. 4, 1896, and Mr. Cannon became the first president of the State Senate of Utah. (See also Bio. Ency. Vol. 1, p. 566.)
