Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Cummings, Horace Hall

Cummings, Horace Hall, a member of the general board of the Deseret Sunday School Union since 1901, was born June 12, 1858, at Provo, Utah, a son of Benjamin Franklin Cummings and Catherine Hall. He was baptized Dec. 7, 1866, by Edward Stevenson, ordained an Elder Dec. 20, 1874, by his father (B. F. Cummings), ordained a Seventy Jan. 2, 1884, by Thomas V. Williams, and ordained a High Priest, Jan. 28, 1900, by Anthon H. Lund. He filled a mission to Mexico in 1885-1887, presiding over the Mexican Mission during the last year. While on this mission he distributed the first shipment of Books of Mormon in Spanish, shipped the first company of 42 Mexicans to the L. D. S. colonies in Chihuahua, translated and printed in Spanish a number of sections from the Doctrine and Covenants and compiled the first complete mission record in Mexico.

Elder Cummings worked as a chore boy for two years at $10 per month and his board, then, for one year, at the Deseret News office for $5.00 per week; then for three years in a woolen factory at $9.00 per week, giving all he earned to his parents. After taking a B. S. degree in 1895, in the University of Utah, he took further work in the Chicago University and the Columbia University, and added to his store of knowledge by reading and study, so that he became one of the foremost educators in the State of Utah. Thus, he taught for six years in the public schools, five years in the Church schools and eleven years in the University of Utah. He served over thirteen years as general superintendent of the L. D. S. schools. While serving as a member of the third Utah State Legislature, he introduced a bill which moved the University of Utah from its location on 2nd West street to the commodious site on the east bench.

Bro. Cummings had charge of the Utah Educational Exhibit at the World's Fair at St. Louis, Mo., in 1904, and won for the exhibit gold and silver medals and about 20 lesser ones. He was also chosen to represent the National Educational Association at the Mexican Centennial celebration on invitation of Pres. Porfiro Diaz, at the expense of the Mexican government.

By request of the Utah State Text Book Commission, Bro. Cummings wrote three school books on elementary science, which received three adoptions of five years each, and now after 35 years, without revision, are still used in many schools, and secure for the writer a nice little check annually as royalty on sales. He has also done his share in the civic development of Salt Lake City by building, at different times, two homes for his mother, two for himself, a store at 44 East South Temple street, three apartment houses on 2nd South street, and four houses in Gilmer Park, costing in all, including the land, about $300,000. In ward and stake capacities he has also been a faithful and zealous worker. Among other offices he served as a Sunday school teacher for over 25 years, president in the 61st Quorum of Seventy, stake superintendent of religion classes, member of the High Council of Granite Stake, member of the central committee which started the M. I. Associations, general superintendent of L. D. S. schools, and a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board since 1901.

In 1881, Elder Cummings married Barbara M. Moses. This union has been blessed with six sons and two daughters, namely, Horace Moses, Julian Moses, William Ridge, Victor Clyde, Lorenzo John and Harold Moses, and Ruby and Norma. He also married Matilda Wilcox Bliss, a widow with three children (Ella Maud, Edwin Samuel and Walter Bliss); one child, a daughter who died two days after birth, was born of this marriage.
