Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Nichols, DeLore

Nichols, DeLore, a member of the general board of the Deseret Sunday School Union, was born July 14, 1889, in Brigham City, Utah, a son of George W. Nichols and Bertha Magdeline Jensen. He was baptized Sept. 4, 1898, by Peter Sorensen and attended the grade and high school of Brigham City, and, being a lover of sport, he played on the first basketball team organized in the last named school. After completing one year of high school, he filled a mission to England. Upon his return he entered the Utah State Agricultural College in the fall of 1913 and graduated in 1917. During the participation of the United States in the World war, Bro. Nichols was placed in charge of some 250 war gardens in Logan and vicinity. Since that time he has been associated with the Agricultural College Extension Service, having headquarters at different times in Flagstaff, Coconino Co., Arizona, and in Morgan County, Utah. At present he is located in Davis County, Utah, and resides at Farmington. While living in Morgan County, he was a member and later president of the Morgan Stake Sunday School Board, a member of the Morgan Stake High Council and director of teacher-training work. He became a member of the South Davis Stake Sunday School Board as soon as he located in that county and was sustained as superintendent of Sunday schools in the stake Jan. 11, 1929. Bro Nichols was ordained a High Priest Dec. 9, 1923, by W. W. Francis, and on Nov. 21, 1934, he became a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board.

In 1922 Elder Nichols married Charlotte Stallings of Ogden, an active Church worker, having been president of the Ogden Stake Primary Board and a member of the faculty of the Weber College. Brother and Sister Nichols have two little daughters, Natell and LaDene, and the family is most highly esteemed, being leaders in the promotion of social, dramatic and literary projects as well as in Church activities in the ward and stake.
