Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Pyper, George Dollinger

Pyper, George Dollinger, general superintendent of the Deseret Sunday School Union, was born Nov. 21, 1860, in Salt Lake City, Utah, a son of Alexander C. Pyper and Christiana Dollinger. He was baptized when eight years old, officiated in the offices of the Aaronic Priesthood and was ordained an Elder in 1883, and later ordained a High Priest. In 1901 a sketch of Elder Pyper's life was published in the Biographical Encyclopedia Vol 1, p. 669. Since that time he continued to act as manager of the Salt Lake Theatre until 1929, when the edifice was torn down. For a period of over thirty years he had brought to the people the finest attractions the stage afforded and during that period also brought to the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, many world-famed artists and musical organizations. In 1928 he published the story of the Salt Lake Theatre and early drama in Salt Lake, under the title of "The Romance of An Old Playhouse." Among the side activities he was a member of the first Salt Lake Board of Education, and of the first City Library Board; also president of the Salt Lake Oratorio Society and Musical Arts and Civic Music Association, and since its organization has been first assistant to Elder Melvin J. Ballard in the Church Music committee. In 1909 he installed a Church exhibit in the Government Building at the Alaska-Yukon Exposition at Seattle, Washington. The models of the temple and tabernacle used at that fair were taken to the Smithsonian Institute at Washington, D.C., and recently have been shown at the Century of Progress in Chicago, and the San Diego expositions. Elder Pyper was chairman of the Century of Progress Church committee and in consultation with the Fairbanks family (J. B., J. Leo and Arvard) supervised the preparation of that wonderful exhibit.

In November, 1911, Elder Pyper managed the Tabernacle Choir in a 6000 mile tour to the National Irrigation Congress held in Madison Square Garden, New York City, and extended the tour to Washington and other cities of the United States. On this tour the choir sang before Pres. Taft in the White House. In 1934 he conducted the tour of the choir to the Century of Progress Fair in Chicago, where it sang for a week at the Ford auditorium. In 1929 he was named as chairman of the L. D. S. Pageant Committee which produced the great spectacle "The Message of the Ages" in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, April 6, 1930, as part of the exercises celebrating the one hundredth anniversary of the organization of the Church. The pageant involved 1500 people, ran for 30 nights and was witnessed by approximately 200,000 people. Following the pageant Bro. Pyper visited the Hawaiian Islands in the interest of the Sunday schools and the Y. M. M. I.A. He was among the early flyers from Hilo to Honolulu. Since January, 1910-a period of 27 years-he has been associate editor of "The Juvenile Instructor," now "The Instructor."

When Elder David O. McKay was appointed general superintendent of the Deseret Sunday School Union in 1918, he chose Elders Stephen L. Richards as his first, and George D. Pyper as his second assistant. This position Elder Pyper held until Oct. 30, 1934, when he was set apart as general superintendent, with Elders Milton Bennion and George R. Hill as assistants. At this writing he is well and active though far beyond the biblical three score and ten.
