Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Clegg, Benjamin

Clegg, Benjamin, a prominent and faithful Elder in the Church, was born April 29, 1857, in Tooele, Tooele Co., Utah, the son of Benjamin Clegg and Grace McIntyre. He was raised in Tooele, where he attended the public schools, and at the age of eight years he was baptized by Pres. Hugh S. Gowans at Tooele, and later ordained to the Priesthood. When 28 years of age he moved to Gentile Valley, and while residing there in the Mound Valley Ward, he became acquainted with Anna Jane Williams (the daughter of Bishop Williams) whom he later married in the Salt Lake Temple. This union was blessed with six children, namely, Benjamin O., Robert Williams, Joseph, Donald Willard, William Dale and Anna Louetta. Soon after his marriage Bro. Clegg located in the Trout Creek Ward, and after being ordained a High Priest by George C. Parkinson he acted as a counselor in the ward bishopric for 13 years. He filled a mission to Australia in 1897-1900, where he labored nine months in Queensland and later one and a half years in Adelaide, in South Australia, where he, together with Elder Alexander A. Carr, reopened a missionary field after a period of thirty years during which no missionary labors had been performed by Latter-day Saint missionaries in that part of the country. Elder Clegg acted as president of the district thus opened. Together with his missionary companions, he became an instrument in the hands of the Lord in bringing eleven new converts into the Church. After his return from this mission he again acted as a Bishop's counselor in the Trout Creek Ward, and has ever been active in Church affairs, besides filling a number of civil offices in the community. He has been blessed with good and faithful children, who are all active in the Church. Thus his oldest son, Benjamin Orson, has filled a mission to Great Britain. Another son, Robert W., now acts as Bishop of the Bench Ward in the Bannock Stake of Zion. His fourth son, Donald Willard, has filled a mission to the Northwestern States and later a short mission to the Western States. His daughter, Anna Louetta, has filled a mission to the Eastern States and in all instances Bro. Clegg has assisted these missionaries financially. Bro. Clegg is a farmer and stock raiser by avocation.
