Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Dahl, David Theodore

Dahl, David Theodore, first counselor in the presidency of the West Jordan Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, was born March 4, 1872, in that part of West Jordan included in Midvale, Salt Lake Co., Utah, the son of Alexander Dahl and Ellen Jorgenson. He was baptized when about eight years old by James T. Turner, ordained an Elder Nov. 14, 1904, by Alberto Bateman, ordained a Seventy Dec. 12, 1910, by J. Golden Kimball, filled a home mission for six months in the Jordan Stake during the winter of 1913-1914, was ordained a High Priest Feb. 6, 1920, by Apostle Rudger Clawson and set apart to act as first counselor to Bishop Wm. J. Leak in the West Jordan Ward. Later, he acted as a member of the Jordan Stake High Council, and when the West Jordan Stake was organized May 8, 1927, he was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Joseph M. Holt of that stake, which position he held until the death of Pres. Holt. On Feb. 1, 1931, he was chosen as first counselor to Pres. Almon T. Butterfield of the West Jordan Stake. Bro. Dahl has followed the occupation of ranching, and at the age of nineteen years he was part owner of a ranch, raising sheep and cattle, and also dealing in meat and groceries. In 1906 he sold his meat and grocery business and purchased a farm in West Jordan, where he still resides. Later, he engaged in extensive dry farming, is the owner of 1,600 acres of land, and paid special attention to raising wheat. Among the many civil offices held by Elder Dahl, we may mention that he was the first president of the West Jordan Commercial Club, director of Salt Lake County Farmers' Equity, president of Salt Lake County Wheat Growers Association, member of Jordan School District Board of Education (from 1923 to 1931), and during the last four years acted as vice-president of said board. In February and March, 1930, he attended the National Educational Convention and the National School Board Convention at Atlantic City, New Jersey. On that occasion he visited leading schools and cities throughout the East and Middle West; he also visited the national capital, the Hill Cumorah, and the Joseph Smith Farm, etc. In 1899 (Nov. 29th), he married Johanna Maria Rodberg, who died Sept. 21, 1901. He married Amanda Teressa Pehrson Nov. 17, 1904. This latter union has been blessed with five sons and two daughters, namely, Lawrence Theodore and Clarence Peter (both of whom have filled missions for the Church), Arthur David, Harvey Alexander, Marvin James, Mary Ellen and Elizabeth Evelyn. Bro. Dahl is a man of affairs, a natural leader and the possessor of a pronounced personality.
