Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Dimond, Edwin Robert

Dimond, Edwin Robert, fourth Bishop of the Magna Ward, Oquirrh Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, was born Aug. 16, 1888, at West Jordan, Salt Lake Co., Utah, the son of Robert E. Dimond and Mary E. Bateman. He was raised and schooled in West Jordan, attending school principally in the Taylorsville District. He was baptized Aug. 16, 1896, by Robert E. Dimond, ordained a Deacon Dec. 30, 1900, by John A. Egbert and acted as president of a Deacons quorum; ordained a Teacher March 6, 1904, by Daniel R. Bateman and acted as president of a Teachers quorum; ordained a Priest Oct. 1, 1905, by John A. Egbert, and an Elder April 1, 1907, by John S. Hansen. He filled a mission to Great Britain in 1908-1911, laboring in the London Conference, part of the time as presiding Elder of the Gravesend Branch. Prior to going on this mission he was a student at the B. Y. University at Provo, Utah. After returning from his mission he served on the Sunday school board of the Jordan Stake and as a home missionary. On April 24, 1913, he married Hilma L. Maimsfrom in the Salt Lake Temple. This marriage has been blessed with five children, namely, Darrel Edwin, Doris, Lila, Lynn Joseph and Harvey Dahle. Elder Dimond moved to Magna in 1913, where he took an active part in the affairs of the Magna Branch, acting as ward teacher, instructor in the ward Y. M. M. I. A. and also in an Elders quorum, acted as second counselor in the presidency of the 14th Quorum of Elders in the Pioneer Stake and later as president of the 4th Quorum of Elders in the Oquirrh Stake. On Oct. 23, 1927, he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Rudger Clawson and set apart as second counselor in the bishopric of the Magna Ward, which position he held until Aug. 19, 1928, when he was chosen as a member of the High Council of the Oquirrh Stake. On May 2, 1931, he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle David O. McKay. Besides laboring faithfully in ecclesiastical affairs, Bishop Dimond has held a number of civil positions, and through his diligence and faithfulness he has succeeded in getting the Magna Ward into a prosperous condition. Bishop Dimond is known as a man of strict integrity and reliability. He is employed by the Utah Copper Company in the Fine Crushing Department of said company.
