Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Barron, Alexander Franklin

Barron, Alexander Franklin, (1813-1885), of. Scotch-Irish descent, and a descendant of a long line of early American pioneers, was born Oct. 4, 1813, at Elkridge, Giles Co., Tenn., a son of Alexander Barron and Elizabeth Liddell. Until he was nineteen years of age he lived in Tennessee and Georgia with his parents. He was educated in home schools, and in Nashville, Tenn., where he studied medicine for a time. In 1832 he joined a party of U. S. surveyors, and with them and a company of U. S. colonists, went to Texas. Here he associated with such men as David Crockett and Samuel Houston in the development and pioneering of the country, he having extensive land grants in and near Houston, where he made his homo. In 1844 he married Dovey Ann Shinn. She died in 1847, leaving two small daughters. In 1848 he married Mary Miller, and with her.he was baptized into the L. D.S. Church Aug. 6, 1851, by William Moody. By this marriage eleven children were born; six sons and five daughters. In September, 1853, he started for Utah with the Preston Thomas Company, which was said to be one of the largest companies to leave for Utah at one time. There were 102 wagons, one thousand head of cattle, and a large number of fine horses, mules, and sheep. They arrived at the Cherokee Strip, or Nation, Nov. 4, 1853, and stayed there for the winter. In the spring of 1854 they started for Utah again, with Washington Jolly as captain, the company now being divided. Arriving in Utah in September, they stayed in Salt Lake City just one day when Pres. Brigham Young sent them to Fort Herriman to make their home. Bro. Barron took the cattle to Cache Valley later, because there was more feed there. Due to extreme cold and heavy snows about haft of the herds was lost. He returned to Herriman to find the family needing help, as his wife was ill and the hired man had gone insane. He lived at Fort Herriman for about ten years and was Bishop there from 1858 to 1865, being the first Bishop of the Fort Herriman Ward. In 1857 he married Phoebe Ann Peck as a plural wife. She bore him three children, namely, two boys and one daughter. His children (sixteen in all) except three grew to maturity and became good citizens in the community where they have lived. In 1858 Bro. Barron went south in the "General Move", and spent a year at Fillmore and Meadow Creek. He did quite an extensive dairy business, selling to passing travelers, notably the company of Mountain Meadow Massacre fame. They bought freely and paid liberally for butter, cheese and milk. While there he was called by Anson Call to go with Jacob Croft and William Powell to survey a town-site in Millard County. They located the site for Deseret and dedicated the land. Bro. Barron offered the dedicatory prayer, in which he prophesied, that the desert in Pahvant Valley would truly blossom as a rose, and that a highway would be "thrown up" through the valley, which would connect the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans. Streams of living water would flow out of the ground, and the valley would be settled from the mountains East toward the West, North and South and in time become a great agricultural center. In 1922 President Alonzo A. Hinckley, while acting as Commissioner of Agriculture in Utah, stated that Millard County had produced more hay and grain and alfalfa seed in 1922 than any other locality in Utah, thus verifying the prophecy of Brother Barron. After spending a year in Millard County, Bro. Barron returned to Fort Herriman, but in 1865 President Young called him to go to the "Muddy" in southern Nevada. He arrived in St. George late in November, where Erastus Snow advised him to go to Panaca, Nevada, instead of the Muddy, as the ranges were dead from lack of rain. At Panaca he served as acting Bishop and while living here he filled a short mission to his old home in the South in 1869. He visited all of his relatives in Tennessee, Georgia and Alabama, and preached the Gospel to them. He became a prominent farmer, stock-raiser, and leader in Church and civic affairs at Panaca, where he lived until 1877, when he was again called by Pres. Young to go to St. George. He settled at Washington, Washington County, making this his headquarters for operations on the Church ranch in northern Arizona. In connection with his two sons-in-law, Virgil Kelly and John Lufkin, he developed the springs now known as Sever, Oak Grove and Parashont, which he bought from the Indians. This ranch was located on the north rim of the Colorado River, about fifty miles west from what is now the Grand Canyon of Colorado National Park. At the time Bro. Barron was managing this ranch, he had also contracted the handling of the Church sheep numbering several thousand head. Under the terms of this contract he was to deliver the sheep at a certain time, back to the Church authorities, who had the matter in charge. He served notice that he was ready to make the delivery of the sheep at a definite locality at a certain time. The representative of the Church failed to meet the appointment as agreed, and consequently the sheep had to be held. In the meantime an unusual snow storm came upon them, and the entire herd perished. The representative of the Church demanded that he make payment in full for the loss. The case was tried and a decision, which was influenced by misrepresentations and prejudice, was reached, sustaining the claim of the Church representative. Bro. Barron was required to make payment in full for the loss, or he would be excommunicated from the Church. When advised of the decision, he made the following statement: "I will not allow myself to be cut off the Church for money, if it takes all the property I have". In his effort to pay this enormous debt, he turned over his entire possessions. In the course of events, the matter was referred to Apostle Erastus Snow, who, after a thorough investigation, made the following statement: "Knowing Elder Barron as I do to be an honest and upright man, I cannot believe him willfully guilty, and those men who have sought to demand from him that which is not right will not prosper." This statement has been verified, for those who instigated the proceedings have gone down in disgrace, thus fully vindicating the honor of Elder Barron, who was a man of great faith and always loyal to the Church.

Through all the trials and hardships of pioneer life, Bro. Barron remained true to the faith he had espoused, dying as a firm believer in the Latter-day Saint doctrines as taught by Joseph Smith. It was said of him and his families that their charities knew no bounds. The poor and needy never left his door unaided, and this fine humane characteristic was extended to the Indians as well as the whites.

Alexander F. Barron died in Washington, Utah, April 3, 1885, having spent the last years of his life surrounded by his large family.
