Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Bennion, Samuel Otis

Bennion, Samuel Otis, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, was born Jane 9, 1874, at Taylorsville, Salt Lake Co., Utah, a son of John R. Bennion and Emma Jane Terry. He was baptized when about eight years old and was later ordained a Deacon and presided over the quorum of Deacons of which he was a member. In due course of time he was ordained an Elder and later a Seventy. In 1898 (Aug. 25th) he married Charlotte Towler of Mill Creek Ward, Salt Lake Co., Utah. He received a good education in his younger days, and during part of his life, before he went into the mission field, he was occupied in agriculture, but principally in ranching and sheep raising. He was set apart for a mission to the Central States Nov. 12, 1904, and was chosen as president of the South Texas District after he had been in the mission six months. Later the same year, he was called to the mission headquarters at Independence, Missouri, and aftor spending ten months as secretary of the mission, he was appointed mission president Oct. 1, 1906. The growth of the mission was sure and steady, and the sound practice established in laying a firm foundation, made the mission, under the direction of the Lord, an important part of the Church. In January, 1931, the Texas Mission was formed out of the states of Texas and Louisiana, which had constituted a part of the Central States Mission. Pres. Bennion remained in the mission field until Jan. 20, 1934. At the April Conference in 1933 he was sustained as one of the First Council of Seventies, and was ordained to that office April 13, 1933, by Pres. Heber J. Grant. On April 1, 1934, Elder Bonnion was appointed general manager and vice, president of the "Deseret News", which position he still holds. While Pres. Bennion had charge of the Central States Mission he made it a rule to visit the missionaries from one end of the mission to the other every ninety days, and saw them in their fields of labor, heard their reports, gave them instructions, and as a result saw many thousands of people baptized into the Church. The mission was always self-sustaining financially, and large sums of money were sent to the headquarters of the Church from the tithes of the mission, after the expenses and building programs that were carried on in the mission field itself had been cared for.
