Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Cannon, Sylvester Q.PPCannon, Sylvester Quayle

Cannon, Sylvester Q.PPCannon, Sylvester Quayle, Presiding Bishop of the Church since 1925, was born June 10, 1877, in Salt Lake City, Utah, a son of George Quayle Cannon and Elizabeth Hoagland. He was the youngest of eleven children born to this couple. When an infant he was taken by his parents to Washington, D. C., where his father was in Congress as a delegate from Utah. His childhood was spent on the Cannon Farm southwest of Salt Lake City, where he attended a private school maintained by his father. From 1889 to 1892 he attended the Latter-day Saints College, and, having qualified in stenography, he accompanied his father as secretary on a trip to the Eastern States and England. In 1894-1895 he pursued special studies at the University of Utah, and thereafter attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Boston, Mass., for a period of four years, graduating therefrom as a Bachelor of Science in June, 1899, having majored in Mining Engineering and Metallurgy. In September, 1899, Elder Cannon left home for a mission to Holland and Belgium and was assigned to labor in the Liege district in Belgium. Having studied French and German quite extensively, he was, in three months, placed in charge of the Seraing-Ougree Branch, Belgium. In 1900 he was appointed to preside over the Netherlands-Belgium Mission, where he had to learn the Dutch language. In February, 1902, he was called by Pres. Francis M. Lyman to visit with him the Turkish Mission as "guide and interpreter". On that three-months journey he visited Egypt, Palestine, Syria, Turkey, Greece, Italy and France and prepared a series of articles in reference to the trip for the "Millennial Star". After an absence of three years, Elder Cannon returned home and was engaged professionally by the State of Utah in a survey of irrigated lands and water from the Weber River.

Cannon, Sylvester Q.PPIn March, 1904, at the organization of the Pioneer Stake, he was appointed first counselor in the stake presidency. On June 15, 1904, he married Winnifred Saville in the Salt Lake Temple. Four sons and three daughters have been born of this union. In 1907 Elder Cannon was again appointed to preside over the Netherlands-Belgium Mission and to supervise the publication of the Doctrine and Covenants in the Dutch language. He also published a new and improved edition of the Book of Mormon in the Netherlands, and new editions of the French and Dutch hymn books, with many additions and improvements. On this mission he was accompanied by his wife and two little children.

Cannon, Sylvester Q.PPFrom 1917 to 1925 Elder Cannon presided over the Pioneer Stake of Zion, and has been a member of the Board of Control of the Deseret Gymnasium since 1910 and, since 1923, president of the Board of Trustees of the L. D. S. Business College. For one year he acted as president of the Utah Society of Engineers and in 1915 was accepted as a member of the American Society of Civil Engineers.

Cannon, Sylvester Q.PPOn June 4, 1925, he was ordained and set apart by Pres. Heber J. Grant as Presiding Bishop of the Church, in which capacity he has general supervision of the following activities: Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood, the temporal affairs of the various wards with the ward bishoprics; receiving and accounting for the tithes, offerings, and other donations; preparation of all financial and statistical reports; the Church relief work and the design and construction of all Church buildings. In 1930-1931 he was appointed chairman of the Governor's State Flood Commission and in 1931-32 he acted as chairman of the State Advisory Council for Unemployment.
