Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Compton, Allen

Compton, Allen, a member of the Mormon Battalion, Company D, was born Jan. 10, 1809, in Wilson County, Tennessee, a son of William Compton. On Jan. 13, 1832, he married Mary Betrice. In June, 1845, he moved to Hancock County, Illinois, and on May 2, 1846, a mob numbering eighteen persons rode up to the door, called the father out and told him to get his family out of the house immediately. As soon as they were out the mob fired the house; the Compton family were not allowed to take anything with them. They took passage on the steamer "St. Croix" and started to follow the saints who had preceded them in the great exodus. They arrived at Council Bluffs on the 3rd of July. Colonel Allen had come into the camp the day before to enlist five hundred men to go to Mexico, and Bro. Compton became one of the number. He left his family camped in the corner of a worn fence with nothing to protect them from the scorching sun during the day, or the heavy dews at night, but a piece of wagon cover stretched on the fence. Two of his children were sick with the ague. The Battalion marched from Fort Leavenworth, leaving the sick detachment-among whom was Bro. Compton-to winter at Pueblo. In the spring of 1847 Captain Higgins' Company was sent to Fort Laramie, Bro. Compton being one of them. They met Amasa M. Lyman just before arriving at Fort Laramie. The company overtook the Pioneers on Green River, arriving in Salt Lake Valley on July 22, 1847. Bro. Compton started back on Aug. 24, arriving home on Nov. 18th, 1847, and started back again for the Valley Oct. 14, 1848, with the mail (that being the first mail that came to Utah), arriving in Salt Lake City Nov. 30. The Indians were troublesome during the winter, and Bro. Compton was sent with Capt. Scott to battle them near Provo. After the April conference Bro. Compton was asked to return to Council Bluffs, build some flat boats when he arrived there, and ferry the saints across the Missouri River, which he did, operating the Lone Tree Ferry in 1851-1852, the one known as Busha's Ferry in 1853. Then he moved up and ran the ferry at Winter Quarters. He died Aug. 17, 1854, in Council Bluffs, Iowa.
