Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Leatham, Louis Salisbury

Leatham, Louis Salisbury, a member of the Salt Lake Stake Genealogical Temple Committee, was born Nov. 16, 1903, in the 16th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, a son of Patriarch Wm. Leatham and Martha Ann Salisbury. His grandparents were early residents of Utah and his maternal grandfather, Joshua Salisbury was, it is claimed, the pioneer of dry land farming in Utah and the West. Bro. Louis Learham was baptized in the Salt Lake Tabernacle font by Elder George A. Davis Feb. 4, 1911, and received his education in the public schools of Salt Lake City and in the extension division of the University of Utah. He was ordained to offices in the Aaronic Priesthood and ordained an Elder May 25, 1925, by Bishop LeGrand P. Backman. He was ordained a Seventy Aug. 31, 1927, by RuIon S. Wells, just prior to leaving on a mission to Great Britain. During this mission he traveled from the extreme north of Scotland to the English border on his bicycle, preaching the gospel, and also acted for some time as president of the Aberdeen Branch and as clerk of the Sheffield District. Before returning home in October, 1929, he traveled quite extensively in Europe. He is a member of the 2nd Quorum of Seventy and is also deeply interested in genealogical and temple work, is second counselor in the presidency of the Salt Lake Stake Genealogical and Temple Committee, and vice president and secretary of the Robert Leatham Family Association. He has also served in various capacities in the auxiliary organizations of the Church. In secular affairs he has served as auditor for the Bennett Gas and Oil Company, cashier of the National Building and Loan Assn. of America and its affiliated companies, auditor for the State Banking Department (liquidating division), and field representative for the Home Owners Loan Corporation. He was one of the division supervisors of the first Covered Wagon Days Parade held in Salt Lake City in July, 1931, and in subsequent annual parades, and is a member of the State Central Committee of one of the major political parties of Utah. On Sept. 24, 1930, he married Anna Grace Carn (daughter of Thomas Richard Carn and Almeda Ford) in the Salt Lake Temple. They have two children, namely, William Wallace and Janet Leatham.
