Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Miles, Gertrude Griffiths

Miles, Gertrude Griffiths, a lady missionary who died in the field, was born Aug. 31, 1895, in Smithfield, Cache Co., Utah, a daughter of William George Griffiths and Gertrude Martha Williams. She was baptized Sept. 5, 1903, by John Swenson. Her mother died when Gertrude was only a girl of thirteen, and the bringing up of the other children of the family was left to her. In 1912, she married Glen Miles in the Logan Temple and their married life was very happy. He was killed in one of the battles of the World war in October, 1918. After his death Sister Miles devoted most of her time to Church work. While still residing in Smithfield she was called on a mission to the Northern States, being set apart Oct. 19, 1920. She reached her field of labor Oct. 23, 1920, and died in Chicago March 25, 1921, the cause of her death being embolism following an attack of quinsy. She was a woman of pleasing personality, and by the service she rendered to others, won a place in the hearts of all who were associated with her. She was chosen to assist Sister Emily Whitney Smith, president of the mission Relief Societies, in special work, which called them to visit many branches of the mission, giving encouragement and suggestions to the local sisters. On Friday evening, March 18, 1921, a social was given in the Logan Square chapel, commemorating the seventy-ninth anniversary of the organization of the Relief Society. At this social Sister Miles gave a historical sketch of the work accomplished by the women since their organization was effected. Funeral services were held in the Logan Square chapel, Chicago, Saturday afternoon, where a large number of friends and investigators assembled to show their appreciation of their association with her. Many were the words of praise of the untiring efforts and the sterling qualities of Sister Miles. Elder R. Truman Hillyard, president of the Northern Indiana Conference, a resident of Smithfield, Utah, a life long friend of Sister Miles, accompanied her body home. Her mission was complete in this life, and pleasant thoughts can be entertained of the joyous meeting on the "other shore" of the here, who gave his life for humanity, and the heroine, who died "on the firing line," battling for the cause of truth and righteousness.
