Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Peery, Joseph Stras

Peery, Joseph Stras, president of the Temple Square Mission and manager of the Bureau of Information in Salt Lake City, was born Oct. 5, 1868, in Ogden, Utah, a son of David H. Peery, and Elizabeth L. Higginbotham. His father died in Ogden in 1901 but his mother who was born in Nauvoo, Ill., Jan. 13, 1846, is still (1936) living in Ogden, aged 91 years.

Joseph S. Peery was born under very favorable circumstances, and his youth was spent in attending school and studying music and singing and activity in Church organizations. When a young boy his father would call him into their home, known as "The Virginia" and have him play the piano and repeat stories from the Bible for the entertainment of visitors. From the age of 16 to 20 he worked in his father's store and made a splendid clerk; often working from 7:00 o'clock a. m. to 10:00 p.m. At the age of 20 Joseph Peery desired to continue his education and having spent two winters at the University of Utah, his parents arranged for him to attend the Roanoke College in Virginia. At that time there was great persecution against the saints and a local newspaper was very abusive. Bro. Peery discovered that one of his college professors was editor of the paper so he said to him: "You are telling lies against my people, and if you don't stop, I will leave Roanoke College and everyone will know why I leave." The professor answered: "Why, Mr. Peery, I had no idea that you were a 'Mormon.' I promise you that I will never say anything against your people any more." The winters of 1888-1889 and 1889-1890 Bro. Peery spent at the University of Nebraska, at Lincoln, where he became president of his class, editor of the college paper, represented his university in a debate with the Methodist University, and represented the University infantry company in a rifle shooting contest. After his return from college in 1890, Elder Peery was appointed superintendent of the Weber County Schools, during which time he inaugurated a system of grading, the first of the kind adopted for county schools in Utah. In the summer of 1892 he resigned this position to attend the Yale University Law Department, at New Haven, Conn., where he graduated with honors in the class of 1895 with the degree of L.L.B. The evening he arrived in New Haven there was a large gathering of students who were debating the gold and silver standards. All the students were strongly on the side of gold. The statement was made, "Is there anyone in the audience who would like to talk?" Bro. Peery rose and for fifteen minutes held the students spellbound in his defense of free silver. The next day he was invited to join an honorary society called Corbey Court. He accepted and made many friends among the Yale students.

After his return home Bro. Peery saw the importance of having a public library in Ogden. He got up an entertainment, which was attended by 1,500 people and netted $500 which amount was the nucleus of the Ogden public library. In 1898 he was elected the first president of the Carnegie Public Library of Ogden and during his administration the library building was erected. On May 4, 1896, he was appointed a trustee of the State Industrial School and was later made president of the Board of Trustees. In the fall of 1898 he was nominated by the Democratic party and elected to be county attorney, in which office he served for two years and then went into the sheep business, from which he retired in 1929.

On July 20, 1898, he married Luacine Hoge of Salt Lake City, daughter of Enos D. Hoge and Luacine Williams. For the first three years their marriage was ideal, but his wife's health failing, he watched her for seven years gradually losing strength. After her demise on April 27, 1908, he felt that "Heaven would not be heaven to him without his wife," so in August, 1908, he went into the Salt Lake Temple and had his wife sealed to him for time and all eternity. He says, "The main testimony of my life was the heavenly happiness I received in the holy Temple of the Lord when my adorable wife was sealed to me." Bro. Peery then made temple work his main business for some years. He accumulated a genealogy of thousands of names and as far as possible had the work done in their behalf.

On Dec. 22, 1909, Bro. Peery married Julina Clarissa Smith in the Salt Lake Temple. She was a daughter of Pres. Joseph F. Smith and Julina Lambson. Two sons and four daughters were born of this marriage, namely, Joseph Smith, David Harold, Luacine, Julina, Elizabeth Louise and Margaret Peery. On Aug. 1, 1923, he again went through the sorrow of losing his beloved wife by death. She left six children between the ages of 2 and 12 years. On March 19, 1924, he married Liliu Davis, second cousin of Julina Smith Peery, deceased, and a daughter of Albert J. Davis and Margaret D. Foraythe. This union has been blessed with three children, namely, Nancy, Paul Davis and Jeanne Peery.

Elder Peery has held many responsible positions in the Church, such as president of Y. M. M. I. A., officer on Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. boards, High Councilor, etc., and in August, 1909, he became a missionary guide on the Temple Block, Salt Lake City, in which work he has been active ever since. On July 1, 1929, he was appointed first assistant to Pres. Levi Edgar Young of the Bureau of Information, and on July 9, 1932, he was appointed president of the Temple Square Mission and manager of the Bureau of Information. During the year 1936, under the direction of Pres. Peery, 300,000 tourists were entertained and 67 missionary guides alternated in taking companies through the Tabernacle and Assembly Hall and in explaining to the visitors the sacred uses of the Temple.
