Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Salisbury, Elizabeth Hoskin

Salisbury, Elizabeth Hoskin, wife of Joshua Salisbury and a pioneer of Wellsville, Utah, was born Sept. 28, 1829, in Cornwall, England, a daughter of James Hoskin and Elizabeth Hancock. Her grandfather, John Hancock, was engineer of one of the earliest locomotives and in 1812 drove an engine over the London Bridge. While Sister Salisbury was still a young girl, he father died, and she went to work for a wealthy English family as a nurse girl, where she learned many valuable lessons in house keeping and the care of children. She was married when quite young to Benjamin Hoskins, who, being ambitious to secure financial opportunities, sailed from England with his young wife for America Aug. 25, 1848. They settled first in the State of Connecticut and later moved to Pennsylvania, locating in Minersville, where the young husband went to work in the coal mines. In 1856 he was injured while at his work and about a month later died from injuries sustained. The young wife with her three children were well cared for by the Odd Fellows Lodge, and when, shortly afterwards, twin girls were born to her, a nurse was sent to attend her, and this lodge and other kind friends were solicitous in her behalf. Among these was Joshua Salisbury, whose wife had recently died, leaving him with two little children. Sympathy for each other's sorrow became affection and on Oct. 13, 1858, they were married. Being also a convert to the Church Sister Salisbury thriftily helped to save means to make it possible for the family to go to the Rocky Mountains. The family included one little daughter, Caroline, born eight months before they left their home in the east. They arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 1, 1860. The family settled at Wellsville, a recently settled locality in Cache County. Here Bro. Salisbury erected a log house and Sister Salisbury became associated with the Relief Society, over which she presided for eighteen years. She was beloved by all her co-workers. She became the mother of eight more children and also reared a motherless babe for some time. She mothered four different families of children, 19 in all. Sister Salisbury died in Salt Lake City July 19, 1918, at the age of 89 years. Interment took place in Wellsville.
