Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Salisbury, Joshua

Salisbury, Joshua, one of the early pioneer settlers of Wellsville, Cache County, Utah, was born June 3, 1827, in Llanasa, Flintshire, Wales, a son of Thomas Salisbury and Sarah Jones. He was baptized Dec. 25, 1852, by his uncle, Joseph Jones, and while yet in his native land was ordained an Elder in 1854. In appearance Bro. Salisbury was tall and well proportioned, and at the age of 18 years weighed 185 pounds. In June, 1850, at Llanasa, Wales, he married Martha Davies who bore him two children. Being deeply impressed with the further light and knowledge received from the teachings of the restored gospel he earnestly endeavored to convert his fellow workers in the coal mines, but met with great persecution as a result. In 1855, with his wife and two children, Bro. Salisbury left his native land for America. The family spent five years on the frontiers before crossing the plains and mountains from the Missouri River to Utah. While passing through Illinois Bro. Salisbury's wife died at St. Johns, Perry Co., Ill., in 1857, and on Oct. 13, 1858, he married Elizabeth Hoskin (daughter of James Hoskin and Elizabeth Hancock). Bro. Salisbury worked in the coal mines in Pennsylvania, and through thrift and determinaton was finally enabled to accumulate the necessary outfit and supplier to unite with the body of the Church in Utah. With his own hands he built a sturdy covered wagon and traveled a thousand miles overland, alone, arriving safely at Florence, Nebraska, where Bro. Salisbury, his wife and their children united with a company of emigrating saints in charge of Captain John Smith, which after traveling another thousand miles arrived in Great Salt Lake City Saturday, Sept. 1, 1860. The family settled at Wellsville in Cache Valley, Utah, where, upon the advice of Brigham Young, Bro. Salisbury became a pioneer in dry farming, being the first man in Cache Valley to raise wheat on "dry" land there. He began his dry farm experiments in the year 1868 and in 1872 was successful in harvesting the first crop of "dry land" wheat in the Valley. He also raised choice garden seeds on his irrigated farm, some of which were exhibited at the World's Fair in Chicago, Ill., and carried off a number of valuable prizes. Brother Salisbury was known to be a charitable man, always helping the immigrating saints and those less fortunate than himself. He proved himself to be a man without guile. He was an expert stone mason and helped with both his services and his means in the erection of the Logan Temple. He also helped in the construction of the Wellsville Tabernacle and many other public buildings and homes in Cache Valley. He was ordained a High Priest Dec. 25, 1884. Bro. Salisbury died May 6, 1913, at Wellsville, Utah, survived by his widow and ten children.
