Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Salisbury, Matilda Jane Gibbs

Salisbury, Matilda Jane Gibbs, wife of Bishop Joseph Hoskin Salisbury, was born at Willard, Box Elder Co., Utah, Dec. 16, 1863, daughter of Patriarch John Duggan Gibbs and Julia Ann Thompson, both early Utah pioneers. Sister Salisbury was of a most refined nature and spent her life in the service of the Church and in doing good among her fellowmen. With the exception of seven years, when she resided at Imbler, Oregon, where her husband presided as Bishop of the Imbler Ward, her whole life was spent in Utah. Sister Salisbury began her Church activities in the Portage Ward prior to her marriage in the Logan Temple, Jan. 1, 1885. She subsequently became an officer in the Wellsville M. I. A.; president of the Imbler Ward Relief Society; an officer in the Logan 2nd Ward Y. W. M. I. A., and president of the Logan 5th Ward Y. W. M. I. A. While residing in Salt Lake City she was active in the Mill Creek, Forest Dale and 20th Wards Relief Societies, giving of her sound judgment and mature wisdom. With her husband and family she celebrated her golden wedding anniversary on Jan. 1, 1935. She was also an active officer of the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers organization. Exemplifying the words, "God could not be everywhere, so He sent mothers," she became the honored mother of six children, namely, Joseph Gibbs, LeRoy Gibbs, Wilford Gibbs, John Duggan and Julia Elizabeth. Two of her sons have filled missions for the Church and one son rendered service to his country overseas in the U. S. army during the World war. Sister Salisbury was truly a fit candidate for the Celestial Kingdom, having a life long record of service and devotion to the Church and to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. She breathed a spirit of love and affection which inspired all with whom she associated. Sister Salisbury, survived by her husband, three sons and 14 grandchildren passed from this world in her 72nd year, after a life well lived and full of good deeds, on June 3, 1935, at Salt Lake City, Utah. After a most impressive funeral in the 20th Ward, Salt Lake City, interment took place in Logan, Utah, where graveside services were also held.

"Loving and kind in all her ways, Upright and just to the end of her days, Sincere and true in heart and mind, Beautiful memories she left behind."
