Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Hyde, Frank

Hyde, Frank, 6th Bishop of Kaysville Ward, North Davis Stake, Davis Co., Utah, was born Jan. 25, 1881, in Kaysville, Utah, the son of Rosel Hyde and Hannah Maria Simmons. He was baptized April 1, 1889, by Wm. Blood, was raised a farmer and educated in the common schools of Kaysville. He took an active part in Church matters from his early youth, receiving instructions from his parents both by example and precept. Early in life he was ordained a Deacon and on Jan. 26, 1896, ordained a Teacher; later he was ordained a Priest, and on Jan. 10, 1904, he was ordained an Elder by John C. Jameson. He was ordained a Seventy by J. Golden Kimball March 13, 1910, and became a member and later a president of the 55th Quorum of Seventy, which position he held until Aug. 8, 1915, when he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Apostle Francis M. Lyman and set apart to preside over the Kaysville Ward. Prior to this he acted as assistant superintendent of the Kaysville Sunday school No. 3, and later as superintendent for two years of the same school. Bishop Hyde has also held a number of secular offices in the community and served as a member of the Kaysville City Council from 1917 to 1921. In 1904 (May 25), he married Winnifred Barnes in the Salt Lake Temple, which union has been blessed with four children, viz., Lucille, Helen R., Ruth and Noall Frank. Bishop Hyde is a carpenter by trade, and for 18 years he has been engaged in contracting and building in northern Utah and southern Idaho. On June 29, 1921, he met with an accident while driving a team on the state highway, near Kaysville, being run into by an automobile. From this accident he came out with a broken leg, a broken arm and a broken shoulder and ribs; his life was despaired of, but by the power of God and the administration of the Priesthood he was restored to perfect health. Bishop Hyde ascribes this miraculous case of healing to the fact that he has kept the Word of Wisdom from his early youth.
