Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Jenkins, John Howard

Jenkins, John Howard, 1st Bishop of the Ogden 13th Ward, Ogden Stake, Weber Co., Utah, was born Aug. 1, 1886, in Ogden, Utah, the son of John Jenkins and Harriet Riley. He was raised and received a good education in the schools of Ogden. After being baptized Oct. 4, 1894, by William Moyes, he began his Church activities, and was ordained a Teacher Dec. 2, 1901, by Bishop Robert McQuarrie; ordained a Priest Oct. 13, 1902, by Warren G. Child, and ordained an Elder June 4, 1906, by Thomas Samuel Browning. After laboring as a Sunday school teacher, he was called to fill a mission to New Zealand, where he did missionary labor in 1906-1910, laboring among the Maoris of the Wanganui and Taranaki conferences. He was conference president for nearly three years and opened up the Taranaki district for active missionary work; he assisted to harvest the first crop on the Maori agricultural farm at Hastings, Hawkes Bay. After his return home from this mission, he acted as Sunday school superintendent of the Ogden 2nd Ward for two years. In 1912 (Nov. 20), he married Athleen Woods, granddaughter of Parley P. Pratt, in the Salt Lake Temple. Barbara and Marion were the issue of this marriage. Brother Jenkins acted as president of the 1st Quorum of Elders in the Ogden Stake from 1913 to 1916, and was superintendent of the State Industrial Sunday school from 1913 to 1916. During a temporary residence in Idaho, he assisted in opening up the townsite of Pingree, and took up a quarter section of land there. Returning to Ogden, he became an employee in the Fred J. Kiesel Company, and later worked for J. G. Read and Brothers, with which company he now holds the position of treasurer and director. When the Ogden 13th Ward was organized from parts of the 4th and 6th Wards, he was called to act as Bishop of the 13th Ward, where he took a leading part in the erection of a frame building as a temporary meeting house and later directed the building of the present modern 13th Ward chapel. His wife died Nov. 30, 1918, and on Dec. 10, 1919, he married Cora Stephenson (who had filled a mission to the Northern States in 1917-1919) in the Salt Lake Temple. The children of this marriage are Donna, John Stephenson and Joseph Richard, born in Auckland, New Zealand.

In April, 1925, Bro. Jenkins was called on a second mission to New Zealand, this time to succeed Angus T. Wright as president of the New Zealand Mission. He was accompanied on this mission by his wife, Cora, who was called to preside over the Relief Societies in the Mission. During this mission Pres. Jenkins was busy organizing and re-organizing branches of the Church among the Maoris and Europeans. Under his administration, a recreation hall was finished at Nuhaka, and he superintended the transfer of the meeting-house properties in New Zealand to the Church; and also brought the mission out of debt. Three general conferences of the mission were held during his administration, two of them at the invitation of Princess Puea Te HeRangi at her model mansion on the Waikato River. Since June, 1928, Brother Jenkins has acted as a member of the Ogden Stake High Council.
