Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

General Board of the Primary Association

PRIMARY ASSOCIATION FIRST GENERAL OFFICERS OF THE PRIMARY ASSOCIATION Louie B. Felt, President; Matilda W. Barrett, Counselor; Clara C. M. Cannon, Counselor; Lillie T. Freeze, Secretary; Mary Alice (Minnie)Felt Cutler, Treasurer.

Anderson, May

Anderson, May, general superintendent of the Primary Association of the Church since 1925, was born June 8, 1864, in Liverpool, England, a daughter of Scott Anderson and Mary Bruce. She was baptized in England by John Nicholson and confirmed by Orson Pratt. In 1883, with her father's family, she emigrated to Utah, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Nevada" with a company of Latter-day Saints in charge of Ben. E. Rich. She became interested in Kindergarten work and studied kindergarten methods under Miss Alice Chapin and in the University of Utah under Miss Mary C. May. For two years Sister Anderson taught the Free Kindergarten in Salt Lake City and for four years operated a private kindergarten and also for four years was assistant teacher in the kindergarten department of the University of Utah. For five years she served as a counselor to Louie B. Felt in the Primary Association of the 11th Ward, Salt Lake City, and in October, 1890, was sustained as general secretary of the Primary Association. From this position she was released in 1905, to act as first counselor to Louie B. Felt, general president of the Primary Associations of the Church, and on Oct. 8, 1925, she succeeded Sister Felt in that position. Sister Anderson has been editor of the "Children's Friend," the organ of the Primary Association, since 1901, and in her official capacity in the Primary Association has visited every stake in the Church except those just recently organized. Sister Anderson helped to establish the Primary Children's Hospital in Salt Lake City and is president of the board of trustees of that institution. For one year she served under Dr. E. Gowans in behalf of the Children's Bureau of the U. S. Department of Labor during the World war, working under the direction of Miss Julia Lathrop, being appointed to serve as an honorary or "dollar a year" worker. As a member of the Salt Lake committee of child welfare (division of the state defense council) in April, 1919, Sister Anderson received from the U. S. Department of Labor a handsome bronze medal. For her efficient service, the U. S. Treasury Department, in 1919, presented her with a Victory Loan Medal, made from a captured German cannon. The Primary Association, over which Sister Anderson presides, has a total membership of nearly 120,000.
