Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Marsh, Albert

Marsh, Albert, 4th Bishop of the Alpine Ward, Utah Co., Utah, was born May 5, 1842, at Steeple-Ashton, Wiltshire, England, the son of Isaac Marsh and Mary Ann Nash. He was baptized in England when about ten years old, emigrated to Utah in 1854 with his aunt and crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Marshfield" and the plains in William Empey's ox train. He located in Alpine, Utah Co., in the spring of 1855, and resided there continuously until his death. He endured the trials and hardships Of pioneer life, participated in the so-called Black-Hawk war and took an active part, both in ecclesiastical and in civil capacities throughout his entire life. In the Church he held such positions as superintendent of the Alpine Ward Sunday school for fifteen years, presided over the ward Y. M. M. I. A. ten years and acted as Bishop of the Alpine Ward fourteen years, being ordained a Bishop by the late Apostle Francis M. Lyman in 1893. He was the instigator of the Old Folks entertainments in Alpine, the first few annual affairs being held at his home. In municipal affairs he was prominent as a school trustee, city marshal, member of the city council, member of an irrigation company, etc. He was also one of the most successful farmers of the community and engaged in mercantile business. In 1868 (Feb. 15), he married Sarah C. Oakey of American Fork in the old Endowment House in Salt Lake City. She was born in Des Moines, Iowa, Sept. 5, 1847. This marriage was blessed with eleven children, namely, Mary Lillian, Albert, Elizabeth, Joseph F., Lenora, Olive, Lois, Blanch, Reno, Henrietta and Jenetta. Seven of the children are dead. Bishop Marsh died in Alpine Feb. 22, 1919, leaving a wife, five children, 42 grandchildren and six great grandchildren. Bro. Marsh was universally known and beloved for his honesty, his integrity, his peace-loving disposition and his willingness to help in every way possible to build up the Church, of which he was a devoted member, and the community at large.
