Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Morris, Emma Ramsey

Morris, Emma Ramsey, a member and chorister of the general board of the Primary Association for several years, is a daughter of George W. Ramsey and Amanda Ross. She was a student at the University of Utah, studied piano with Mattie R. Stark, organ with John J. McClellan, and voice culture with Anthony C. Lund, Madame Klara Klotte, and Blanche Corelli (of Berlin, Germany). She made her debut at the Berlin Philharmonic Hall with the Berliner Ton-Kunstler Orchestra under the direction of Richard Strausse, sang at the New Royal Opera (Krolls), the Raphsoden Theatre and the Alden Theatre in Berlin. She also sang with artists from the Berlin Royal Opera for royalty and foreign diplomats many times. During her second trip to Europe she studied several years in Paris, France, with Joseph Archainland. Sister Morris made her debut at the Aeolian Hall in Paris in company with leading singers from the Paris Grand Opera and the Opera Comique. Upon her return to America she made extensive concert tours from the Atlantic to the Pacific, singing in 21 concerts a month. She sang the "Flag Without a Stain" for Theodore Roosevelt who named her "Utah's Nightingale." She sang the same song for President Wm. H. Taft. The Grand Army of the Republic presented her with a gold and pearl flag in token of her services. Her singing was commended by Madame Schumann-Heinck. On her third trip to Europe, Sister Morris maintained a teaching studio in Paris for 16 months. She was a member of the Salt Lake Opera Company with which she appeared on several occasions in leading roles. She also sang for charity concerts many times and was active in Sunday School, M. I. A. and Primary work. She was set apart as a missionary to Germany, giving freely of time and talents in several missions in Europe. On June 30, 1905, she was married to George Q. Morris and is the mother of three daughters, namely, Marian, Margery and Helen.
