Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

McEntire, William Rawson

McEntire, William Rawson, 6th Bishop of the Huntsville Ward, Ogden Stake, Weber Co., Utah, was born Nov. 26, 1884, in Ogden, Utah, the son of William Napoleon McEntire and Olive Ann Rawson. As an infant he moved with his parents to Harrisville, Weber Co., where, and in Farr West, he was raised and schooled. He was baptized when about 8 years old, and being born of goodly parents he was raised in such a way that he could take part in religious duties from his earliest youth. Thus he was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest, Elder, Seventy, High Priest and Bishop. He received his ordination as a Seventy from J. Golden Kimball April 19, 1909, and was ordained a High Priest and Bishop Feb. 25, 1926, by Apostle Stephen L. Richards. In his early youth, he acted as secretary of Y. M. M. I. A., and after moving to Huntsville, when about 19 years old, he acted as president of the Huntsville Y. M. M. I. A. and also as supt. of the ward Sunday school. As an active Seventy he served several years as a president in the 75th Quorum of Seventy. In 1906 (Sept. 26), he married Rosene M. Woodfield of North Ogden, in the Salt Lake Temple. The children of this marriage are the following: Virginia May, Laura, William Rawson, Helen Mar, Jay Woodfield, and Don Woodfield. In secular capacities, Bishop McEntire has acted as secretary and treasurer of the Huntsville Irrigation Association, and as a member of the Huntsville Town Board. At present he is a member of the Weber County Board of Education. He also has the distinction of having been the first scout master of the Huntsville Ward, and as such gave the boys of Huntsville some of their first lessons in scout work. For twenty years he kept a barber shop in Huntsville and later engaged in merchandising. He has also done considerable farming. Throughout his life so far he has been active in all affairs pertaining to the welfare of the community in which he resides.
