Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Richards, Louisa Lula Greene

Richards, Louisa Lula Greene, a member of the general board of the Primary Association from 1892 to 1917, was born April 8, 1849, at Kanesville, Pottawattamie County, Iowa, a daughter of Evan M. Greene and Susan Kent. She was baptized in April 1857, by her father and came with her parents to Utah in Allen Weeks' company in 1852. She was taught by her father, who was an excellent teacher, was a student of Tripp and Roger's High School in Salt Lake City and attended the University of Deseret, John R. Park, principal. In 1868 she became the first secretary of the Relief Society in Smithfield, Cache Co., Utah, serving in that position for some time. She was also the first president of Y. L. M. I. A. at Smithfield, being sustained in that position May 25, 1871. She was also a teacher in the first Sunday school in the Smithfield Ward and assisted in organizing the first Primary Associations in Cache County, being a teacher in the organization at Smithfield and also a member of the Home Dramatic Club there. Coming to Salt Lake City, she presided over the Y. L. M. I. A. in the 20th Ward and was selected as the first president of Primary there, but Sister Eliza R. Snow advised that she be allowed to assist her in organizing Primary Associations and other women's organizations throughout the Church. Sister Richards was the first editor of the "Woman's Exponent," the first publication owned and edited by the women of the Church. The first number of this periodical was issued June 1, 1872. Sister Richards was a member of committee on publications for the Deseret Sunday School Union board for many years, and was editor of the "Little Folks Department" of the "Juvenile Instructor." Upon the completion of the Salt Lake Temple she was called as an ordinance worker, being set apart June 7, 1893, and released March 2, 1934. At an early day she was called to be a visiting representative of all the women's organizations of the Church, and in this capacity has traveled from Canada to Arizona, encouraging the sisters and helping the good work along. Sister Richards is the author of hundreds of poems and stories which have appeared in the "Woman's Exponent," "Deseret News," the "Improvement Era," the "Juvenile Instructor," the "Young Woman's Journal," the "Children's Friend," the "Relief Society Magazine," and in other newspapers and periodicals published in the inter-mountain region. She assisted Sister Aurelia S. Rogers in the publication of her history and is the author of a book of poems entitled "Branches That Run Over the Wall." On June 16, 1873, she was married to Levi Willard Richards and became the mother of seven children, namely, Mary Greene, Mabel, Lee Greene, Willard Greene, Evan Greene, Heber Greene and Sarah Greene.
