Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Matthews, Percy George

Matthews, Percy George, Bishop of the Evanston Ward, Woodruff Stake, in Uinta Co., Wyoming, was born May 14, 1877, at Newton Abbot, Devonshire, England, the son of William Henry Matthews and Emiline Edmunds. His parents were converted to "Mormonism" in England and young Percy at the age of seven years emigrated with his parents to Utah in the year 1885, crossing the Atlantic on the steamship "Nevada." The family located in Taylorsville, Salt Lake Co., Utah, where Percy was baptized and confirmed in March, 1886, by Elder Samuel H. Bringhurst. From his early youth he was always interested and active in Church matters, and soon after being ordained a Deacon he presided over the Deacons quorum in Taylorsville. Up to the time of taking up his residence in Evanston, Wyoming, in 1897, his principal work was farming and brick-making; he was also employed at times at the smelters in Murray, Utah. On Sept. 28, 1899, he married Lillian L. Burdett, a native of Evanston, Wyo., James Brown, Bishop of Evanston Ward, officiating. Mrs. Matthews is the daughter of James Burdett and Sarah Jane Lethbridge, and was born in Evanston, June 23, 1878, her parents having formerly become converts to "Mormonism" in England. Bishop and Mrs. Matthews are the parents of eleven children, namely, James William, Gladys Alma, Sarah Emiline, Frances Lillian, Percy Lorenzo, Della Lucille, Burdett Edmund and Bernard George (twins), Lamar Clarence, Grace Delores and Melvin J. In the spring of 1902 Bro. Matthews was called on a mission to Great Britain, where he labored in the Bristol-Cheltenham Conference. To fill this mission he took his departure May 14, 1902, and returned home July 28, 1904. As a missionary he was quite successful and gained the reputation of being a convincing and logical speaker, and was the means of baptizing a number of souls into the Church. In the latter part of 1904 he was set apart as president of the 2nd quorum of Elders in the Woodruff Stake. In 1905 he was chosen as a counselor to Bishop James Brown in the Evanston Ward Bishopric, laboring in that capacity eleven years, at the end of which time he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Orson F. Whitney and set apart to preside over the Evanston Ward, choosing as his counselors Cyril C. Tingey and William J. Starkey. After serving as Bishop for ten years, he was called to act as a High Councilor in the Woodruff Stake and also as chairman of the stake genealogical committee; both of these positions he still holds, filling them with credit and success.

Since locating in Evanston he has not only been active in Church duties, such as Sunday school, Mutual, Priesthood and home missionary work, but in secular affairs he has been in the employ of the Union Pacific Railroad Company and the Dawson and Burdette Mercantile Company. For more than twenty years he has been engaged in real estate and fire insurance business. He was connected with the Evanston post office, ten years as assistant postmaster, and during the past ten years he has filled the position of postmaster. As a member of the Lions Club and a member of the School Board of Education, he has wielded a weighty influence for nine years; he holds the position of director.

Mr. Matthews is regarded as an enterprising, progressive and substantial citizen, and has filled various positions with marked ability and success.
