Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Nelson, August M.

Nelson, August M., second Bishop of the Sandy First Ward, East Jordan Stake, Salt Lake Co., Utah, was born Dec. 12, 1876, at Sandy, the son of Matts S. Nilsson and Ellen Larsson. He was baptized when about eight years old, at West Jordan, where he also was ordained a Deacon and presided over a Deacons quorum. His father died in 1880, and he moved with his mother to Taylorsville, later to Star Valley, Wyo, and he finally became a permanent settler in Sandy in 1896. He received a common school education in West Jordan and Taylorsville. After locating in Sandy, he was ordained a Teacher and acted as president of a Teachers quorum. After being ordained an Elder, he acted as a counselor in the presidency of the 3rd Quorum of Elders in the Jordan Stake. He also presided over the Sandy Ward Y. M. M. I. A. In 1906-1908 he filled a mission to Sweden, laboring in the Goteborg Conference, a part of the time as president of the Goteborg Branch. After returning home, he acted as a counselor in the stake presidency of the Y. M. M. I. A. in the Jordan Stake. After being ordained a Seventy by J. Golden Kimball, he acted as a president of the 93rd Quorum of Seventy and in 1914 he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Joseph F. Smith, jun., and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Alva J. Butler in the Sandy Ward. When Sandy was divided into three wards in November, 1920, he was continued as counselor in the bishopric of the Sandy 1st Ward. In 1921, when Bishop Butler moved to Salt Lake City, Bro. Nelson was chosen as his successor, and was ordained a Bishop Aug. 14, 1921, by Apostle George F. Richards and set apart to preside over the Sandy 1st Ward, which position he still holds. In 1906 (April 25), he married Mabel Electa Jensen in the Salt Lake Temple. This union has been blessed with seven children, namely, Lucille Roxie, Marvin Leo, Virden James, Raymond August, Arval Joseph, Loa Ellen and Norma Anna. Bishop Nelson is a contractor and builder, but has been connected with a number of other business enterprises.
