Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Pierce, Isaac Washington

Pierce, Isaac Washington, a Patriarch in the Juarez Stake of Zion, and a prominent business man of Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, was born Aug. 22, 1839, in Jacksonville, Morgan Co., Ill., the son of Isaac Washington Pierce and Phebe Baldwin. Isaac W. Pierce was the son of Isaac Pierce, who was the son of Daniel Pierce, who was the son of Clothier Pierce, who was the son of Clothier Pierce, who was the son of John Pierce, who was the son of Michael Pierce. Michael Pierce was one of three brothers (Captains Michael and William, and their brother John) who came to America between the years 1620 and 1645. They made a number of trips across the Atlantic Ocean in various ships, bringing immigrants from the Old World to the New. In 1629 Capt. William Pierce commanded the renowned "Mayflower" with a company of immigrants from Holland. Capt. Michael lost his life in defending the colonies of America from attacks of Indians.

The parents of Isaac Washington Pierce, the subject of our sketch, were reared and married near Ogdensburg, N.Y. They joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the year 1833, and emigrated from Kirtland, Ohio, to Far West, Missouri, in 1887, from which place they were driven out by a mob of men opposed to them because of their religious faith. They went to Jacksonville, Ill., where their son Isaac was born. Isaac's only sister, Lucy Ruth, died in 1838, during the mob violence of those times. His father was the first of his family to join the Church, and died as a martyr for his religion, Dec. 28, 1841, because of the Missouri persecutions and privations heaped upon him. He left a widow and four sons, namely, Amasa, George Henry, Nathan, and Isaac. While crossing the plains, en route from the Missouri River to Utah, with his mother and brothers, Isaac was baptized into the Church, in the Platte River, by Elder Solomon Warren in August, 1852. He arrived with his mother's family in the Salt Lake Valley Oct. 6, 1852. He was present at the dedication of the ground for the Salt Lake Temple in 1853, and during its construction gave of his time and means, aiding in erecting that beautiful building. In the spring of 1854 the family moved to Ogden, Utah, where young Isaac made a sled and hauled wood from the canyon; he also made ax-handles and sold these for food for the family. He was ordained a Deacon in 1855 by Bishop Brownell. He went to Payson, Utah, where his brother, George, lived, and helped guard the town from Indian raids at the time of the so-called "Walker War." He attended school in the Third and Eighth Wards in Salt Lake City. On April 4, 1857, he was ordained an Elder and received his endowments in the Salt Lake Endowment House. He was ordained a Seventy June 14, 1857, by Elder Hyrum Mace, at Fillmore, Utah, and became a member of the 42nd Quorum of Seventy. He was a Pioneer settler of Deseret, Millard Co., Utah, in the spring of 1858, and helped to put in the first water dam at Deseret the same year. His mother was the first white woman settler at Deseret. He was a ward teacher in Deseret, and in the spring of 1862 he crossed the plains as a teamster, going from Utah to the Missouri River to meet the L. D. S. emigrants. He drove four yoke of oxen from Deseret and returned with every one of them in good condition. John R. Murdock was the captain of his company. On this trip he met the two Carlson sisters, who later were to play an important part in his life. On the trip he traveled 2,500 miles by ox team. On May 4, 1863, he married Miss Hannah Carlson, and on Oct. 10, 1863, she was sealed to him in the Salt Lake Endowment House. She was born Jan. 29, 1839, and died in childbirth Jan. 22, 1864, and was buried with her child at Fillmore, Utah. On March 27, 1864, Bro. Pierce married his wife's widowed sister, Elna Carlson. He adopted and had sealed to him her two-year-old son, John Murdock. Elna was born March 26, 1842. On Jan. 6, 1865, Bro. Pierce's mother died at Deseret and was buried beside his wife, Hannah, at Fillmore, Utah. By his second marriage there are nine children, namely, John Murdock (adopted), Phebe Elna, Isaac Washington, Miel Carlson, Hannah Anna, Ann Eliza, Cora Agusta, Mary Lucy and Eva Ruth. All of the above are now living except Cora Agusta and Eva Ruth. In the spring of 1869, he became one of the first settlers of Levan, Juab Co., Utah, where he acted as presiding ward teacher, home missionary, Sunday school teacher, and a member of the School of Prophets from 1869 to 1871. In the spring of 1871 he moved to Glenwood, Sevier Co., Utah, where he taught day school and Sunday school for two or three years. He was also ward clerk and tithing clerk, and Sunday school superintendent for 15 years. After being ordained a High Priest May 24, 1874, by Apostle John Taylor, he acted as a member of the High Council at the organization of the Sevier Stake of Zion. On July 15, 1874, he was set apart as first counselor to Bishop A. T. Oldroyd, Glenwood Ward, serving until the year 1886. During his residence in Glenwood, Sevier Co., Utah, he served as a school teacher, postmaster, prosecuting attorney, justice of the peace, etc. He was very active in Church work also, and spent much time and money in gathering genealogy and in Temple work for the dead. During the years 1880-1884 he arranged for the baptism by proxy, in the Temples, for 22,000 dead, and for 500 endowments for the dead. On April 17, 1881, he married Miss Caroline Done, as his plural wife, in the Salt Lake Endowment House, Pres. Daniel H. Wells performing the marriage ceremony. She was born July 21, 1865. Thirteen children were born of this union, as follows: Arwell Lee, Eudora Elna and Lenora Caroline (twins), Ruby Evadna, Ada Diantha, James Lamar and Isaac Larue (twins), Vera Juanita, Clyde Done, Ireta and Zereta (twins), George Teasdale and Nathan Taylor (twins). There were four pairs of twins. At the present time seven of these thirteen children are living. All the twins died in infancy, except Zereta and Nathan Taylor. In the spring of 1886 Elder Pierce went on a mission for the Church, returning home July 4, 1888. His missionary work was done entirely without "purse or scrip." Whenever he needed food, shelter, or clothing, it was his testimony that his needs were always granted him through fervent prayer. He was very sociable, genial, full of faith, a good conversationalist, a good speaker, and made many friends in the mission field. He labored in the States of Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York, West Virginia, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and also in Canada. He presided a part of the time over the Pennsylvania Conference. He traveled 14,588 miles as follows: By rail, 10,792 miles; by steamboat, 269 miles, and on foot, 3,527 miles. He held 308 meetings, baptized 32 persons, ordained a number to the Priesthood and blessed 66 children. He assisted in organizing branches of the Church in Coal Valley, Allegheny Co., Elkhorn and Little Redstone, Fayette Co., Penn. He also organized branches of the Church at East Liverpool, Ohio, and Mount Pleasant, Penn. His senior family had moved to Rabbit Valley, and were living at Loa, Piute Co., while his junior family were living at Glenwood, Sevier Co., Utah, where he found them well upon his return from his mission. During his residence in the Loa Ward he served as 1st counselor to Bishop Willis E. Robison. On May 16, 1890, he was arrested by U. S. Deputy marshals for violating the law by living with his two wives in plural marriage. Having been arrested twice by two different marshals, whose charges of law violation were in conflict, he decided to take his plural family and find a new haven of rest and a home in Old Mexico. On his way to Mexico he stopped along the way to work, that he might provide the necessities of life for his family. His longest stay was at Mancos, Colorado, where he rented a saw mill, lumber yard and store. He was advised to continue his journey to Mexico, which he did, arriving at Colonia Diaz, Chihuahua, Mexico, Dec. 1, 1890, where a year later his senior family joined him and both families made their homes for a number of years. In the Mexican Mission, later known as the Juarez Stake of Zion, he served on the High Council, on the stake school board, and as a member of the stake Sunday school superintendency. Being very active in the ward he was chosen as a counselor to Bishop W. Derby Johnson, but as his work as a member of the High Council conflicted, he was released from the Bishopric. He was a very active member of the ward dramatic club, taking the leading parts in many plays. Pioneer life in the Mexican Latter-day Saint colonies was difficult, and Elder Pierce with his families suffered many hardships and privations. He did some farming, made and laid up large Mexican adobes, cobbled and repaired shoes, was dance floor manager and caller, worked on the old John W. Young railroad between Deming and Colonia Diaz as cook for the surveyor's camp, etc. In 1897 he, with others, took a railroad grading contract of 12 1/2 miles between Corralitos and Colonia Dublan. Finishing that work he moved to Ciudad Juarez with a part of his family and entered the retail lumber business in the early part of 1898. This new business was established, not only to furnish an income for Elder Pierce, but to provide a market for the lumber which the L. D. S. colonists were manufacturing in the Sierra Madre Mountains of Chihuahua, Mexico. The first Church gatherings to be held in the cities of Juarez, Mexico, and El Paso, Texas, were held at the home of Elder Pierce. Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, and El Paso, Texas, were, and still are the gateway cities into and out of Mexico. Most of the leading brethren and sisters of the Church usually stopped over at the Pierce home, where they were always welcome, and were given the needed help in crossing the international border. Elder Pierce loved the leaders of the Church, and was always loyal and keen to heed their advice. It was his privilege to know personally all the presidents of the Church during his time. As a child he often sat on the knee of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and has entertained in his home all the succeeding presidents of the Church, as well as many of the Apostles and other prominent Church leaders. He was a strict tithe-payer, a faithful observer of the Word of Wisdom, a loyal and able Church worker, very much loved and honored by those who knew him best. On March 11, 1906, his faithful and loyal service to the Church and to his fellows was rewarded by his being called and ordained a Patriarch under the hands of Apostle George Teasdale. He had great joy and satisfaction in this new calling, and gave blessings to many of his immediate family. After an eventful and successful life, filled with pioneer and frontier experiences, service to the Church and his country, he passed away in Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, from an attack of pneumonia, in the presence of members of his family, Aug. 21, 1906, just one day before his 67th birthday anniversary. He was a loyal, devoted and loving husband and father, a good provider, and a splendid business man. He was dearly beloved by his large family, because of his just dealings with them, and his unselfish devotion to their welfare. His remains were taken to Colonia Dublan, Chihuahua, Mexico, where a large Church funeral was held, and he was laid away to rest in the Dublan Ward cemetery. His wife, Caroline Done, died at El Paso, Texas, Dec. 7, 1916, and was buried in the Concordia Cemetery, El Paso. His wife, Elna Carlson, died Sept. 9, 1919, at Shelley, Idaho, where she is buried. Of his fourteen living children (seven from each wife), six live in El Paso, Texas, two in Arizona, two in New Mexico, two in Idaho, one in Utah, and one in Montana. His wives and children claim that he was very just and successful in living the law of plural marriage. Notwithstanding the difference in the ages of his wives, they claim they had never quarreled with each other. They were loyal and devoted to him and to their children, and as a result the children of both wives are very near and dear to each other, and proud of their relationship and paternal parent.
