Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Pierce, Arwell Lee

Pierce, Arwell Lee, first Bishop of the El Paso Ward, Saint Joseph Stake, a prominent business man and agriculturist of El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, was born June 8, 1882, at Glenwood, Sevier Co., Utah, the son of Isaac Washington Pierce and Caroline Done. His infancy and early childhood were spent in Utah. At the age of eight years he left Utah with his parents en route to old Mexico, where they went as colonists in search of a new home. During this trip, which was made by team and wagon, he was baptized by his father in a Southern Utah stream on July 21, 1890, which was his mother's birthday anniversary. His father confirmed him a member of the Church the same day. Accompanying the family on this trip were his first cousin, Brigham H. Pierce and his family. One day while crossing the desert near Gallup, New Mexico, Arwell was riding on the side of his cousin's heavily loaded wagon, drawn by four fine animals, when, as he attempted to jump free from the wagon, his foot caught in the brake and he was thrown underneath the rear wheel which ran over his body almost crushing him to death. No doctors or medicine were available, and although his life was despaired of for more than a week, he was healed by the power of the Priesthood through the administrations of his father and cousin. After about five months on the road between Utah and old Mexico, a part of the time stopping by the. way and working for funds, the family arrived at Colonia Diaz, Chihuahua, Mexico, on Dec. 1, 1890. Here Arwell attended day school, and was an active member of the various Church auxiliary organizations. On June 8, 1894, he was ordained a Deacon by his father and served as first counselor in the Deacons quorum presidency. The family made their home in Colonia Diaz for ten years, during which time they suffered many hardships: poor housing conditions, poor food, and but little clothing. Arwell worked on the farm with his father. In 1896, during the construction of the Rio Grande Sierra Madre & Pacific Railroad, he drove a team and scraper, aiding in building the railroad grade near Dublan, when he was but 14 years of age. In the early part of the year 1898, his father established a retail lumber yard in Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, and Arwell went there to work with him. It was at this time he attended a Mexican day school and studied Spanish, which he learned to speak almost without any foreign accent. He also learned to read and write Spanish very well. Returning again to his mother's home in Colonia Diaz, he did odd jobs; farming, hauling wood, cutting hay, breaking horses to work, and riding the range, to help earn something to support the family. In the month of May, 1900, he moved his mother and the family to Colonia Dublan, where a home was built and maintained. During the years 1901-3, he attended the Juarez Stake Academy under the presidency of Professor Guy C. Wilson, who encouraged him to take up school teaching as a profession. Arwell was forced to give up school, however, to assist his father in the lumber business in making a living for the family. He worked as yardman and bookkeeper and managed the business during his father's illness of a year or more. In 1903 he worked as timekeeper and bookkeeper at a grading camp during the construction of the Nacosari Railroad in Sonora, Mexico. In 1902, he was ordained an Elder by his father. He was called on a mission to Mexico in 1904. He went to Salt Lake City, where he did his temple work and was there set apart for his mission by Pres. Francis M. Lyman, who was a boyhood friend of his father's. Elder Pierce arrived in Mexico City Christmas Day, 1904. He labored under the presidencies of Talma E. Pomeroy and Hyrum S. Harris. He had charge of the Sunday schools of the mission, the choir, and was conference president and second counselor to Pres. Harris. His mission was filled with many striking manifestations of the power of God in his ministrations among the people. He was protected and delivered from the attacks of mobs and wicked, designing men in a miraculous manner many times. He baptized eight persons, blessed several children and ordained a number to the Priesthood. While in the mission field, he underwent a very serious operation, from which he entirely and speedily recovered. He learned to converse fluently and preach convincingly in the Spanish language and was respected and beloved by the missionaries and by the native people among whom he labored. He was honorably released to return home because of the death of his father which occurred on Aug 21, 1906. After his return home, he settled his father's estate in the Mexican courts, and after managing the business for the estate one year, he interested some El Paso business men, organized the Juarez Lumber Company and took over the lumber yard from the estate. He bought an interest in the business and became its active head as manager. He organized the first L. D. S. Sunday school in Ciudad Juarez, which was a part of the Dublan Ward, the sessions being held at the home of his mother with whom he lived. On Oct. 2, 1907, he married Miss Mary Brentnell Done in the Salt Lake Temple, Pres. John R. Winder officiating. In the organization of the Ciudad Juarez Branch of the Dublan Ward, he was assistant to Presiding Elder James Mortensen, and the meetings were held at Elder Pierce's home. On March 15, 1910, he was ordained a Seventy by Apostle George F. Richards. In September, 1911, he and his wife, accompanied by his sister, Vera, and her sister, Ethel, made a month's tour of Mexico, visiting many of the cities and towns where he had served as a traveling missionary in 1905-6. During this trip they visited many places of historical interest, including the National Museum and the ruined city of San Juan Teotihuacan. In July, 1912, when he took his family to Dublan for a visit and vacation, he arrived just as the Mexican ,revolutionists were looting the stores, taking the colonists' guns, horses, and supplies. He was appointed by the Juarez Stake Presidency as one of a committee of three to accompany the first train of refugees to El Paso, Texas. While the colonists were refugees in El Paso, he, as one of the committeemen, helped look after their needs. He, with his family, had many exciting and dangerous experiences during the Mexican Revolution, including getting caught in the cross-fire of the rebels and federals in the early part of the three days' battle of Juarez, when the Madero rebel forces took the town from the Diaz Federal forces, bringing about the complete overthrow of the old Federal Government in Mexico. He with his wife and sister, Ada, escaped in a one-seated buggy to El Paso through the Federal lines. In 1912 he moved with his family to El Paso, Texas, where he has since made his home. Under instructions from the presiding brethren, he organized the first Latter-day Saint Sunday school in El Paso, Texas, and was its first superintendent. In the organization of the first independent branch of the Church in El Paso, he was first counselor to Presiding Elder Philip H. Hurst from 1912 to 1916. In 1915 he and his wife attended the World's Fair in San Francisco and the Fair in San Diego. The trip was made by way of Salt Lake City, where they attended the convention of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company of which he was the state agent for Texas. This trip was awarded to him as a prize for writing the most insurance during a contest. In the reorganization of the Juarez Stake presidency in 1916, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Pres. Jos. C. Bentley by Apostle Anthony W. Ivins. In 1918, when Philip H. Hurst moved to Utah, Elder Pierce succeeded him as president of the El Paso Branch of the Church. He served in the stake presidency and as branch president until Oct. 11, 1918, when he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the newly organized El Paso Ward by Pres. Anthon H. Lund in the office of the First Presidency in Salt Lake City, Utah. During the World War he assisted the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company to bring in over 4000 Mexican laborers to work in the beet fields and sugar factories. He made several trips to Utah and Idaho to take train loads of these laborers and afterwards visiting them to keep them satisfied and contented in their work. In the year 1919 the El Paso Ward was transferred from the Juarez Stake to the St. Joseph Stake and Elder Pierce continued as Bishop of the ward. In the year 1920, while attending general conference in Salt Lake City, he secured permission from the First Presidency of the Church to buy ground on which to erect a ward chapel and recreation hall, and to gather funds for the erection of such a building in El Paso, Texas. In the year 1920 he entered the automobile business in Ciudad Juarez and Chihuahua City, and in 1928 in Arizona and El Paso, Texas, still retaining his financial interests in the lumber business, but devoting most of his time to the automobile business. In the year 1928-9 he disposed of all his automobile holdings in Mexico, Arizona, and El Paso, Texas, and again devoted his time to the lumber business and farms. During the summer of 1925, Bishop Pierce and his family in company with others took a three months' vacation trip up through Utah, Idaho, the Yellowstone National Park, and on up to Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, coming down the Pacific Coast to San Diego, California, and on home. This trip was very educational and enjoyable. In October, 1927, he with his entire family attended the dedication of the Arizona Temple at Mesa. Between the years 1920 and 4930 he visited and inspected many chapels and recreation halls in Utah, Arizona and California in search of ideas for the El Paso Ward building. In April, 1930, he with his wife attended the Centennial Celebration and Conference of the Church in Salt Lake City and got the authorization of the First Presidency of the Church to commence actual construction of the new ward chapel and recreation hall. As Bishop of the ward and chairman of the building committee, he purchased all the building materials, furniture and fixtures, and had general supervision of the construction and financing of the building from the time it was begun in October, 1930, to the time of its dedication by Pres. Heber J. Grant on May 24, 1931. The dedicatory services were attended by many prominent governmental officials, including the mayor of El Paso and the president of the El Paso Chamber of Commerce, the former making a very splendid address. The building, complete with furnishings and ground beautifications cost a little more than $70,000, and was completely paid for at the time of dedication. At the time of the dedication of the grounds on Oct. 27, 1930, the ward had but $8000 on hand. Those who worked on the building, non-members as well as members, donated approximately one-third of their daily salaries to the ward. The non-member friends of the Latter-day Saints contributed liberally in materials and cash and the city officials were all interested and did much to encourage and help in this work. The financing and building of this ward chapel is an outstanding event in the life of Bishop Pierce, taking as it did ten years for the formulation of plans and gathering funds for its erection and being built at a time of an economic depression. In his remarks at the dedication of the chapel, among other things, Pres. Grant said: "I think it is a little less than remarkable that you have in this city what, in my judgment, is the finest, most costly, and splendid ward meeting house of any ward of the same size in the whole Church. You have done yourselves proud." Following closely in the footsteps of his father in his business and Church life, on the international border, Bishop Pierce has made his home, both while living in Juarez and in El Paso, a haven of rest and headquarters for the leading brethren and sisters of the Church. He has made numerous automobile and train trips with the General authorities of the Church and other leading brethren to attend conferences in Mexico, assisting in getting them across the national boundary. In 1926 he made an automobile trip with Pres. Heber J. Grant and his party of eight to visit the Juarez Stake in Mexico and the St. Joseph Stake in Arizona. Eight children have been born to Bishop Pierce and wife as follows: Arwell Lee, Joseph Brentnell, Merlin Done, Ireta May, Arthur Clyde, Wendell Lothair, Arwella Caroline and Mary Elizabeth. The first two were born in Ciudad Juarez, where they died in infancy and were buried. The other six were all born in El Paso, Texas, where they are now living with their parents. Bishop Pierce earns his living by managing the Juarez Lumber Yard, S. A., in Juarez, Mexico, and operating approximately 300 acres of farming land in the Juarez Valley in growing alfalfa, wheat, corn and grapes. He was the first to see a future in growing fine table grapes in the Juarez Valley and at present has about 30,000 grape-vine plants and ships his table grapes to Mexico City. He is still Bishop of the El Paso Ward, St. Joseph Stake, which has a membership of 485 souls. The ward is fully organized and splendid work is being done by the people in their new ward chapel and recreation hall, with fine class rooms, Relief Society hall, boy scout quarters, baptismal font, etc., in the basement. The chances for growth in the ward membership in the next few years are good.
