Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Pierce, Mary Brentnell Done

Pierce, Mary Brentnell Done, wife of Arwell Lee Pierce, and Ward Relief Society president, was born Feb. 18, 1885, at Payson, Utah Co., Utah, the daughter of Abraham Done and Elizabeth Annie Robinson. She was baptized, March 3, 1893, by David Fawn and confirmed by her father. She was present at the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, and was very greatly impressed with the grandeur of the occasion. At the age of three years she had scarlet fever which left her hearing impaired, and gave her much trouble with her ears, so in 1899, at the age of 14, she went to the Salt Lake Temple, where she was blessed for her hearing and was completely healed. With her parents she moved to Colonia Dublan, Chihuahua, Mexico, where they arrived in December, 1899. She attended the Juarez Stake Academy under the presidency of Professor Guy C. Wilson, graduating from the four years of high school in 1904. She taught in the grade schools at Dublan for the next three years, giving all of her money to her parents for the support of the family. On Oct. 2, 1907, she was married to Atwell Lee Pierce in the Salt Lake Temple. She has borne eight children, namely, Arwell Lee, jun., and Joseph Brentnell, both of whom died in infancy; Merlin Done and Ireta May, who both graduated from the Juarez Stake Academy, and have since been attending the B. Y. U. at Provo, Utah, and the College of Mines in El Paso, Texas; Arthur Clyde and Wendell Lothair who are attending High School in El Paso, Texas; Arwella Caroline and Mary Elizabeth, who are attending the grade schools in El Paso, Texas. She is a very devoted, loyal wife, and a splendid mother. Although her life is wrapped up in her home, with her husband and children, still she finds time to devote to her Church and its needy. She was second counselor to Ella Wilson Hurst in the first Relief Society presidency of the El Paso Branch, and when Sister Hurst moved to Utah in 1918 Sister Pierce succeeded her as the president of the El Paso Branch Relief Society. When El Paso Ward was organized Oct. 11, 1918, she continued to serve as president of the Ward Relief Society, which position she still holds. Sister Pierce has been a very close companion of her husband in all of his Church social and business activities, accompanying him on many trips to Salt Lake City to attend the general conferences of the Church, going with him to the World's Fair at San Francisco in 1915, to Mexico City in 1911, and on a three months' tour with the family in 1925. She has been a real support to her husband in his positions in the Church, gladly entertaining the general authorities of the Church and other leading brethren and sisters who visit them from time to time as they cross the border into Mexico and return. She is very much beloved by all who know her best, for her genial and lovable character, her willingness to serve in carrying cheer and comfort to those who are sick and in need. She has ever been unselfish with her husband's mother and children, all of whom have at various times made their home with them. For a number of years before the death of her husband's mother, she and the younger children made their home with Bishop and Sister Pierce. As the care and burden of her husband's widowed mother and children has been his responsibility, she has made them welcome in the home, and gladly shared her husband's income with them. As Bishop Pierce is the oldest of his mother's children, Sister Pierce has stood nobly by her husband in giving his brothers and sisters the advantages of good schooling and sent two of them on missions. Even to this day, when all her husband's brothers and sisters, except one, are married and have families of their own, they happily gather at the home of Bishop and Sister Pierce each Thanksgiving Day, and have for years, to enjoy themselves in a big family dinner together.
