Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Pomeroy, Talma Emerson

Pomeroy, Talma Emerson, a Patriarch, and an ordinance worker in the Arizona Temple, at Mesa, and prominent Elder in the Mesa Ward, Maricopa Stake, Maricopa Co., Ariz., was born May 6, 1863, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Francis Martin Pomeroy and Sarah Matilda Colburn. His father was one of the original pioneers with Brigham Young coming to Utah in 1847, and his mother, with her parents, arrived in the Valley Sept. 24, 1848. When but one year of age his parents moved to Paris, Bear Lake Co., Idaho, where they resided until Sept. 14, 1877, when the family migrated to Arizona, locating at Mesa. He drove his mother's team most of the entire distance, and otherwise did his full share in that memorable journey. Bro. Pomeroy was baptized in 1871 by Thomas Sleight in Paris. In the building of the Mesa Canal, though only 15 years of age, he received credit for a man's full wage, "because he earned it" by doing a man's part. Through all the hardships usually endured in settling a new country, building canals, roads, homes, clearing, fencing and farming the land, and in freighting, working in the harvest fields, etc., he also did a man's full part, aiding materially in supplying the necessaries of life for the family. Brother Pomeroy was the first secretary of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Maricopa Stake, being set apart Jan. 20, 1883, which position he held until April, 1884, when he was called and left for a mission to the Northwestern States, being set apart in Salt Lake City, April 7, 1884, and ordained to the office of a Seventy by William W. Taylor. He labored in the states of Iowa and Minnesota, under the presidency of William H. Palmer, being very successful in his mission. He had several extraordinary experiences, one of which occurred in the city of St. Paul, where he and his companion were arrested and incarcerated for one night. The next morning they were turned loose, and informed that there was no charge against them. Later the city commission informed them that it had been made a misdemeanor for "Mormon" missionaries to preach in their city. In the discussion that followed, Elder Pomeroy bore a strong testimony of the truth of the message they were bearing, thus preaching the gospel to the very men who were responsible for the anti-Mormon regulation. He returned home in October, 1885, after having been honorably released.

For several years following his return from this mission, he, in connection with his brother, William, operated a mail and stage line from Phoenix to Fort McDowell, via Tempe and Mesa. In 1886 (Oct 13), he married Sarah Melissa Johnson, the daughter of Benjamin F. Johnson and Sarah Melissa Holman, in the St. George Temple, Utah, to which place he was accompanied by his mother; they made the journey by team overland for that purpose.

In October, 1885, Brother Pomeroy was set apart as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Mesa Ward, which position he held for three years. He was set apart as one of the seven presidents of the 90th Quorum of Seventy when that quorum was organized March 28, 1886, by Seymour B. Young, which position he held until 1913, the last years acting as senior president. March 9, 1913, he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Hyrum M. Smith. In June, 1903, he was called on a mission to Mexico, in filling which he acted a part of the time as president of the Mexican Mission, after being set apart to that position by Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff, May 23, 1904. Returning to the City of Mexico in company with Pres. Anthony W. Ivins and family, and Apostle Abram Owen Woodruff and wife, from a conference meeting, the latter was taken ill, which developed into a serious case of small-pox. She was taken care of at the mission house by her husband and Elders Pomerey, Paul F. Henning and Alonzo I. Taylor. Sister Woodruff succumbed to the disease, and shortly afterwards, at El Paso, Texas, her husband died with the same malady.

In 1904 Elder Pomeroy was joined by his wife and family, who had been called to take charge of the mission house in the City of Mexico. Here Sister Pomeroy was a mother, indeed, to the missionaries, nursing them through illness and otherwise administering to their comforts. Great progress was made in missionary work during Pres. Pomeroy's administration. New fields were opened up and new branches organized. Being honorably released, he returned home Aug. 5, 1905. Elder Pomeroy was stake and ward chorister for ten years, and was also prominent in dramatic work in the Maricopa Stake. He also took a deep interest in military affairs, and for 14 years was identified with the national guard of the State of Arizona. He was captain of Company E (the first company to be organized in Mesa), later captain of Company D, and for two years and a half served as major of the Second Battalion, to which position he was elected by ballot, without solicitation, by all of the line officers. In 1916 he was elected chief recruiting officer of Arizona and major commanding the reserve battalion. He held the responsible position of agency director for several years with the New York Life Insurance Company, having charge of as many as seven states at a time in Mexico for them. This position he resigned to take the same with the Beneficial Life, which position he has held for eight years, and is still a loyal worker in their cause. He was the first ward representative and later a member of the stake board of the Genealogical Society of the Maricopa Stake, a home missionary, and in charge of the home mission work in the stake.

Brother Pomeroy is the father of seven children, five of whom are still living; they are active workers in the Church. Their names are Mabel Aeolia, Clarence Melnotte, Gladys Leona, Sarah Melissa and Joseph Franklin. His two sons have both filled honorable missions.

While the Arizona Temple was in course of construction, and visitors were being allowed to go through that building, Elder Pomeroy acted as one of the guides for those visitors, and after the Temple was completed, and before its dedication, he also acted as one of the guides to visitors who were allowed to go through during the year it was kept open for visitors. After its dedication Elder Pomeroy was called and set apart as a regular Temple ordinance worker, together with his wife. They have both acted in that capacity ever since, this being their fourth year. Brother Pomeroy visited Salt Lake City and California in 1931.
