Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Richards, Franklin Snyder

Richards, Franklin Snyder, president of the High Priests Quorum in the Ensign Stake of Zion and general attorney for the Church, was born June 20, 1849, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Franklin D. Richards and Jane Snyder. He was early placed in the best schools the city afforded, and as he advanced in years he received such special instructions as were within reach. Immediately after reaching his 17th year, he received a certificate from the Board of Examiners authorizing him to teach school, and soon thereafter he became the teacher of one of the largest and best schools in Salt Lake City, which he taught during the years 1866, 1867 and 1868. While his father presided over the European Mission, young Franklin attended to his father's secular affairs at home, and devoted his income to the maintenance of his father's family. At the same time he continued his own higher studies under private tutors. On Dec. 18, 1868, he married Emily S. Tanner in Salt Lake City. Their children are Franklin Dewey Richards, Joseph Tanner Richards, William S. Richards and two adopted daughters, Wealthy Lucile Jensen and Emily R. Beeson. In May, 1869, he moved with his father's family to Ogden, in Weber County, where he was soon afterwards appointed clerk of the probate and county courts and later was elected county recorder. At that time there was no lawyer resident in Ogden, and, as the public lands were just coming into market, young Franklin applied himself diligently to master legal forms and qualify himself to perform the duties of the offices which he held. He received valuable suggestions from Attorney Aurelius Miner, who spent part of his time in Ogden. He soon acquired fame for keeping the public records, and when they were examined by Pres. Brigham Young he remarked that they had no equal in the Territory. On the conclusion of his eighth year of service as county recorder and his ninth year of service as county clerk, he voluntarily retired from these offices. Pres. Brigham Young counseled him to become a lawyer, and when Providence brought him in close communion with the law, he felt, what others were quick to observe, that he had come to his destined calling, and after studying law diligently he was admitted to the bar of the Third District Court at Salt Lake City, June 16, 1874. While pursuing his law studies young Richards had developed habits of concentration and continuous study. He became a successful and eloquent reasoner, and thus fitted himself to be an able defender of constitutional rights and the inherent liberty of man. His first defense was that of a man charged with murder, and he fought for his client with a skill and vigor which astonished even his familiar friends; his client was acquitted. In 1877 he filled a mission to Great Britain, during which he also visited many countries in Continental Europe. In the spring of 1878 he rendered efficient service in the litigation commenced over Pres. Brigham Young's estate. Later he formed a partnership with Judge Rufus K. Williams, formerly chief justice of the Supreme Court of the State of Kentucky, the firm name being Richards and Williams. When a great suit, involving over a million dollars, was brought against the Church by some of the heirs of Pres. Young the firm of Richards & Williams was retained as counsel for the Church, and successfully defended the case. When an attempt was made in 1880 to deprive the women of Utah of their franchise, the firm of Richards & Williams again appeared, with other counsel, in the defense of women's rights, and the case was dismissed with the rights of the women preserved. In the spring of 1881 Brother Richards was admitted to the bar of the Supreme Court of California. He was a member of the constitutional convention of 1882 and was sent to Washington as one of the delegates to present the constitution to Congress, and seek admission into the Union.

In company with Honorable John T. Caine and Delegate David H. Peery he went to Washington and labored faithfully to advocate the claim of Utah to statehood. While in the capitol he became closely associated with the eminent jurist, Jere S. Black, and made a most favorable impression upon many of the prominent states-men of his country.

A convention of the Peoples Party was held in the autumn of 1882 to nominate a successor to George Q. Cannon as delegate in Congress. Franklin, who had come to the front as a political leader, was mentioned by many prominent and observant persons as the man fit for the position. He, however, declined the honor and suggested John T. Caine, a gentleman of long legislative experience, who was finally elected. After that Brother Richards became a familiar character at the nation's capitol. He was engaged again and again to plead for the rights of his beloved Utah and her people, and, during the anti-polygamy prosecutions, he most ably defended many of his brethren against unmerited punishment. Among other things he was successful in his effort to have the so-called segregation scheme thwarted, which, if it had been upheld, might have meant life imprisonment for unlawful cohabitation, when the extreme penalty prescribed for it by the Edmunds Law was six months imprisonment and $300.00 fine. In a presentation of some of these cases before the Supreme Court of the United States Brother Richards became associated with such distinguished lawyers as Wayne MacVeagh, Senator George G. Vest, James O. Broadhead, Jeremiah M. Wilson, George Ticknor Curtis and others. The exposition of the cause of the "Mormon" people, as involved in the cases against Lorenzo Snow, was fearlessly and patriotically made by Brother Richards and Mr. Curtis, who had eminent ability as an expounder of the Constitution. The arguments of the two advocates, the famous Washington jurist and the eloquent Utah lawyer-together, constitute a masterpiece of legal logic. Brother Richards, in order to defend the righteousness of the cause of the Saints, constantly appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States for fair and just constructions of the law which would enable the people to live without violating it. In all his legal actions the personal qualities of Brother Richards were strongly marked. He exhibited great moral courage and dignity, and yet, was affable and entertaining. He possessed a most retentive memory and a highly cultured mind.

Franklin S. Richards has a grand intellectual inheritance, having descended from a long line of staunch patriots and strong-willed professional men. Possessed of high aspirations and hereditary capacity for growth he has not stopped at knowing the law from books, but he has sought to learn the laws written upon the hearts of humanity as well as those underlying principles of justice which are the only sure foundation for the endurance of a free republic. He has had a brilliant career and the cause of the Latter-day Saints has always been his greatest concern. Because of his ability and integrity Brother Richards has been retained as the legal adviser and general attorney for the Church ever since his employment as such in 1880, and though flow advanced in years he is still bright and vigorous physically and mentally, and is still wide awake in protecting the rights of his friends and the affairs of the Church to which he has been so devoted and patriotic during his entire life.

In addition to the foregoing Brother Richards served several years as city attorney for Ogden City and as prosecuting attorney for Weber County. He held the office of city attorney for Salt Lake City from 1884 to 1890. He was a member of the Legislative Council of Utah in 1884, and was president of the council in 1890. He was chairman of the Peoples Party, and conducted the memorable campaign of 1890. He took part in the Reed Smoot investigation as attorney for Pres. Joseph F. Smith and other witnesses.

He was a member of the Constitutional Convention of 1895 that framed the Constitution for the State of Utah, and took an active part in its proceedings, especially in favor of Woman's Suffrage. Although no man worked harder or did more to secure statehood, he has always declined official positions, when repeatedly urged by influential citizens to accept some of the highest offices within the gift of the people.

Some of Brother Richards' most important and valuable service for the Church has been rendered in establishing the system of corporations sole, for holding titles to church properties throughout the world. The Bishops in the organized wards of the Church are corporations sole, and hold the title to their respective ward properties. The presidents of stakes are also incorporated to hold the titles to stake properties. The Presiding Bishop is a corporation sole to hold the titles to all mission properties where the laws of the state or country in which the land is situated will permit, and the President of the Church is incorporated to hold the titles to the general funds and property of the Church, including temples, educational institutions and other real estate. One of the principal reasons for creating these corporations sole was to give them perpetual succession so that titles would not be affected by the death, resignation or disqualification of any persons holding them.

At the time that Brother Richards recommended this system to the Church (and it was adopted by the presiding authorities) there were but few corporations sole in the United States, and it required considerable work on his part to get the legislature of Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Wyoming and Nevada, where the principal wards and stakes of the Church were situated, to pass laws providing for such corporations. After the laws were passed he personally directed the creation of the corporations and the transfers of property to them, which required much of his time during several years. There are now (in 1931), nearly a thousand ward and stake corporations in the Church. The vesting of titles to mission properties in the Presiding Bishop's Corporation was especially difficult and laborious because the lands are located in nearly all of the States of the Union, as well as in Europe and other foreign countries, and it involved the necessity of him becoming acquainted with the laws of the different states and countries throughout the world in which the Church properties are situated.

In 1929 Elder Richards lost his beloved companion, Sister Emily S. Richards, a talented woman of high intellectual attainments, who took a most prominent part in women's suffrage and other matters affecting the rights and interests of her sex. For many years she was a member of the General Board of the Relief Society of the Church and a director in many charitable and benevolent institutions. She was president of the Board of Lady Managers at the World's Fair in 1893, and held many important positions in connection with the Red Cross and other organizations during the World War. Her charming personality and cheery disposition made her a favorite and leading figure among her associates, and enabled her to impart encouragement and help to her husband and others, which gave her great joy and satisfaction.

In Church capacity, Brother Richards has served as a member of the High Councils of the Weber and Ensign Stakes of Zion, and for several years he has acted as president of the High Priests Quorum in the Ensign Stake.

(For further details see Life of Franklin S. Richards in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 132-140, and Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. 4, pp. 532-537.)
