Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Czechoslovak Mission

Gaeth, Arthur

Gaeth, Arthur, the first and only president of the Czechoslovak Mission prior to 1930, was born May 6, 1905, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the son of Otto S. Gaeth and Josephine Lindhardt. His parents joined the Church when he was six years of age and he was baptized by his father on August 27, 1913. The family moved to Utah in April, 1919.

Elder Gaeth was set apart on May 11, 1926, by Apostle David O. McKay as a missionary to the German-Austrian Mission, where he labored for 86 months, during the last year as general superintendent of auxiliary organizations.

On May 19, 1929, after Elder Gaeth had been released from the German-Austrian Mission and was preparing to spend six months in the Swiss-German Mission, delivering illustrated lectures on Utah and the Mormons, he was called by President John A. Widtsoe of the European Mission to go to Prague, Czechoslovakia, to investigate conditions and gain permission for the opening of a mission of the Church in that land. The investigation proved that the time was ripe for the inauguration of the work of the Lord in that land and on July 24, 1929, President Widtsoe, President and Sister Hyrum W. Valentine and four missionaries from the German-Austrian Mission met in Prague with Elder Gaeth and five other missionaries: Elders Alvin G. Carlson, Joseph I. Hart, Willis H. Hayward, Charles Josie, and Wallace F. Toronto, and the three Brodil Sisters, members of the Church living in that city. Together they journeyed to the famous Karlstein Castle, built near Prague in 1348. In a little grove in the shadow of the castle President Widtsoe dedicated the mission on July 24, 1929, and set Elder Arthur Gaeth apart as its first president. President Hyrum W. Valentine ordained him to the office of a High Priest.

During the ensuing year the missionaries spent their time learning the new language. They held their first meetings in English and attracted an average attendance of sixty better-class people. The Elders gained valuable publicity in the newspapers and President Gaeth was able to deliver two German lectures over the radio, as well as prepare two others which were delivered over the radio in Czech by a friend. His illustrated lectures on Utah and the Mormons were in demand everywhere before adult education circles and the English clubs in the country of which there were more than thirty.

On April 6, 1930, on the 100th anniversary of the organization of the Church, the Czech missionaries held their first conference which was conducted in the Czech language. On this occasion the Mission distributed a new Czech songbook which contained 70 songs which had been translated into the Czech language. Most of the leading newspapers of the country printed accounts of the centenary celebration of the organization of the Church and Elder Gaeth delivered a Czech lecture over the radio in Prague and a German lecture over the radio in Brno commemorating the event.

In the meantime new missionaries were sent to Czechoslovakia and the mission was organized on a permanent basis. Twenty-eight new tracts were translated and published, the Book of Mormon was translated and came off the press in February, 1933, and two booklets: "A Century of Mormonism," especially prepared for the mission by President Gaeth, and "What Is Mormonism," by President John A. Widtsoe, also made their appearance.

In January, 1931, President Gaeth returned to the United States, delivering lectures about "Czechoslovakia, the Cradle of Slavonic Liberty" at Eastern universities and in Utah. On March 23, 1931, he married Martha K. Picha in the Salt Lake Temple and in April he returned with her to Czechoslovakia to preside over the mission. Together they made many friends, became members of the American Institute of Czechoslovakia, and lectured in many sections of the country. In 1934 Sister Gaeth was one of the official delegates of the Czechoslovak National Council of Women at the international congress of Women's organizations in Paris, France. Pres. Gaeth represented the Brigham Young University at the International Agricultural Congress in Prague in 1931 and at the International Congress of Philosophy at the same place in 1934. President and Sister Gaeth were released in July, 1936, to be succeeded by President and Sister Wallace F. Toronto.

From September, 1935, to April, 1936, a series of articles "A Missionary's Odyssey," by Elder Arthur Gaeth, appeared in the church section of the Deseret News giving an account of his missionary experiences in Germany and Austria and of the development of the Czechoslovak Mission. Elder Gaeth also visited Hungary, Jugoslavia, Roumania, and Russia and investigated religious conditions in those countries. In 1934, under his direction, Sister Etus von Haragos completed the translation of the Book of Mormon in Hungarian.
