Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Romney, Orson Douglas

Romney, Orson Douglas, a prominent Elder and Church worker in the Ensign Stake of Zion, was born Aug. 15, 1860, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of George Romney and Vilate Ellen Douglas. Being born of goodly parents he was raised as a Latter-day Saint from his early youth and was baptized when eight years of age. As he became old enough to take part in Church activities he was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Priest, Elder, Seventy and High Priest. When only 13 years of age he went to St. George, southern Utah, to live with his grandparents, and only received such education as southern Utah could afford at that time. Returning to Salt Lake City two years later, he attended school in the old 20th Ward school house, and subsequently became a student at the Deseret University (now the University of Utah). Among his fellow students there were Gov. Heber M. Wells and Hon. B. H. Roberts. As a boy he served in the presidency of a Deacons quorum in the 20th Ward, and later as secretary of an Elders quorum. Still later he acted as one of the presidents of the 13th Quorum of Seventy. He also served in the presidency of the 20th Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school until called to the superintendency of the Ensign Stake Sunday schools. For twenty years he acted as a member of the Ensign Stake High Council. In 1888 to 1892 he filled a mission to New Zealand and twenty years later filled a second mission to New Zealand, on which mission he was accompanied by his family and presided over the mission. Returning home from these missions he circumnavigated the globe twice, the last time in company with his two sons, Orson D., jun., and Melbourne, who are now associated with him in the lumber business. In a secular capacity Elder Romney commenced his life's career as a butcher's delivery boy, and later as delivery boy for the Z. C. M. I. Still later he worked in the wholesale china and crockery department of that institution. He also served as salesman in the 20th Ward Coop store, acted as clerk at S. B. Teasdale's store on Main St., Salt Lake City, and for 25 years worked in the Taylor, Romney and Armstrong Lumber Company. While thus employed he held successively every position from teamster to manager. When his father was 72 years of age he started Orson D. in the lumber business, which since then has grown with rapidity and during the first ten or twelve years of its existence it grew to greater proportions than the old firm of Taylor, Romney & Armstrong. Elder Orson D. Romney is now the principal owner of the Romney Lumber Co. and has acted as president of the same since 1920.

In 1884 (Sept. 4th), Bro. Romney married Emma Frances Phillips, daughter of Wm. G. Phillips and Maria Ann Tuckfield; this union has been blessed with five children, three sons, namely, Orson D., jun., Melbourne, and William G. (deceased), and two daughters, namely, Vilate (wife of Antoine R. Ivins), and Gertrude (wife, now widow, of Shirley Clawson).
