Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Smith, Elias Asahel

Smith, Elias Asahel, senior member of the High Council of the Liberty Stake of Zion, was born March 21, 1857, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Elias Smith and Lucy Brown. He was baptized May 4, 1865, by Nathan Davis, and, taking an active part in Church affairs from his early youth, he was ordained a Deacon and later promoted to other positions in the lesser Priesthood. In 1882 he was ordained an Elder by Edwin W. Davis and in 1886 a High Priest by Pres. John Taylor and called to serve as a special member of the High Council of the Salt Lake Stake in order to assist in adjusting differences existing between Utah and Salt Lake counties in reference to the water of Utah Lake for irrigation purposes. The decision rendered by this council was accepted by all parties concerned. Subsequently a judgment was rendered by the district court sitting at Provo confirming the decision of the High Council. In 1888 Bro. Smith was chosen as a regular member of the High Council, and when the Salt Lake Stake of Zion was divided in 1904, he was selected as a regular High Councilor in the new Liberty Stake in which capacity he has served faithfully ever since. In 1882 (Dec. 19th) he married Laura Nebeker, daughter of John Nebeker and Lurena Fitzgerald. This union was blessed with two children, namely, Elias A., jun., and Inez. His wife died Sept. 15, 1886, and on June 1, 1892, he married Emily Catherine Weiler, daughter of Elijah M. Weiler and Emily Crismon.

Besides being an active Church worker, Elder Smith served as probate judge of Salt Lake County from 1884 to 1889, as selectman of Salt Lake County two years, as a member of the Territorial legislature two terms, acting as president of the legislative council. He has also served as a member of the Territorial Board of Equalization and as chairman of said board for two terms, and as regent of the University of Utah from 1886 to 1888. In 1897 he was appointed by Gov. Heber M. Wells as a member of the commission for the Pioneer Jubilee; he also served 11 years as a member of the Board of Corrections of the Utah Penitentiary, and is now acting as chairman of the Utah State Land Board, under appointment of Gov. George H. Dern. By the foregoing it will be seen that Elias A. Smith has led a most active life and rendered efficient service to both Church and State.
