Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Stoddard, George Eckersley

Stoddard, George Eckersley, second president of the Union Stake of Zion in Oregon, was born July 12, 1865, at Wellsville, Cache Co., Utah, the son of John Stoddard and Emma Eckersley. His early schooling was sacrificed in order to contribute to the temporal wants of a large family of brothers and sisters. He spent long hours as a boy working in the early primitive saw mills located in isolated tracts of timber in Utah and Wyoming. In this school he learned the difficult lessons of hard work and perseverance. He was baptized when about eight years old, and taking an active part with his parents in Church activities, he was ordained to the Priesthood in his early youth. He married Ellen S. Izatt, July 19, 1888, which union was blessed with ten children, namely, G. Earl, Elmer I, David I, A. Lester, John I, Jeanette, Howard J, Waldo I, and Robert L.

Bro. Stoddard moved to Oregon in 1889, locating in the La Grande Ward, where he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over the La Grande Ward in March, 1902. He held this position until December, 1907, and although young in years he soon won the love and confidence of his people.

In 1912, in company with his wife and daughter Jeanette, Bro. Stoddard made a trip to Europe where two of his sons (Earl and Elmer) were laboring as missionaries.

In September, 1914, Bro. Stoddard was chosen as president of the Union Stake, succeeding Franklin S. Bramwell in that position. Making a success of his presidency, both as a Bishop and a stake president, he became very popular with his people and the Union Stake of Zion prospered under his administration. Also in a secular capacity Pres. Stoddard became successful and ranked as one of the leading business men in eastern Oregon. Thus he acted as manager of the sugar factory at La Grande from 1899 until 1907. He also acted as manager of the Stoddard Bros. Lumber Co., which did an immense amount of business in that part of the country. Previous to this he had been associated with David Eccles and Charles W. Nibley and others in building a sugar factory at La Grande and together with Bro. Nibley he purchased the Grande Ronde Lumber Company at Perry, which was the beginning of his long lumber career. While acting as Bishop a beautiful stake tabernacle was built at La Grande under his direction. Pres. Stoddard died while still in his active manhood, Feb. 27, 1917, in California, following an operation. Charles W. Nibley, one of the speakers at his funeral, remarked: "I never had a friend to whom I was more closely attached. We shared each other's confidences and many an hour have we spent discussing not only business matters but religious and social matters, which were very near to our hearts. In all of my association with George I never found a single thought or idea, nor knew of a single action of his life that did not ring true. He was always candid and fair. His judgment I regarded as most sound. He was dependable and loyal to the core, always a hard worker, indeed I often chided him for working too hard and advised him to give more attention to his rest and leisure. I loved him with all my heart and soul, for he was one of the most lovable men I ever knew. It would hardly be fair for me to close without calling attention to the fact that he was very much blessed in securing a wife who helped him in so many ways. He appreciated this himself and we often spoke of it. The family of children that he has left behind testify to the kind of man he was."

In the demise of Pres. Stoddard the Church lost one of its most faithful and devoted presiding officers and the community at large one of its most able and successful business men and enterprising citizens, who possessed the love and unstinted confidence of all his associates in life.
