Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Summerhays, Joseph William

Summerhays, Joseph William, a prominent member of the Deseret Sunday School Union, was born Jan. 15, 1847, at Pimlico, Middlesex, England, the son of Caleb Summerhays and Margaret Moore. His parents joined the L. D. S. Church when he was one year and 11 months old and became members of the Westminster, Chelsea and Wandsworth branches of the London Conference successively. In 1866, he emigrated to Utah, crossing the Atlantic Ocean in the sailing vessel "Caroline" which sailed from London May 5, 1866, with 389 Saints under the leadership of Samuel H. Hill. The voyage lasted about five weeks, as the ship did not arrive at New York until June 11th. Thence the company continued the journey by railroad and steamboat to Wyoming, a village situated on the Missouri River, seven miles north of Nebraska City. The emigrants made this trip from New York principally in box cars. For crossing the plains Bro. Summerhays hired out as a teamster to Capt. Andrew H. Scott, who then acted as Bishop of the Provo 2nd Ward, and drove a team consisting of three yoke of steers and an iron axle wagon. Capt. Scott's train left the Missouri River August 1, 1866, and arrived in Salt Lake City, Oct. 8, 1866. Several severe snow storms were encountered on the latter part of the journey, in one of which a number of cattle perished; nearly thirty of the emigrants died on the journey across the plains. On his arrival in Provo, Bro. Summerhays delivered his team to the owner and spent his first winter in Utah (1866-1867) in Provo. Later he resided in Pleasant Grove, but finally made his permanent .home in Salt Lake City. In 1868-1869 he assisted in the construction of the Union Pacific Railroad through Weber Canyon and afterwards became an employee of William Jennings in Salt Lake City. Bro. Summerhays was ordained an Elder On June 27, 1870, and on the same day he married Mary M. Parker in the Endowment House. Subsequently he married three other wives, namely, Mary C. Bishop, on June 19, 1882, Sarah Berrett, on June 5, 1884, and Hilda Johnson, on Nov. 16, 1888. By these four wives he became the father of 39 children. For several years Bro. Summerhays was associated with the Z. C. M. I. and Hiram B. Clawson in the hide and wool business, and in 1883 went into business for himself. For many years he was dean of the hide and wool business in Utah. He was also associated with the late Bishop Edward Hunter, Robert Morris and Wm. H. Rowe in the tannery business. Later he was one of the promoters of the Granite Paper Mill Company, which for a number of years produced paper in large quantities at the paper mill situated at the mouth of Big Cottonwood Canyon. After the paper mill was burned, he was one of the organizers of the Big Cottonwood Power Company. For many years he was a director of the Deseret News Company and served on the executive committee. At the time of his demise he was president of the J. W. Summerhays and Sons Co., dealers in hides, wool, furs, etc., and also president of the Utah Wool Pulling Company located in Tooele County. Bro. Summerhays was ordained a Seventy March 11, 1876, by John E. Evans and served successively in the council of the 24th and 105th quorums of Seventy, until he was ordained a High Priest. For many years he labored as a home missionary in the Salt Lake Stake and later in the Granite Stake. He was president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in the 16th Ward, Salt Lake City, where he also acted as teacher and secretary in the Sunday school. When the new meeting house was built in the 16th Ward (on Fifth West St.) he served on the building committee. He acted as a special missionary and had charge of the High Priests of the Forest Dale Ward and also served on the Temple and Genealogical committees of the Granite Stake. But perhaps his greatest achievement as a Church worker was in connection with his activities as a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, and also as a member of the General Board of Religion Classes. Besides the many ecclesiastical offices he held, he served in various secular positions, such as school trustee, tax collector of school funds, chairman of the first town board of Forest Dale, etc. His death occurred June 27, 1929, at the L. D. S. Hospital in Salt Lake City. Besides his 39 children, his descendants up to the time of his demise numbered 46 grandchildren and four great grandchildren, all of whom, so far, have shown loyalty and devotion to the Church, in which their illustrious ancestor trained them in the fear of the Lord. The following is culled from an editorial published in the "Deseret News" at the time of his death: "In the death of Joseph W. Summerhays the "News" loses a long time and highly esteemed associate and friend. For many years prior to 1882 he was associated with this institution in a directorial capacity, besides being interested in the manufacture of printing paper, an industry that the "News" was then promoting and had been fostering through the years. In business affairs he was energetic and capable, independent withal and courageous in pursuing the policy which appeared to deserve the approval of his integrity, promptness and square dealing. Those who came into commercial contact with him were always able to speak of him in high terms. He came to America when a lad of sixteen. In Utah his activity and influence have been felt for good in many directions and the circles in which he has been a leading figure will surely miss him!"
