Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Sargent, Anna Christina Isakson

Sargent, Anna Christina Isakson, a Utah pioneer, was born Aug. 17, 1833, at Lurup, Christianstad Lan, Sweden, the daughter of Johan Peter Isakson and Andrietta Raasce. She received most of her education at home from her mother, who was a school teacher. She was also taught to spin flax and wool into linen thread and yarn and to weave and knit. Later she became a nurse and practiced this profession in her native land until she came to America.

She was the first of her family to accept the gospel and was baptized May 25, 1862, by Elder Christian Sandberg. On account of opposition on the part of her father, who was very bitter towards the Latter-day Saints, she was compelled to leave home, and on April 28, 1864, emigrated to Zion, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Monarch of the Sea," in company with 973 emigrating Saints in charge of Patriarch John Smith. Having arrived safely at Wyoming, Nebraska, she crossed the mountains and plains in Captain Isaac A. Canfield's company which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 4, 1864. During the journey of nearly a thousand miles she walked the entire distance, wading streams and rivers and enduring all the hardships incident to those times; and being unable to speak English she was very much handicapped. Upon her arrival in Salt Lake City she met Pres. Brigham Young who, placing his hands upon her head, promised her that she should be a mother in Israel, that her children would love, honor and obey her, that she should be prosperous and ride in her own carriage, and that her last days would be her best. All of these predictions were fulfilled. After spending a short time in Salt Lake City she went to Hoytsville, Summit Co., Utah, where she acted in the capacity of a nurse with great success. She also wove carpets, made men's suits and women's dresses from homemade cloth, often that of her own manufacture.

In 1868 (June 20), in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City, she was married to George Sargent by Apostle Wilford Woodruff. She bore her husband five children.

Sister Sargent had a kind and gentle disposition and a personality which led many to seek her advice and counsel. Especially mothers and expectant mothers sought her guidance, and she was never too busy to listen to them and give words of comfort. She was a great lover of flowers and the raising of flowers and vegetables was her hobby and to offer them to her friends was her joy. She died at Hoytsville, Summit County, Utah, Nov. 6, 1904, leaving one son, two daughters and several grandchildren to mourn her loss.
