Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Smith, Julina LambsonPPSmith, Julina Lambson

Smith, Julina LambsonPPSmith, Julina Lambson, member of the General Board of the Relief Society from October 6, 1892, to April 2, 1921, was born June 18, 1849, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the daughter of Alfred Boaz and Melissa Jane Biglet Lambson. Her parents were pioneers of 1847, and on the journey across the plains her father, who was an excellent mechanic, was invaluable to the company in which he traveled. Many nights while crossing the plains he was called out to mend broken wagons and make repairs which required all of his attention until early morning, so that the journey could be continued without delay. It was said of him by members of the company that without his assistance the company could not have succeeded in crossing the plains. The mother of Julina is the youngest sister of Bathsheba W. Smith, who for years presided over the Relief Society of the Church. The Lambson home in Salt Lake City, which was finished in 1848, was the first house plastered in Salt Lake City. As lime could not be had, a mixture of clay and sand mingled with hair clipped from the backs of cows and oxen, was used. When the house was torn down after seventy-five years of service, the plaster was still firm on the walls and ceilings. The nails used in the home were all made by Elder Lambson on his own anvil from wagon tires. The lumber he hauled from Red Butte Canyon east of Salt Lake City. He also forged all the mill irons used in the first mills built in Utah, excepting one built by Isaac Chase in which the irons were brought across the plains.

Smith, Julina LambsonPPJulina's oldest sister, Melissa Jane, later Mrs. Albert W. Davis, was born in a dugout at Winter Quarters shortly before her parents began crossing the plains. Soon after the birth of the third daughter, Edna, who was born March 3, 1851, Alfred B. Lambson left his little family and filled a mission to the West Indies. When Johnston's Army was approaching Salt Lake City, and the inhabitants of that city moved south, the Lambson family also took up their journey and most of them located temporarily at Nephi. Those were trying days and in her early girlhood, Julina experienced all the vicissitudes of pioneer life, in company with other early residents of Utah. Many were the days when wheat flour could not be obtained, and the Lambson children were forced to eat corn bread dry or home-made molasses or a little grease. From her childhood until the time of her marriage her home was made most of the time with her uncle, President George A. Smith, who was at the time Historian of the Church, and in whose home the records of the Church were kept. It was there that she met Joseph F. Smith, who was at the time employed in the Historian's Office as a clerk. In 1866, May 5th, she was married to Elder Smith, who later was chosen as one of the Apostles and destined to become the President of the Church. This union was blessed with eleven children, namely, Mercy Josephine, Mary Sophronia, Donette, Joseph Fielding, David Asael, George Carlos, Julina Clarissa, Elias Wesley, Emily Jane, Rachel and Edith Elenor. Her husband married other wives and provided for them separate homes as readily as his means would permit. The old Smith home, 333 West 1st North Street, Salt Lake City, was built piecemeal, a room being added at a time. Yet it was one of the very substantial two-story buildings in the city. This was the home of Julina Lambson Smith and her family until Pres. Smith moved her and her unmarried children to the Bee-Hive House about 1903. The wives, although provided with separate homes, always helped each other, and learned to love each other dearly. In times of sickness they assisted each other, and in times of health rejoiced together and worked side by side with their husband. For a number of years Sister Smith acted as a midwife, having graduated and having been commissioned in this practice. She was instrumental, not only in bringing the children of her husband's other wives into the world, but in bringing hundreds of other children, with remarkable success. Her younger sister, Edna, who was also a wife of Pres. Joseph F. Smith, also practiced successfully in this calling. How different were those days! Not only did these sisters attend women in confinement, but acted as nurses a good part of the time for the women on whom they waited, and all for the handsome sum of five, or at most ten dollars.

Smith, Julina LambsonPPWhen the first Retrenchment Society was organized in Salt Lake City, Sister Smith was chosen to act as president of that organization, June 25, 1870, in the 16th Ward, Salt Lake City. Nearly all of the meetings were held in her home. While she was a member of the General Board of Relief Society she started the burial clothes department January 4, 1912, by the request of the board and the First Presidency. She was one of the ordinance workers in the Endowment House, and when the Salt Lake Temple was built she was among those originally called to labor in that building and was duly set apart. This position she held rendering faithful service until 1925, when she met With a painful accident, breaking her hip, which compelled her to retire.

Smith, Julina LambsonPPDuring the anti-polygamy raids, her husband, then one of the Apostles, was asked to take charge of the records of the Church, for there was great fear that they might fall into the hands of the enemies of the people. While this commission was upon him, he was sent to the Hawaiian Islands, where he had performed his first mission in his early youth, and Sister Julina accompanied him with a baby only one year old, leaving five of her children at home. During their sojourn on the islands, which lasted two long years, Elias Wesley was born. He presided over the Hawaiian Mission, his native land, from 1919 to 1922, having previously filled a mission there. Sister Smith preceded her husband back to Salt Lake City where with her two little children she again took up her labors with her united family. She was a charter member of the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, and served as a captain of Ten for some time. Besides being the mother of eleven children, she has up to the year 1934, seventy-two grand-children and a large number of great-grandchildren.

Smith, Julina LambsonPPThe scenes of Sister Julina Smith's life have changed much during the past fifty years. Many homes now shelter those who once lived in the old Smith home. Even now, she says, she can hear the prattle of happy children as they engage in play in her large living room and in the spacious lot upon which the homes were built; the memory of trials, sickness and tribulations, as well as many joys, are also readily recalled. She recalls that when night came on, and the husband and father was home, he went from bed to bed saying good night and tucking in each child for a peaceful night's rest, and how the children gathered in for family prayers. Many and happy are the memories of the old home, still preserved and the headquarters for the West Side Seminary of the Church.
