Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Snow, Moroni

Snow, Moroni, Bishop of Provo Fifth Ward, Member of General Board of Y. M. M. I. A., etc., was born May 13, 1858, in Provo, Utah, the son of Apostle Erastus Snow and his wife Artimesia Beman. At the time of his birth his parents had been exiled from their home in Salt Lake City on account of the "move south" due to the approach of the Johnston Army. In 1861 the family moved to St. George, Utah, where Moroni was reared and educated. He was baptized July 5, 1866, by his father and in 1877 was ordained an Elder; he was ordained a High Priest Dec. 17, 1882, by John D. T. McAllister. At St. George Bro. Snow acted as president of Y. M. M. I. A. and later as a member of the Stake Board of that organization. In 1879 and 1880 he filled a mission to Great Britain, where he assisted in the publication of a new edition of the "Doctrine and Covenants". While on this mission, in company with Pres. Wm. Budge, he visited the Scandinavian Mission, which was opened by his father in 1850; during this visit Elder Andrew Jenson traveled with them and acted as interpreter. After his return from this mission Elder Snow acted as deputy assessor and collector, surveyor of Washington County, superintendent of schools, recorder, justice of the peace and alderman, besides attending to numerous Church duties. In 1886 he and his family moved to Milford, Utah, where he acted as postmaster and had charge of the Railroad Express. Returning to Provo in 1898 he served as Bishop of the 5th Ward from 1902 to 1906 and was for a time a member of the Utah Stake High Council. In 1908 he moved to Salt Lake City, where he became assistant superintendent of the "Improvement Era" and general secretary of the General Board of Y. M. M. I. A. which position he held for about nineteen years. He was one of the organizers of the Consolidated Wagon and Machine Company in Salt Lake City and worked in the office of that company for many years; he also acted as a member of the High Council of the Salt Lake Stake.

In 1882 (Sept. 13th) he married Emma Adelaide Gates in the St. George Temple. She was the daughter of Jacob Gates and Emma Fausberry, born in St. George Aug. 22, 1862. This union was blessed with nine children, namely, Moroni M., Mark A., Washington Irving, Vivian, Erma, Leah, Leslie, Clifford and Jacob G.

Elder Snow died January 18, 1935, in Salt Lake City, survived by his wife, five sons and two daughters.
