Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Taylor, John Harris

Taylor, John Harris, one of the first seven presidents of Seventies and a member of the general board of Y. M. M. I. A., was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, June 28, 1875, the son of Thomas E, Taylor and Emma Louise Harris. He was baptized when eight years of age in the old Endowment House in Salt Lake City, and being active in the Church from his boyhood days, John H. was ordained to the offices of Deacon Dec. 9, 1889; Teacher Sept. 29, 1893, and Priest July 6, 1894. On Jan. 5, 1896, he was ordained to the office of an Elder by Edward Wm. Davis. He was ordained a Seventy Jan. 24, 1896, by Apostle Heber J. Grant, and during the two following years filled a mission to England, during which time he labored as a traveling Elder and later as secretary of the Nottingham Conference. After his return from this mission he attended the Chicago College of Dental Surgery at Chicago, Ill., from which institution he graduated in 1901, after which he practiced his profession in Salt Lake City. In 1907-1909, he filled a mission to Holland and presided over the Belgian Conference of the Netherlands Mission for a year and a half.

While residing in the 14th Ward, Salt Lake City, Bro. Taylor acted as president of a Deacons' quorum and assistant superintendent, and later as superintendent of the Sunday school. In 1900 he located in Forest Dale, where he acted as assistant superintendent of the Sunday school and as president of the 105th Quorum of Seventy. On Sept. 20, 1911, he was sustained a member of the general board of Y. M. M. I. A. and called to take charge of athletic work for that organization throughout the Church. Later, he was sustained as scout commissioner and appointed special scout commissioner for the Church, representing the national organization of the Boy Scouts of America.

In 1923, Dr. Taylor was called to preside over the Northern States Mission, with headquarters at Chicago, Illinois, and upon being released from that position in 1928, he and his wife were called to take charge of the Missionary Home in Salt Lake City, where missionaries receive training from one to two weeks, preparatory to leaving on their missions.

In 1900 (Sept. 20th) Bro. Taylor married Susan Rachel Grant (daughter of Heber J. Grant and Lucy Stringham), born Aug. 30, 1878. This marriage, which took place in the Salt Lake Temple, has been blessed with two children, namely, Lucy and Heber Grant Taylor.

Dr. Taylor has a pleasing personality and is eminently fitted for the position he now holds; he wields a great influence for good over the young people with whom he comes in contact in the mission home, in which work he is ably assisted by his wife.

In the General Conference of the Church held in 1933, he was sustained as one of the seven presidents of Seventy. He was set apart to that position by President Heber J. Grant.
