Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Tingey, Joseph Stafford

Tingey, Joseph Stafford, Bishop of the Farmer's Ward, Salt Lake Co., Utah, was born July 16, 1857, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Bishop John Tingey and Phebe Stafford. He was baptized Oct. 3, 1867, by Thomas Higgs and took an active part in the Sunday school, Y. M. M. I. A. and other organizations in the 17th Ward. He was ordained an Elder Oct. 21, 1876, by Peter O. Hansen and filled a mission to Great Britain in 1880, laboring first as a traveling Elder in the Newcastle and Durham conferences and subsequently in the Birmingham Conference. While laboring as a missionary in Great Britain his health was greatly impaired, and for a number of years afterwards he suffered more or less from ill health. While laboring in the Birmingham Conference he assisted in the burial of Elder Wm. H. Butler of Weber County, Utah, who in the winter of 1881-1882 was stricken with disease. Elder Butler was the third missionary from Utah to be buried in the same grave, the other two being James H. Flanigan who died in 1857 and Caleb Parry who died in 1863. During his labors as a missionary Elder Tingey witnessed many remarkable manifestations of the power of God, in conversions, gift of tongues, interpretation of tongues, prophecy and healing of the sick. While in England he also visited many parts of that country in successful genealogical research, and also visited France.

After returning home from his mission he became an active member in the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Salt Lake Stake and in the 17th Ward Sunday school he acted as librarian, teacher of the theological department, and later when he changed his residence to Farmers Ward he acted as Sunday school superintendent. He was ordained a Seventy Oct. 28, 1885, by George G. Bywater and acted as a president of the 137th Quorum of Seventy from 1891 to 1909. After being ordained a High Priest Feb. 28, 1909, by Edwin Bennion, he acted as first counselor in the bishopric of the Farmers Ward until Feb. 25, 1914, when he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, after which he presided over the Farmers Ward until his death which occurred July 25, 1923.

Besides his numerous ecclesiastical positions, Bishop Tingey held a number of civil offices, among which may be mentioned his position as trustee of the 40th school district in Salt Lake County. He was a printer by trade and was for many years foreman of the Deseret News Job Printing Department. From his earliest youth he was a diligent and faithful Church worker and often exerted himself almost beyond his physical powers.

In 1884 (Sept. 30th), he married Martha J. Horne, daughter of Joseph and M. Isabella Horne, who for many years was general president of the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Associations in the Church. This marriage was blessed with seven children, namely, Joseph S., jun., William H, Clara H., and Clarence H. (twins), Weiler H. and Stafford H. (twins who died in infancy), and Rulon H. His son Clarence H. has presided over the Australian Mission since 1927.
