Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Tingey, Martha Jane Horne

Tingey, Martha Jane Horne, general president of the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association of the Church from 1905 to 1929, was born Oct. 15, 1857, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the daughter of Joseph Horne and Mary Isabella Hales. She received her education in private schools and in the Deseret University, now the University of Utah. Sister Martha was baptized by her father when eight years old and has since her earliest youth been a diligent Church worker, a teacher in the Sunday school and an officer in the Primary Association and Y. L. M. I. A. For several years she acted as counselor in the 14th Ward Y. L. M. I. A., and in 1880 was chosen as second counselor to Sister Elmina S. Taylor, general president of the Y. L. M. I. A. in the whole Church. In April, 1905, Sister Tingey succeeded Sister Taylor as general president of the Y. L. M. I. A., which position she held until April, 1929, when, at her own request, she was honorably released on account of ill health. Sister Tingey was a successful presiding officer, and during the many years she stood at the head of all the young ladies of the Church, she made a remarkable record for diligence and faithful discharge of duty. Her counselors were Ruth M. Fox and May Taylor Nystrom. Sister Nystrom was released due to her removal from the city, and Sister Lucy Grant Cannon succeeded her as second counselor. After the Y. L. M. I. A. of the Church became affiliated with the National Council of Women, Pres. Tingey made several trips to Washington, D.C., Seattle (Washington), Chicago (Illinois), New York, California and other states, representing the Y. L. M. I. A. at the National Council of Women on several occasions. On Sept. 30, 1884, she was married to Joseph S. Tingey and became the mother of seven children, five of whom are still living.

Sister Tingey is gifted in music and has natural elocutionary powers, and being possessed of a rare memory, while still quite young, she was in constant demand for public and private entertainments. Although giving much of her time and attention to her Church duties, Sister Tingey has always been a devoted wife and mother. (See also "Young Woman's Journal," Vol. 2, pp. 307-311.)
