Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Van Cott, Annie Anderson

Van Cott, Annie Anderson, genealogist and historian, was born Nov. 12, 1882, in Skouby, Aarhus Amt, Denmark, the daughter of Ole Anderson and Minnie Nielsen. She emigrated to Utah in 1884, together with her parents and a brother six months old, and settled in Pleasant Grove, Utah Co. In 1895-1897 her father filled a mission to Denmark, leaving a wife and eight small children. On his return Annie, at the age of 14 years, went to Salt Lake City to do house work, and there she has spent the greater part of her life. She was always anxious to obtain an education and so worked for her schooling through the eight grades, and about three years at the University of Utah. In 1905 she was married to Frank V. Van Cott, a son of John Van Cott, by whom she became the mother of six children. While Sister Van Cott has spent a great deal of her time endeavoring to raise her children in the fear of the Lord, she has also tried to do outside work. Always having a desire to study and progress, she has taken advantage of every opportunity to do so. The Lord has said, "The Glory of God is Intelligence" and "seek learning by study." This has been Sister Van Cott's guide. When she married she had not finished her high school, so after she had had her children, she began to take some university work, first by correspondence and later attended the classes. During the years of 1925 to 1927 she worked out eight hours a day to support her son Frank who was filling a mission in Denmark. She wanted to keep pace with her children in their school work and so continued her studies at the University. In June, 1930, she succeeded in getting her B. A. degree along with her daughter, Helen. She believes that this was the first time in the history of education in Utah that a mother and daughter received their degrees at the same time from a state university. The next year, while Helen was teaching, Sister Van Cott continued at the University and in June, 1931, obtained her master's degree in history. Sister Van Cott has also been a diligent Church worker. From 1903 to 1905 she was a Sunday school and Mutual teacher in the 11th Ward. In 1906 she moved to the 33rd Ward, where she has since resided. She immediately became a teacher in the Primary class, serving four years. Altogether she has spent ten years as a Sunday school teacher, nine years as a teacher and counselor in the Mutuals, four years as principal of religion classes, six years as theological teacher in the Relief Society, two years as secretary of the teacher training class, and three years as a ward missionary. From 1905 to the present time she has been much engaged in Temple and genealogical work and has had Temple work done for over 4,000 names of the Van Cott family. She is now engaged in writing a Van Cott history and genealogy. On Jan. 20, 1925, she was set apart as a member of the ward genealogical committee, having charge of the junior Temple excursions in the ward, and in September, 1928, she was made secretary of the committee, which position she still holds. In the summer of 1927 she went on a trip to Scandinavia with her mother who was going on a mission. Her father and son, Frank, were there on missions. She returned home with her son. "To be happy be busy," is her motto.
