Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Weed, Charles Leonard

Weed, Charles Leonard, 5th Bishop of the 26th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, (Pioneer Stake), was born Sept. 1, 1867, at Vestra Ryd parish, Upsalalan, Sweden, the son of Erick Wilhelm Weed and Johanna Susanna Flink. Having a desire to try his fortune in the new world, he emigrated to America in 1887 in advance of the rest of his father's family, and after stopping a short time in New York City and after the family had also arrived in America, they moved into the country and resided successively in Delaware and Otsego counties, New York While residing at Franklin, Delaware County, "Mormonism" found the family and here young Charles was baptized April 5, 1903, by Thomas Richardson, an Elder from Zion. Soon afterwards he was ordained a Priest, and at a conference held in Albany the same year he was ordained an Elder by John G. McQuarrie, president of the Eastern States Mission. For a short time he assisted the Elders in holding street meetings and otherwise, and then emigrated to Utah, arriving in Salt Lake City in October, 1903. His first home in Utah was in the 16th Ward, from which he filled a mission to the Eastern States in 1908-1910 and presided a part of the time over the New York Conference. After his return from that mission, he was ordained a Seventy by Levi Edgar Young and became a president in the 110th Quorum of Seventy. While residing in the 16th Ward, he acted as assistant superintendent of the Ward Sunday school, and after he had moved into the 26th Ward in 1912, he acted as assistant Sunday school superintendent in that ward and later was superintendent of the ward Sunday school for eight years. He was ordained a High Priest by Elder William McLachlan, president of the Pioneer Stake, April 2, 1916, after which he acted as first counselor to Pres. William Miller of the High Priest's Quorum, and afterwards as president of said quorum in the Pioneer Stake. On March 3, 1926, he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle George Albert Smith and set apart to preside over the 26th Ward (Pioneer Stake), succeeding Kershaw N. White, who had removed to another ward. Before emigrating to Utah, and while living in Orsego County, New York, he married Ella Matilda Erikson, daughter of Erik Erikson and Charlotte Akerlof, a native of Sweden, who bore him four children, namely, Charles Emil, Floyd Leonard, Harold Erikson and Alma Waldo. Before leaving Sweden Bro. Weed learned the trade of a machinist, which vocation he followed most of his life. He was die machinist for the Utah Products Company for five years and later engineer for the Zions Securities Corporation. He died in 1934, in Salt Lake City, Utah.
