Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 4 ( 1936)

Williams, Thomas Allen

Williams, Thomas Allen, fifth Bishop of the 12th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Jan. 22, 1861, in Draper, Salt Lake Co. Utah, the son of Thomas V. Williams and Pernecy F. Allen. He was baptized by Edward Snelgrove in March, 1869, and, taking an active part in Church work from his early youth, he was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Elder, Seventy and High Priest. He was ordained a Seventy by his father and a High Priest in 1904 by Angus M. Cannon. After serving as 2nd counselor to Bishop Hiram B. Clawson he acted as Bishop of the 12th Ward from 1904 to 1908. Since the amalgamation of the 12th-13th Ward he has acted as a member of the High Council of the Ensign Stake. In 1887-88 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in West Virginia, Maryland and Virginia. For many years he presided over all the Deacons in the 12th Ward, under the direction of Bishop Alexander C. Pyper. He was also a diligent and successful Sunday school officer and teacher for nearly forty years. In a secular capacity he served as a member of the Pure Food Bureau and as a member of the Board of the State Industrial School at Ogden, Utah. At present he is a member of the Board of Regents of the University of Utah. Bro. Willliams received a good education, and after going through all the grades of the common school, he attended the University of Utah. From 1881 to 1895 he acted as manager of the tinware and glassware department of the Z. C. M. I., and after that was employed as manager of the Utah Stove and Hardware Company until 1895. Still later he was sales agent for several hardware manufacturers. Bro. Williams has traveled considerably through the United States, Canada, Cuba, Hawaii and Alaska. At present he is an active and influential member of the High Council of the Ensign Stake of Zion and is otherwise prominently connected with a number of ecclesiastical and civil activities in the community.

In 1883 (Nov. 22nd) he married Susan, daughter of John R. Winder and Ellen Waiter. This union has been blessed with eight children, namely, Clare, Thomas Allen (died in infancy), Jean, Edna, Gilbert Winder, Frank Winder, Rex Winder and Allen Winder.
