and can shed light upon some of the rites, rituals,

holidays, and festivals that a religious community holds

dear. Therefore, we have included those, when applicable.

Furthermore, though historical information and sacred

texts may provide a basic structure for understanding

a particular tradition, the actual practices of a group

are what provide a deeper knowledge about how people

behave and interact with the world around them. For this

reason, we have noted key practices and important rituals.

Our overall hope was that in this book we would be able Our overall hope was that in this book we would be able Our overall hope was that in this book we would be able

to provide a concise but rich overview for each tradition. to provide a concise but rich overview for each tradition. to provide a concise but rich overview for each tradition. to provide a concise but rich overview for each tradition. to provide a concise but rich overview for each tradition.

As teachers, we have met students of many diverse As teachers, we have met students of many diverse As teachers, we have met students of many diverse As teachers, we have met students of many diverse As teachers, we have met students of many diverse

backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly backgrounds and faith traditions, but we are certainly

not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have not insiders to most of these belief systems. We have

taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are taken the approach of observers, recognizing that we are

outsiders. But we hope that our diligent observations outsiders. But we hope that our diligent observations outsiders. But we hope that our diligent observations outsiders. But we hope that our diligent observations outsiders. But we hope that our diligent observations

may provide insight into people who believe differently may provide insight into people who believe differently may provide insight into people who believe differently may provide insight into people who believe differently may provide insight into people who believe differently may provide insight into people who believe differently may provide insight into people who believe differently may provide insight into people who believe differently

than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a than we do, so that we can speak with each other from a

position of knowledgeable respect. position of knowledgeable respect. position of knowledgeable respect. position of knowledgeable respect. position of knowledgeable respect. position of knowledgeable respect.

The subtitle of this book, “Religions, Cults, and The subtitle of this book, “Religions, Cults, and The subtitle of this book, “Religions, Cults, and The subtitle of this book, “Religions, Cults, and

Popular Beliefs,” might be confusing. You may wonder Popular Beliefs,” might be confusing. You may wonder Popular Beliefs,” might be confusing. You may wonder Popular Beliefs,” might be confusing. You may wonder

what makes a religion different from a cult or popular

beliefs. Here are a few general definitions.

By religion, we are most often referring to world

belief systems such as Judaism, Christianity, Islam,

Buddhism, and Hinduism. These systems tend to have

well-established worldviews developed over a long period

of time. These religions have been historically and

geographically influential, often on multiple continents.

Religions emphasize tradition, ritual, sacred scripture,

structure of belief, and often have centralized authority.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

9

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 9 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

But you will see that some of these characteristics also apply to the newer groups discussed in this book. However, in general the designation religion indicates an established tradition with longstanding beliefs and patterns of behavior among followers.

Most people associate the term cult with groups that are dangerous or fanatical. Usually, people think of the term cult as an insult. However, some scholars in the social sciences—sociology and psychology, for example—use this term in a different way as a very example—use this term in a different way as a very example—use this term in a different way as a very specific designation for a small religious group that often specific designation for a small religious group that often specific designation for a small religious group that often specific designation for a small religious group that often specific designation for a small religious group that often has a less well-established belief systems. These groups has a less well-established belief systems. These groups has a less well-established belief systems. These groups has a less well-established belief systems. These groups has a less well-established belief systems. These groups tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic tend to be separatist and form around a charismatic leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand leader with unique ideals. Cult leaders often demand high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults high levels of commitment from followers. Some cults are also sects, or splinter groups from a more established are also sects, or splinter groups from a more established are also sects, or splinter groups from a more established are also sects, or splinter groups from a more established are also sects, or splinter groups from a more established religion. Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but Cults need not be inherently abusive or scary, but their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and their isolationism can lead to rumors by outsiders, and can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as can sometimes result in violence from within the group as well as outside the group. In this book, we use the term well as outside the group. In this book, we use the term well as outside the group. In this book, we use the term well as outside the group. In this book, we use the term cult in this way. The term is often interchangeable with in this way. The term is often interchangeable with in this way. The term is often interchangeable with in this way. The term is often interchangeable with “new religious movement” or “alternative religion.” Some scholars began using these terms in place of cult in order to avoid implying that all those groups are dangerous and fanatical.

“Popular beliefs,” the third element of the subtitle, is a sort of catch-all category for the purposes of this book. Some popular beliefs, such as atheism or postmodernism, have long histories and established systems of thought. Others, such as vampirism, are more recent and even contradictory in their beliefs and practices.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

10

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 10 1/4/12 11:19 AM
