What unites the diverse groups in this third category

is popularity. By this we do not mean that they are the

most widely believed or practiced traditions in the world.

We simply mean that these groups are common enough

that many people might have heard about them or met

someone that is a part of one of these groups.

The book is divided into several sections. First,

“World Traditions” addresses some of the most

influential religions in the world. This includes the

Abrahamic traditions: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Abrahamic traditions: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Abrahamic traditions: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.

Additionally, “World Traditions” includes Hinduism, Additionally, “World Traditions” includes Hinduism, Additionally, “World Traditions” includes Hinduism, Additionally, “World Traditions” includes Hinduism, Additionally, “World Traditions” includes Hinduism,

which is considered the parent religion of Buddhism, which is considered the parent religion of Buddhism, which is considered the parent religion of Buddhism, which is considered the parent religion of Buddhism, which is considered the parent religion of Buddhism,

Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in Jainism, and Sikhism. The Baha’i faith is also included in

this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world this section. These religions are generally labeled world

religions because of the sizes of their populations or their religions because of the sizes of their populations or their religions because of the sizes of their populations or their religions because of the sizes of their populations or their religions because of the sizes of their populations or their religions because of the sizes of their populations or their religions because of the sizes of their populations or their religions because of the sizes of their populations or their

impact on the global community. For example, Judaism impact on the global community. For example, Judaism impact on the global community. For example, Judaism impact on the global community. For example, Judaism impact on the global community. For example, Judaism

has a small world-wide population primarily due to the has a small world-wide population primarily due to the has a small world-wide population primarily due to the has a small world-wide population primarily due to the has a small world-wide population primarily due to the has a small world-wide population primarily due to the has a small world-wide population primarily due to the has a small world-wide population primarily due to the

Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it Holocaust; despite the relatively small size of Judaism it

has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its has had a tremendous impact on the world through its

influence on and connections to both Christianity and influence on and connections to both Christianity and influence on and connections to both Christianity and influence on and connections to both Christianity and

Islam.

The following section, “Religions of Place,” considers

traditions that are either nature-based or indigenous,

meaning that in general these religions are tied to specific

geographical regions. For example, Shinto’s creation myth

includes the story of how the gods created the world, and

that Japan came out of that creation. Religious traditions

like Santeria, Vodou, and the Rastafari movement are

primarily found in the Caribbean islands, where they

developed out of oppressive situations related to a history

of slavery. Native American and African tribal religions

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

11

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 11 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

(for example, Yoruba or shamanism) are connected to the land and to a specific community-based understanding of being. However, in the present day, not all so-called indigenous religions are bound to place, as many members of these communities have left their places of origin and have relocated around the world. These include not only traditions like Vodou, Santeria, and Yoruba, but also Taoism, Confucianism, and Zoroastrianism. However, in spite of the fact that these traditions now have global communities in diaspora, the origins, details, have global communities in diaspora, the origins, details, have global communities in diaspora, the origins, details, and practices still remain connected to the geographical and practices still remain connected to the geographical and practices still remain connected to the geographical and practices still remain connected to the geographical and practices still remain connected to the geographical location in which the traditions originated. location in which the traditions originated. location in which the traditions originated. location in which the traditions originated. location in which the traditions originated.

Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Section three is entitled “Uniquely American Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting Traditions.” The United States has been called a melting pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to pot, and the analogy of a salad has also been used to express the idea of distinct individuals from various express the idea of distinct individuals from various express the idea of distinct individuals from various express the idea of distinct individuals from various express the idea of distinct individuals from various express the idea of distinct individuals from various backgrounds all living together on the same land. The backgrounds all living together on the same land. The backgrounds all living together on the same land. The backgrounds all living together on the same land. The backgrounds all living together on the same land. The backgrounds all living together on the same land. The backgrounds all living together on the same land. The backgrounds all living together on the same land. The freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious has fostered the opportunity for many unique religious movements to arise, develop, and flourish in our American movements to arise, develop, and flourish in our American movements to arise, develop, and flourish in our American movements to arise, develop, and flourish in our American “salad.” Jehovah’s Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ “salad.” Jehovah’s Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ “salad.” Jehovah’s Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ “salad.” Jehovah’s Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Unitarians, and the Anabaptist traditions all grew out of Christianity, and some still identify themselves as Christians. The Nation of Islam is an offshoot of orthodox Islam; Hare Krishnas come from Hinduism. However, not all the uniquely American traditions are a direct offshoot of a larger tradition. Scientology originated in the United States with help from science fiction author and founder L. Ron Hubbard. All these traditions add to the religious landscape of this pluralistic society.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

12

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 12 1/4/12 11:19 AM
