In recent years, there have been fictional cultural

phenomena that have actually influenced the beliefs

and identity of real people, whether that is the wizard

Harry Potter driving thousands of people to dress in

their robes or the Twilight characters motivating girls to

save themselves for marriage. The next section of this

book, “Pop Culture-Based Religions,” addresses various

aspects of popular culture that have become religious in

either observance or practice. From television fanatics to

people seeking to communicate with the paranormal, this people seeking to communicate with the paranormal, this people seeking to communicate with the paranormal, this

portion of the book will cover these wildly popular ideas. portion of the book will cover these wildly popular ideas. portion of the book will cover these wildly popular ideas. portion of the book will cover these wildly popular ideas. portion of the book will cover these wildly popular ideas.

In “Nonreligious Beliefs,” we challenge the assumption In “Nonreligious Beliefs,” we challenge the assumption In “Nonreligious Beliefs,” we challenge the assumption In “Nonreligious Beliefs,” we challenge the assumption In “Nonreligious Beliefs,” we challenge the assumption

that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold that all belief is religious. There are some people who hold

beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate beliefs that by nature are not religious but that do operate

as a system for understanding the world and how humans as a system for understanding the world and how humans as a system for understanding the world and how humans as a system for understanding the world and how humans as a system for understanding the world and how humans as a system for understanding the world and how humans as a system for understanding the world and how humans as a system for understanding the world and how humans

should interact with it. Whether atheist, agnostic, or should interact with it. Whether atheist, agnostic, or should interact with it. Whether atheist, agnostic, or should interact with it. Whether atheist, agnostic, or should interact with it. Whether atheist, agnostic, or

postmodern, nonreligious ideologies are on the rise post-postmodern, nonreligious ideologies are on the rise post-postmodern, nonreligious ideologies are on the rise post-postmodern, nonreligious ideologies are on the rise post-postmodern, nonreligious ideologies are on the rise post-postmodern, nonreligious ideologies are on the rise post-postmodern, nonreligious ideologies are on the rise post-

September 11.

Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced, Since we recognize that religion is observed, practiced,

and believed by humans, and that humans are fallible, and believed by humans, and that humans are fallible, and believed by humans, and that humans are fallible, and believed by humans, and that humans are fallible,

the final section of the book, “Extremism,” discusses the final section of the book, “Extremism,” discusses the final section of the book, “Extremism,” discusses the final section of the book, “Extremism,” discusses

some of the worst acts of human behavior prompted by

people’s religious understandings. Over the course of

history, atrocities have been committed in the name of

religion; charismatic leaders have encouraged suicide, and

apocalyptic traditions have encouraged violence to bring

about the end of the world. It is important to address

the dangers of what happens when a person’s religious

understanding causes him or her to do harm to others.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

13

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 13 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

A W O R D A B O U T B C A N D A D

The traditional way of dividing years is based on the date of the birth of Jesus. The abbreviation BC stands for Before Christ, and AD stands for Anno Domini (Latin for the Year of our Lord). Years before the birth of Jesus count down to 1 BC; years since count up from 1 AD. This causes some problems. There is no year 0 in this calendar system. Second, the BC/AD system was created by a monk named Dionysius Exiguus, in the sixth century long before people were able to estimate the year of Jesus’ long before people were able to estimate the year of Jesus’ long before people were able to estimate the year of Jesus’ long before people were able to estimate the year of Jesus’ birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not birth. Historical evidence indicates that Jesus could not have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and have been born later than 4 BC when Matthew and Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together Luke’s accounts of Jesus’ birth are considered together with other Greek and Latin sources. Matthew 2 mentions with other Greek and Latin sources. Matthew 2 mentions with other Greek and Latin sources. Matthew 2 mentions with other Greek and Latin sources. Matthew 2 mentions with other Greek and Latin sources. Matthew 2 mentions with other Greek and Latin sources. Matthew 2 mentions Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the Herod the Great. Luke 2 says that Jesus was born in the reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. reign of Augustus while Quirinius was governor of Syria. Obviously, stating that Jesus was born four years “Before Obviously, stating that Jesus was born four years “Before Obviously, stating that Jesus was born four years “Before Obviously, stating that Jesus was born four years “Before Obviously, stating that Jesus was born four years “Before Obviously, stating that Jesus was born four years “Before Obviously, stating that Jesus was born four years “Before Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, Christ” is linguistically problematic! For this reason, among others, scholars have taken to using the terms BCE among others, scholars have taken to using the terms BCE among others, scholars have taken to using the terms BCE among others, scholars have taken to using the terms BCE among others, scholars have taken to using the terms BCE (Before the Common Era) and CE (Common Era) to refer (Before the Common Era) and CE (Common Era) to refer (Before the Common Era) and CE (Common Era) to refer (Before the Common Era) and CE (Common Era) to refer to these same time periods. We have chosen to use BCE and CE in this book to help you become more familiar with the terminology you will encounter in many history textbooks.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

14

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 14 1/4/12 11:19 AM
