Upon their return, the Judahites rebuild a second temple

in Jerusalem, and here the history of the Jewish people as

told in the Bible draws to a close.

Archaeology

It is interesting to note that, in contrast to this

lengthy biblical history, the archaeological evidence of the

origins and development of Judaism is rather sparse. The

earliest attested use of the name Israel outside the Bible

appears in the thirteenth century BCE, when an Egyptian

pharaoh named Merneptah recorded his conquest of a pharaoh named Merneptah recorded his conquest of a pharaoh named Merneptah recorded his conquest of a pharaoh named Merneptah recorded his conquest of a pharaoh named Merneptah recorded his conquest of a

people called Israel. The date upon Merneptah’s victory people called Israel. The date upon Merneptah’s victory people called Israel. The date upon Merneptah’s victory people called Israel. The date upon Merneptah’s victory people called Israel. The date upon Merneptah’s victory people called Israel. The date upon Merneptah’s victory people called Israel. The date upon Merneptah’s victory

stela (an upright column of stone with markings or stela (an upright column of stone with markings or stela (an upright column of stone with markings or stela (an upright column of stone with markings or stela (an upright column of stone with markings or stela (an upright column of stone with markings or stela (an upright column of stone with markings or stela (an upright column of stone with markings or

writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement writing) might correspond with the time of the settlement

under Joshua mentioned in the Bible. However, the stela under Joshua mentioned in the Bible. However, the stela under Joshua mentioned in the Bible. However, the stela under Joshua mentioned in the Bible. However, the stela under Joshua mentioned in the Bible. However, the stela under Joshua mentioned in the Bible. However, the stela under Joshua mentioned in the Bible. However, the stela

itself provides no useful details about who the conquered itself provides no useful details about who the conquered itself provides no useful details about who the conquered itself provides no useful details about who the conquered itself provides no useful details about who the conquered itself provides no useful details about who the conquered itself provides no useful details about who the conquered itself provides no useful details about who the conquered

people were, nor where they originated. Similarly, the people were, nor where they originated. Similarly, the people were, nor where they originated. Similarly, the people were, nor where they originated. Similarly, the people were, nor where they originated. Similarly, the people were, nor where they originated. Similarly, the people were, nor where they originated. Similarly, the

establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of establishment and extent of Jerusalem as the City of

David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no David is difficult to verify from archaeology, and no

evidence of the Solomonic Temple remains, even though evidence of the Solomonic Temple remains, even though evidence of the Solomonic Temple remains, even though evidence of the Solomonic Temple remains, even though

modern forgeries pop up for sale occasionally. modern forgeries pop up for sale occasionally. modern forgeries pop up for sale occasionally. modern forgeries pop up for sale occasionally.

However, even with limited physical evidence, it is

apparent that the Jewish people have a lengthy past in

and around the land of Israel. Additionally, when these

archaeological clues are taken together with the biblical

text, we get a clearer picture of the beliefs which became

central to Judaism.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

23

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 23 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

B E L I E F S

One God

Judaism is a monotheistic religion. The Jewish belief in one personal God who makes covenants with humankind appears throughout the Hebrew Bible. In Deuteronomy 6:4, for example, the Jewish people find an affirmation of this monotheistic faith: “Hear [Shema] O Israel, the Lord is your God, the Lord is One.”

The Shema is more than just an affirmation of the singleness of God. It discloses the personal name of God singleness of God. It discloses the personal name of God singleness of God. It discloses the personal name of God singleness of God. It discloses the personal name of God singleness of God. It discloses the personal name of God as well. The Tetragrammaton (four letters) YHWH, which as well. The Tetragrammaton (four letters) YHWH, which as well. The Tetragrammaton (four letters) YHWH, which as well. The Tetragrammaton (four letters) YHWH, which as well. The Tetragrammaton (four letters) YHWH, which as well. The Tetragrammaton (four letters) YHWH, which as well. The Tetragrammaton (four letters) YHWH, which in English is translated as “Lord” and scholars pronounce in English is translated as “Lord” and scholars pronounce in English is translated as “Lord” and scholars pronounce in English is translated as “Lord” and scholars pronounce in English is translated as “Lord” and scholars pronounce in English is translated as “Lord” and scholars pronounce in English is translated as “Lord” and scholars pronounce “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses “Yahweh,” is the proper name of God, revealed to Moses at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). at the burning bush (see “Origins and Early History”). Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Many Jews believe that YHWH is too holy to speak. Instead they will substitute the title Adonai (“Lord”) Instead they will substitute the title Adonai (“Lord”) Instead they will substitute the title Adonai (“Lord”) Instead they will substitute the title Adonai (“Lord”) Instead they will substitute the title Adonai (“Lord”) Instead they will substitute the title Adonai (“Lord”) Instead they will substitute the title Adonai (“Lord”) when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will when YHWH appears in the Hebrew text. Some Jews will not write out the word God and instead choose to write not write out the word God and instead choose to write God and instead choose to write and instead choose to write and instead choose to write and instead choose to write and instead choose to write and instead choose to write G–d as a sign of reverence. as a sign of reverence.

Covenant Covenant Covenant

The Shema conveys belief in the covenant, which is a unique arrangement between God and humanity, and which is a foundational belief in Judaism. Covenants in the Bible include the Abrahamic covenant (Gen. 11) and the Mosaic covenant (Ex. 20), among others. These two covenants provide a significant basis for Jewish ritual practices and beliefs about sacred space. Both covenants are conditional; that is, they are “if–then” covenants in which both sides are expected to do something in order

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

24

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 24 1/4/12 11:19 AM
