to receive something else. The Abrahamic covenant,

for example, promises the patriarch a land (Canaan)

and numerous descendants if all male members of the

community are circumcised. Likewise, the Mosaic

covenant is an extensive collection of interpersonal,

sacrificial, and communal commands which allow the

Jewish people to live in a unique relationship with God.

Obedience to God’s Torah

Adherence to the Mosaic commandments revealed in

the Torah is another distinctive feature of Jewish belief. the Torah is another distinctive feature of Jewish belief. the Torah is another distinctive feature of Jewish belief. the Torah is another distinctive feature of Jewish belief.

The word Torah refers to the commandments themselves, refers to the commandments themselves, refers to the commandments themselves, refers to the commandments themselves, refers to the commandments themselves, refers to the commandments themselves, refers to the commandments themselves,

the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see the first five books of the Hebrew Bible collectively (see

“Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments “Texts”), and the interpretation of these commandments

in later Judaism (often called Oral Torah). The Torah in later Judaism (often called Oral Torah). The Torah in later Judaism (often called Oral Torah). The Torah in later Judaism (often called Oral Torah). The Torah in later Judaism (often called Oral Torah). The Torah in later Judaism (often called Oral Torah). The Torah in later Judaism (often called Oral Torah). The Torah

commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and commandments are a series of rules concerning diet and

propriety known as kosher law, or kashrut. For example, propriety known as kosher law, or kashrut. For example, propriety known as kosher law, or kashrut. For example, propriety known as kosher law, or kashrut. For example, propriety known as kosher law, or kashrut. For example, propriety known as kosher law, or kashrut. For example, propriety known as kosher law, or kashrut. For example,

Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating Levitical law commands believers to abstain from eating

pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The pork, shellfish, and other “unclean” foods (Lev. 11). The

law also forbids mixing fibers (Lev. 19), having contact law also forbids mixing fibers (Lev. 19), having contact law also forbids mixing fibers (Lev. 19), having contact law also forbids mixing fibers (Lev. 19), having contact

with dead bodies (Lev. 15), or touching items that have with dead bodies (Lev. 15), or touching items that have with dead bodies (Lev. 15), or touching items that have with dead bodies (Lev. 15), or touching items that have

been in contact with a menstruating woman (Lev. 21).

To outsiders, these may seem like arbitrary rules, but

in the context of Judaism, they provide structure, stability,

and a sense of purpose to even the most mundane daily

tasks. Additionally, much like circumcision, the kosher

laws are a visible reminder of the distinction between

those within God’s covenant community and those

who are outside of it (called Gentiles). The covenant

commandments related to kosher law remain significant

for many Jewish people today, especially Orthodox,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

25

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 25 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

G38 - Assyrian Empire 650 B.C.

The Assyrian Empire (650 b.c.)

Sardis

Tarsus Carchemish

A S S Y R I A N Nineveh

E M P I R E

CYPRUS

Ecbatana

Sidon Damascus Tyre

Samaria Babylon Susa

J U D A H

Jerusalem Ur

Pelusium

Memphis

E G Y P T N

0 200 Mi. 0 200 Km.

© Thomas Nelson, Inc.

Ultra-Orthodox, Hasidic, and some Conservative groups Ultra-Orthodox, Hasidic, and some Conservative groups Ultra-Orthodox, Hasidic, and some Conservative groups Ultra-Orthodox, Hasidic, and some Conservative groups Ultra-Orthodox, Hasidic, and some Conservative groups Ultra-Orthodox, Hasidic, and some Conservative groups Ultra-Orthodox, Hasidic, and some Conservative groups (see “Groups”).

The Land

Though not necessarily a belief, a deep reverence Though not necessarily a belief, a deep reverence Though not necessarily a belief, a deep reverence Though not necessarily a belief, a deep reverence for the land promised to Abraham and his descendants is a respect which many Jewish people share. This land, known as Canaan, and subsequently called Israel or Palestine, changed hands many times over the millennia because of its strategic geographical position amidst major world powers who wished to control access to Asia, Europe, and Africa. For the Jewish people, however, the land was theologically significant; not only did the land have connections to the covenant with Abraham, but Israel also contained Jerusalem, the city of David.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

26

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 26 1/4/12 11:19 AM
