and the September 11, 2001, attacks on New York City

and Washington, DC. Furthermore, in India, Pakistani

Muslim groups have been responsible for the deaths of

thousands of Kashmiri Hindus in an attempt at ethnic

cleansing resulting from territory disputes.

Of course, extremism, hatred, and violence are

present in practically all religions, though no religion

is universally violent. Also, sometimes violence that is

justified with religious language is actually motivated by

political or economic factors. However, each person must political or economic factors. However, each person must political or economic factors. However, each person must

bear responsibility for his or her own violent actions, bear responsibility for his or her own violent actions, bear responsibility for his or her own violent actions, bear responsibility for his or her own violent actions, bear responsibility for his or her own violent actions,

recognizing that these actions reflect badly upon the recognizing that these actions reflect badly upon the recognizing that these actions reflect badly upon the recognizing that these actions reflect badly upon the recognizing that these actions reflect badly upon the

overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily overall religion. Furthermore, this chapter primarily

addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an addresses organized acts of collective violence, but on an

individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance individual level, interpersonal violence and intolerance

can also have religious motivations. For example, violence can also have religious motivations. For example, violence can also have religious motivations. For example, violence can also have religious motivations. For example, violence can also have religious motivations. For example, violence

against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all against women, child abuse, and homophobia can all

result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists. result from religious beliefs, even among non-extremists.

V I O L E N C E I N A S I A N R E L I G I O N S V I O L E N C E I N A S I A N R E L I G I O N S V I O L E N C E I N A S I A N R E L I G I O N S V I O L E N C E I N A S I A N R E L I G I O N S V I O L E N C E I N A S I A N R E L I G I O N S

Though many people stereotypically view Asian Though many people stereotypically view Asian Though many people stereotypically view Asian Though many people stereotypically view Asian

religions as more peaceful traditions, both Hinduism

and Buddhism also have some violent elements. In these

contexts, there are political and nationalist components

that feed religious violence.

Violent Hindu nationalism is most obvious in the

ongoing conflict between India and Pakistan. During

the partition of India after liberation from British rule in

1947, the states of East and West Pakistan were created;

East Pakistan eventually became Bangladesh in 1971. The

division was largely religious, with India being primarily

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

295

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 295 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Hindu and Pakistan primarily Muslim. This partition resulted in significant violence, as both Hindus and Muslims felt as if they were being forced to relocate their families based upon their religious identities; this fostered deep resentment between the two groups. As a result, the relocation process itself was extremely dangerous, with violence frequently erupting between Hindus and Muslims en route. Estimates are that as many as a million people were killed during that summer. For a graphic but important look at partition violence, see BBC News but important look at partition violence, see BBC News but important look at partition violence, see BBC News photographs at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/shared/spl/hi/pop photographs at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/shared/spl/hi/pop photographs at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/shared/spl/hi/pop photographs at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/shared/spl/hi/pop photographs at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/shared/spl/hi/pop _ups/06/south_asia_india0s_partition/html/5.stm. Today, _ups/06/south_asia_india0s_partition/html/5.stm. Today, _ups/06/south_asia_india0s_partition/html/5.stm. Today, _ups/06/south_asia_india0s_partition/html/5.stm. Today, _ups/06/south_asia_india0s_partition/html/5.stm. Today, parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on parts of the northern territory of Kashmir, which lies on the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be the border between India and Pakistan, continue to be disputed.

In 1992, Hindu nationalists destroyed the Babri In 1992, Hindu nationalists destroyed the Babri In 1992, Hindu nationalists destroyed the Babri In 1992, Hindu nationalists destroyed the Babri In 1992, Hindu nationalists destroyed the Babri In 1992, Hindu nationalists destroyed the Babri Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Mosque, which dated back to the 1500s, in the city of Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over Ayodhya. Hindus believed that the mosque was built over the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu the birthplace of Lord Ram, who is an avatar of Vishnu and the beloved hero of the Ramayana, a famous religious and the beloved hero of the Ramayana, a famous religious and the beloved hero of the Ramayana, a famous religious and the beloved hero of the Ramayana, a famous religious epic. Both Hindus and Muslims claimed the same ground epic. Both Hindus and Muslims claimed the same ground epic. Both Hindus and Muslims claimed the same ground epic. Both Hindus and Muslims claimed the same ground as sacred, resulting in an ongoing dispute that lasted over a hundred years. Unfortunately, the eventual outcome was violent conflict; the mosque was razed, and over 2,000 Hindus and Muslims were killed during the attack and associated riots throughout India and Pakistan. Violence also erupted in Gujarat province in 2002 after Muslims bombed a train filled with Hindus who had been on a pilgrimage to Ayodhya, and who were finally returning home. Fifty-nine men, women, and children were killed in this attack, and in response, Hindu mobs killed close

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

296

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 296 1/4/12 11:20 AM
