to 800 Muslims and torched Islamic places of worship.

Around 250 Hindus also died during these riots. These

two examples of inter-religious conflicts are the result not

only of religious divisions but also of political divisions.

Because religious identity is so tied to national identity,

the religious and the political are practically inseparable,

which only escalates the potential for conflict.

Though images of a peacefully meditating Buddha

and untroubled monks are commonplace in Buddhism,

this tradition is also not immune to conflict. Buddhism

has a history of violence and political conquest, from has a history of violence and political conquest, from has a history of violence and political conquest, from has a history of violence and political conquest, from has a history of violence and political conquest, from

encouraging assassination in Tibet to the violent, gun-encouraging assassination in Tibet to the violent, gun-encouraging assassination in Tibet to the violent, gun-encouraging assassination in Tibet to the violent, gun-encouraging assassination in Tibet to the violent, gun-

wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand wielding tactics of Buddhist military monks in Thailand

(see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism (see Jerryson and Juergensmeyer). Buddhist nationalism

has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving has been the force behind clashes in Sri Lanka involving

violence between the Buddhist majority population violence between the Buddhist majority population violence between the Buddhist majority population violence between the Buddhist majority population violence between the Buddhist majority population

and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and and the minority Tamils, who are primarily Hindu and

Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This Christian, over the creation of a Tamil homeland. This

conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending conflict led to a twenty-six-year civil war, finally ending

in 2009 with the victory of the Sri Lankan military and in 2009 with the victory of the Sri Lankan military and in 2009 with the victory of the Sri Lankan military and in 2009 with the victory of the Sri Lankan military and

the defeat of the Tamil insurgents. Some estimates are the defeat of the Tamil insurgents. Some estimates are the defeat of the Tamil insurgents. Some estimates are the defeat of the Tamil insurgents. Some estimates are

that as many as 100,000 people were killed on both sides

combined.

N E W R E L I G I O U S

M O V E M E N T S A N D V I O L E N C E

While new religious movements are not all violent in

nature, there are examples of some groups becoming

violent or even deadly. If there exists the influence of a

powerful leader, coupled with isolation from the outside

world, there can be devastating results.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

297

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 297 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

In 1993, the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) entered a standoff with the Branch Davidians of Mt. Carmel outside of Waco, Texas. The leader of this group, David Koresh, was convinced for years that the members of the compound were preparing for an apocalyptic battle, based on his reading of the Revelation. He saw himself as the messiah in this coming war, and believed he had a responsibility to raise up an army by fathering children with the women of the community—a belief he called the New Light Doctrine— community—a belief he called the New Light Doctrine— community—a belief he called the New Light Doctrine— and by actively recruiting new members. In preparation and by actively recruiting new members. In preparation and by actively recruiting new members. In preparation and by actively recruiting new members. In preparation and by actively recruiting new members. In preparation for the battle, the Branch Davidians had been stockpiling for the battle, the Branch Davidians had been stockpiling for the battle, the Branch Davidians had been stockpiling for the battle, the Branch Davidians had been stockpiling for the battle, the Branch Davidians had been stockpiling weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which weapons. The initial stage of the 1993 standoff, which left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only left several ATF agents and group members dead, only intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon intensified Koresh’s belief that the end of days was upon them. It is unclear whether the Davidians would have them. It is unclear whether the Davidians would have them. It is unclear whether the Davidians would have them. It is unclear whether the Davidians would have them. It is unclear whether the Davidians would have actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; actually used their weapons had they been pushed further; the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the standoff came to a disturbing end when a fire engulfed the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon the compound and killed most of the people inside. Upon investigating the incident, the Danforth Commission (an investigating the incident, the Danforth Commission (an investigating the incident, the Danforth Commission (an investigating the incident, the Danforth Commission (an independent, government-appointed panel) indicated that independent, government-appointed panel) indicated that independent, government-appointed panel) indicated that independent, government-appointed panel) indicated that the Branch Davidians themselves might have started the fire, perhaps to take their own lives rather than submit to an authority they believed to be the anti-Christ.

Similarly violent suicides under the leadership of charismatic individuals have taken place elsewhere. One well-known example took place in Jonestown, Guyana, where the Reverend Jim Jones and his associates convinced more than 900 members of the People’s Temple to end their own lives and take the lives of their children with cyanide rather than submit to an investigation by U.S.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

298

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 298 1/4/12 11:20 AM
