Congressman Leo Ryan in 1978. Congressman Ryan was

assassinated during his investigation. Another incident

occurred in San Diego, California in 1997, when Marshall

Applewhite convinced thirty-eight followers to end their

own lives so that they might access a UFO they believed

was trailing a comet. The members of the cult, called

Heaven’s Gate, called the process of taking their own lives

“membership in the Next Level,” an indication of their

belief that this life was only one plane of existence.

Rarely, cults have also acted homicidally, as was the Rarely, cults have also acted homicidally, as was the Rarely, cults have also acted homicidally, as was the

case with the Charles Manson Family in 1969. Manson case with the Charles Manson Family in 1969. Manson case with the Charles Manson Family in 1969. Manson case with the Charles Manson Family in 1969. Manson case with the Charles Manson Family in 1969. Manson

was able to gather followers from the California counter-was able to gather followers from the California counter-was able to gather followers from the California counter-was able to gather followers from the California counter-was able to gather followers from the California counter-

culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his culture movement, who would eventually murder on his

behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of behalf, by claiming that he was the second coming of

Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race Jesus and that the murders were necessary to spark a race

riot that would lead to Armageddon. Thirty years later, riot that would lead to Armageddon. Thirty years later, riot that would lead to Armageddon. Thirty years later, riot that would lead to Armageddon. Thirty years later, riot that would lead to Armageddon. Thirty years later,

members of the Movement for the Restoration of the members of the Movement for the Restoration of the members of the Movement for the Restoration of the members of the Movement for the Restoration of the members of the Movement for the Restoration of the members of the Movement for the Restoration of the

Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned Ten Commandments stabbed, strangled, and bludgeoned

hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement hundreds of Ugandans who were critical of the movement

and who refused to adhere to the Ten Commandments, and who refused to adhere to the Ten Commandments, and who refused to adhere to the Ten Commandments, and who refused to adhere to the Ten Commandments,

according to what group members believed. Additionally, according to what group members believed. Additionally, according to what group members believed. Additionally, according to what group members believed. Additionally,

in 1994–95, dozens were killed and thousands injured in

poison gas attacks in Japan, perpetrated by a group called

Aum Shinrikyo in response to perceived political and

social threats in Japan.

Usually, violence committed by cult groups is

precipitated by a sense of apocalyptic or millennial

expectation, and/or oppression or mistreatment at the

hands of the larger culture. A galvanizing figure often

plays a role in instigating the violence, though she or he

does not always personally commit the acts.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

299

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 299 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

I S R E L I G I O N A F O R C E F O R V I O L E N C E ?

No religious tradition, large or small, is safe from violent tendencies. Observing widespread religious hatred has led anti-religion writers like atheist author Christopher Hitchens to proclaim that “religion poisons everything.” Furthermore, even people who believe religion can be a force for good must admit that the actions of people in the name of religion, as well as the rhetoric of religious texts, have been damaging, destructive, and traumatic. It is unfair to those who have been traumatized by religious is unfair to those who have been traumatized by religious is unfair to those who have been traumatized by religious is unfair to those who have been traumatized by religious violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s violence to gloss over their hurt by downplaying religion’s role in their trauma. Instead, we must investigate the role in their trauma. Instead, we must investigate the role in their trauma. Instead, we must investigate the role in their trauma. Instead, we must investigate the role in their trauma. Instead, we must investigate the role in their trauma. Instead, we must investigate the role in their trauma. Instead, we must investigate the extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence extremism and anger that has fostered religious violence and begin to think and act in ways that counter those and begin to think and act in ways that counter those and begin to think and act in ways that counter those and begin to think and act in ways that counter those and begin to think and act in ways that counter those and begin to think and act in ways that counter those harmful elements. If religion can be a force for violence, harmful elements. If religion can be a force for violence, harmful elements. If religion can be a force for violence, harmful elements. If religion can be a force for violence, harmful elements. If religion can be a force for violence, harmful elements. If religion can be a force for violence, harmful elements. If religion can be a force for violence, then it can also be a force for good. then it can also be a force for good. then it can also be a force for good. then it can also be a force for good. then it can also be a force for good.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G Bromley, David G. and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Cults, Religion, and Bromley, David G. and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Cults, Religion, and Bromley, David G. and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Cults, Religion, and Cults, Religion, and Cults, Religion, and Violence. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Brown, Robert McAfee. Religion and Violence. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1987.

Burns, Charlene Embrey. More Moral Than God: Taking Responsibility for Religious Violence. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield: 2008.

Collins, John J. Does the Bible Justify Violence? Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 2004.

Hagerty, Barbara Bradley. “Is the Bible More Violent Than the Koran?” NPR News. March 18, 2010.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

300

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 300 1/4/12 11:20 AM
