the many examples of Jewish and Christian apocalyptic

literature from the Greco-Roman period.

The holy text of Islam, known as the Qur’an, emerged

five centuries later and shares many of the apocalyptic

features found in Judeo-Christian texts. Several chapters,

or surahs, of the Qur’an emphasize a coming judgment

of humanity, a resurrection of the body to either eternal

life or eternal torment, and an end of the current age (see

surahs 22, 39, 40, and 82). In the hundred years after

the completion of the Qur’an, Muslims developed the the completion of the Qur’an, Muslims developed the the completion of the Qur’an, Muslims developed the

concept of the Mahdi, a redeemer who will usher in the concept of the Mahdi, a redeemer who will usher in the concept of the Mahdi, a redeemer who will usher in the concept of the Mahdi, a redeemer who will usher in the concept of the Mahdi, a redeemer who will usher in the

final judgment; this idea is especially prominent among final judgment; this idea is especially prominent among final judgment; this idea is especially prominent among final judgment; this idea is especially prominent among final judgment; this idea is especially prominent among

Shi’ites.

Later Apocalypticism Later Apocalypticism Later Apocalypticism Later Apocalypticism Later Apocalypticism For a few centuries after the legalization of For a few centuries after the legalization of For a few centuries after the legalization of For a few centuries after the legalization of For a few centuries after the legalization of For a few centuries after the legalization of For a few centuries after the legalization of For a few centuries after the legalization of

Christianity, apocalypticism waned among Christians. Christianity, apocalypticism waned among Christians. Christianity, apocalypticism waned among Christians. Christianity, apocalypticism waned among Christians. Christianity, apocalypticism waned among Christians. Christianity, apocalypticism waned among Christians. Christianity, apocalypticism waned among Christians.

However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in However, with the rapid spread of Islam, Christians in

Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign Europe began to wonder if the new religion was a sign

of the coming end of the world. That fear was magnified of the coming end of the world. That fear was magnified of the coming end of the world. That fear was magnified of the coming end of the world. That fear was magnified

when Muslims expanded into Jerusalem. In addition, when Muslims expanded into Jerusalem. In addition, when Muslims expanded into Jerusalem. In addition, when Muslims expanded into Jerusalem. In addition,

the mention of a thousand-year reign of Christ in the

Apocalypse of John led some people to believe that

the final battle was theirs to fight as the millennium

approached. Particularly in England and France,

preachers, monks, and writers stoked this fear, though

there is no scholarly consensus on how great the level of

panic was throughout other parts of Europe. For example,

Bernard of Thuringia, a well-known hermit, predicted

the world would end in 992, and Adso of Montier-en-

Dur, writing in 950, vividly described the soon-to-come

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

305

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 305 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

antichrist in a letter to Queen Gerbera of France. Sylvester II, Pope during the year 1000, did not mention the apocalypse in his own writing, and dismissed with a blessing the fearful gathering in Rome on the eve of the millennium when the dreaded end did not arrive.

However, the passing of the year 1000 did not end apocalyptic expectations. In Judaism, Kabbalistic mystics used astrological charts to predict the imminent arrival of the messiah and the redemption of the Jewish people in texts like the Zohar. Building upon these expectations, . Building upon these expectations, . Building upon these expectations, the Jewish mystic Shabbatai Zevi claimed to be the long-the Jewish mystic Shabbatai Zevi claimed to be the long-the Jewish mystic Shabbatai Zevi claimed to be the long-the Jewish mystic Shabbatai Zevi claimed to be the long-the Jewish mystic Shabbatai Zevi claimed to be the long-awaited messiah, anticipating the apocalypse in 1666 awaited messiah, anticipating the apocalypse in 1666 awaited messiah, anticipating the apocalypse in 1666 awaited messiah, anticipating the apocalypse in 1666 awaited messiah, anticipating the apocalypse in 1666 (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like (see Himmelfarb). Moshe Edel has suggested that, like its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic its ancient apocalyptic counterparts, Jewish apocalyptic writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, writing post-1000 CE was still inspired by oppression, this time at the hands of European Christians. Similarly, this time at the hands of European Christians. Similarly, this time at the hands of European Christians. Similarly, this time at the hands of European Christians. Similarly, this time at the hands of European Christians. Similarly, this time at the hands of European Christians. Similarly, Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic Muslims developed astrologically oriented apocalyptic writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response writings in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, in response to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While to the Crusades and the Mongol invasions. While apparently not motivated by political fears, Christian apparently not motivated by political fears, Christian apparently not motivated by political fears, Christian apparently not motivated by political fears, Christian mystics like Hildegard of Bingen wrote about graphic mystics like Hildegard of Bingen wrote about graphic mystics like Hildegard of Bingen wrote about graphic mystics like Hildegard of Bingen wrote about graphic apocalyptic visions during this time as well.

It would be impossible to trace the breadth of apocalyptic movements over the next 900 years, given the sheer volume of examples. However, a few from American religious history deserve mention. Christian apocalyptic fervor in the New World was evident early on. For example, Christopher Columbus called himself “the messenger of the new heaven and the new earth” when reflecting on his “discovery” of the Americas (see Stein). The Puritans, too, saw themselves as part of the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

306

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 306 1/4/12 11:20 AM
