fulfillment of the eschatological kingdom, referring to

their city as a New Jerusalem. One hundred years later

in the American colonies, fiery preachers like Jonathan

Edwards brought about the Great Awakening, which is

characterized by religious revivalism and claims that

the end of the world was soon to come. Additionally,

under the leadership of Joseph Smith, people in the

new Mormon movement in the 1830s called themselves

Latter-day Saints, believing they were living in the last

days. During the same decade, a farmer named William days. During the same decade, a farmer named William days. During the same decade, a farmer named William

Miller convinced hundreds of people that the world would Miller convinced hundreds of people that the world would Miller convinced hundreds of people that the world would Miller convinced hundreds of people that the world would Miller convinced hundreds of people that the world would

end in 1843 and, subsequently, 1844. As a result, the end in 1843 and, subsequently, 1844. As a result, the end in 1843 and, subsequently, 1844. As a result, the end in 1843 and, subsequently, 1844. As a result, the end in 1843 and, subsequently, 1844. As a result, the

date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite date October 22, 1844—the date predicted by Millerite

preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great preacher Samuel Snow—became known as the Great

Disappointment because of the thousands of people who Disappointment because of the thousands of people who Disappointment because of the thousands of people who Disappointment because of the thousands of people who Disappointment because of the thousands of people who Disappointment because of the thousands of people who Disappointment because of the thousands of people who Disappointment because of the thousands of people who

waited in vain for the end to arrive. Events of the later waited in vain for the end to arrive. Events of the later waited in vain for the end to arrive. Events of the later waited in vain for the end to arrive. Events of the later waited in vain for the end to arrive. Events of the later

nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil nineteenth and twentieth centuries, particularly the Civil

War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic War and World Wars I and II, also fueled apocalyptic

expectation.

As the second millennium came to an end, the As the second millennium came to an end, the As the second millennium came to an end, the As the second millennium came to an end, the

late twentieth century saw renewed apocalyptic fervor. late twentieth century saw renewed apocalyptic fervor. late twentieth century saw renewed apocalyptic fervor. late twentieth century saw renewed apocalyptic fervor.

Conservative Christian writers like Hal Lindsey (Late

Great Planet Earth), Tim Lahaye, and Jerry Jenkins (The

Left Behind series) told stories of biblical apocalypse to

modern audiences, and their books became bestsellers.

These books also fueled the discussion among

fundamentalist Christian circles about premillennial,

amillennial, and postmillennial views of the apocalypse

(see Boch). In Judaism, Hasidic Chabad–Lubavitch groups

in Brooklyn, New York claimed that Rabbi Menachem

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

307

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 307 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Mendel Schneerson was the messiah on earth, here to redeem the world.

Small, separatist Christian sects isolated themselves and prepared for the coming apocalypse, often with disastrous results. For example, the Branch Davidians were an offshoot of the Seventh-Day Adventists, growing out of the Millerite movement of the 1800s. Believing David Koresh’s expectations of Christ’s return, the Branch Davidians secluded themselves inside a Waco, Texas compound and ended up facing off with the government, compound and ended up facing off with the government, compound and ended up facing off with the government, resulting in the deaths of over eighty people. Another resulting in the deaths of over eighty people. Another resulting in the deaths of over eighty people. Another resulting in the deaths of over eighty people. Another resulting in the deaths of over eighty people. Another tragic example of an apocalyptic group is the People’s tragic example of an apocalyptic group is the People’s tragic example of an apocalyptic group is the People’s tragic example of an apocalyptic group is the People’s tragic example of an apocalyptic group is the People’s Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually Temple, begun by Jim Jones in California, who eventually moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic moved the group to Guyana in order to establish a utopic community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended community called Jonestown. The People’s Temple ended in a combination of murder and mass suicide in 1978, in a combination of murder and mass suicide in 1978, in a combination of murder and mass suicide in 1978, in a combination of murder and mass suicide in 1978, in a combination of murder and mass suicide in 1978, when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s when over 900 men, women, and children died at Jones’s command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. command. In these cases, public reaction varied radically. Documentaries like William Gazecki’s Waco: Rules of Documentaries like William Gazecki’s Documentaries like William Gazecki’s Documentaries like William Gazecki’s Documentaries like William Gazecki’s Waco: Rules of Documentaries like William Gazecki’s Documentaries like William Gazecki’s Waco: Rules of Waco: Rules of Waco: Rules of Engagement actually presents the Branch Davidians in a actually presents the Branch Davidians in a actually presents the Branch Davidians in a actually presents the Branch Davidians in a positive way and blames the government for their demise. positive way and blames the government for their demise. positive way and blames the government for their demise. positive way and blames the government for their demise. Stanley Nelson’s Jonestown: The Life and Death of the People’s Temple, on the other hand, presents a very negative view of Jim Jones. The syncretic religious group Heaven’s Gate also predicted a sort of alien apocalypse, as they awaited a UFO following the Hale-Bopp comet in 1997. Again, there were tragic consequences as thirty-nine members of this group took their own lives in order to unite with the spacecraft.

The advent of the year 2000 (Y2K) led to additional apocalyptic predictions, this time with a technological

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

308

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 308 1/4/12 11:20 AM
