spin, with computers playing a key role in the approaching

end. Then when the world did not end in the year 2000,

an obscure interpretation of the Mayan calendar became

the new focus of end-times predictions. According to

proponents, the Mayan Long Count calendar should

reset on December 21, 2012, based on cyclical eras of

approximately 394 years, and this will usher in the end

of the current age. The planets will align, causing cosmic

devastation. However, as Krupp and many others have

explained, the Long Count calendar does not portend explained, the Long Count calendar does not portend explained, the Long Count calendar does not portend

cataclysmic events, nor will the planets align in any cataclysmic events, nor will the planets align in any cataclysmic events, nor will the planets align in any cataclysmic events, nor will the planets align in any cataclysmic events, nor will the planets align in any

substantive way. Further, the Maya saw many cyclical eras substantive way. Further, the Maya saw many cyclical eras substantive way. Further, the Maya saw many cyclical eras substantive way. Further, the Maya saw many cyclical eras substantive way. Further, the Maya saw many cyclical eras

beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did beyond the end of the current cycle, indicating they did

not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.” not view the coming 2012 date as the “end of the world.”

W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S W H Y A P O C A L Y P T I C I S M M A T T E R S

In an opinion piece for the New Scientist, Michael Shermer In an opinion piece for the In an opinion piece for the New Scientist Scientist , Michael Shermer

reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings reiterated what has been apparent since the beginnings

of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions . . . help us make of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions of apocalypticism: “Apocalyptic visions . help us make . help us make

sense of an often seemingly senseless world. In the face sense of an often seemingly senseless world. In the face sense of an often seemingly senseless world. In the face sense of an often seemingly senseless world. In the face

of confusion and annihilation, we need restitution and of confusion and annihilation, we need restitution and of confusion and annihilation, we need restitution and of confusion and annihilation, we need restitution and

reassurance.” Indeed, throughout time, apocalypticism

has helped those who fear the world around them to be

reassured that the chaos was soon to end. Just as Jewish

people sought the messianic age to escape subjugation,

and as Christians used numerology and scripture to

assuage their fears of a looming Muslim invasion, today’s

apocalyptic movements often see the end of the world as

a new beginning. This worldview allows the oppressed to

look forward to their freedom, and the religious to look

forward to their ultimate reward. Apocalyptic worldviews

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

309

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 309 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

depict a world in which current injustices are righted, allowing the human mind to find patterns in apparently senseless world events. Given these spiritual, political, and psychological benefits, we are unlikely to have seen the end of apocalypticism.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Bock, Darrell L., ed. Three Views on the Millennium and Beyond. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1999.

Edel, Moshe. “Jewish Apocalypticism: 670–1670.” Pages 354–79 in The Edel, Moshe. “Jewish Apocalypticism: 670–1670.” Pages 354–79 in Continuum History of Apocalypticism. Bernard McGinn, John J. Collins, . Bernard McGinn, John J. Collins, . Bernard McGinn, John J. Collins, . Bernard McGinn, John J. Collins, and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003. and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003. and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003. and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003. and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003. and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003. and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003. and Stephen J. Stein, eds. New York: Continuum, 2003.

Himmelfarb, Martha. The Apocalypse: A Brief History. Oxford: The The The Apocalypse: A Brief History Apocalypse: A Brief History Apocalypse: A Brief History Apocalypse: A Brief History Apocalypse: A Brief History Apocalypse: A Brief History Apocalypse: A Brief History Apocalypse: A Brief History Blackwell, 2010.

Krupp, E.C. “The 2012 Scare.” Sky and Telescope. 118.5 (2009) 22–26. Krupp, E.C. “The 2012 Scare.” Krupp, E.C. “The 2012 Scare.” Sky and Telescope. 118.5 (2009) 22–26. Telescope Telescope . 118.5 (2009) 22–26. . 118.5 (2009) 22–26.

Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. The Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. Landes, Richard Allen, Andrew Gow and David Van Meter, eds. Apocalyptic Year 1000: Religious Expectation and Social Change, 950 to 1000: Religious Expectation and Social Change, 950 to 1000: Religious Expectation and Social Change, 950 to 1000: Religious Expectation and Social Change, 950 to 1000: Religious Expectation and Social Change, 950 to 1050. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.

Shermer, Michael. “The End is Always Nigh.” New Scientist 210.2815 Shermer, Michael. “The End is Always Nigh.” New New Scientist Scientist 210.2815 210.2815 (2011) 30–31.

Stein, Stephen J. “American Millennial Visions: Towards Constructions of a New Architectonic of American Apocalypticism.” Pages 187–233 in Imagining the End: Visions of Apocalypse from the Ancient Middle East to Modern America. Abbas Amanat and Magnus T. Bernhardsson, eds. London: I.B. Tauris & Co., 2002.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

310

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 310 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Charismatic

Leadership

Charismatic leaders are people who, by the use of

emotional connection (charm, manipulation, etc.),

communication style, or relational power are able to

convince others to willingly follow them. Adherents

typically perceive charismatic religious leaders to be

uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others. uniquely imbued with divine power to lead others.

Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of Usually, these religious figures stand outside of

conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically conventional hierarchies and advocate for a radically

different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict different understanding of religion, often creating conflict

with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic with the religious establishment. While charismatic

leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social leadership can be a powerful and positive force for social

change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and change, it can also be manipulative, dangerous, and

abusive.

Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why Scholars have attempted to understand why

charismatic leaders flourish and gain such loyal followers, charismatic leaders flourish and gain such loyal followers, charismatic leaders flourish and gain such loyal followers, charismatic leaders flourish and gain such loyal followers, charismatic leaders flourish and gain such loyal followers, charismatic leaders flourish and gain such loyal followers,

in spite of the potential for manipulation and abuse. in spite of the potential for manipulation and abuse. in spite of the potential for manipulation and abuse. in spite of the potential for manipulation and abuse.

Sociologist Max Weber indicates that charismatic

leadership depends on both the internal qualities of the

leader (“gifts”) as well as the acceptance of the group.

When groups accept charismatic leaders, Weber contends,

followers are willing to completely invest themselves in

another person because of a deep need to overcome the

constraints of their conventional world. Identification

with someone who—through his or her gifts—seems

able to transcend this world is a powerful motivator.

Organizational psychologists who study contemporary

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

311

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 311 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

business leaders note that loyalty often stems from the charismatic leader’s unique ability to encourage high performance and group empowerment, which inspires further devotion and reverence in group members.

Unfortunately, the investment of followers in a charismatic leader can sometimes have disastrous or even deadly consequences. Hitler’s rise to power following the detrimental effects of World War I on Germany is the most widely known example of a charismatic leader playing on the desire of the masses for radical change. The playing on the desire of the masses for radical change. The playing on the desire of the masses for radical change. The damage to Germany at that time, both architecturally damage to Germany at that time, both architecturally damage to Germany at that time, both architecturally damage to Germany at that time, both architecturally damage to Germany at that time, both architecturally (due to continuous bombing and artillery fire) and (due to continuous bombing and artillery fire) and (due to continuous bombing and artillery fire) and (due to continuous bombing and artillery fire) and (due to continuous bombing and artillery fire) and economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of economically (due to reparations forced by the Treaty of Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and Versailles), created a great sense of dissatisfaction and social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political social unrest. In addition, the unstable socio-political climate meant that no solid government remained climate meant that no solid government remained climate meant that no solid government remained climate meant that no solid government remained climate meant that no solid government remained in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This in power for longer than a few weeks at a time. This created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic created an ideal setting for the takeover of a charismatic leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The leader who promised great strength in recovery. The German population was so hungry for relief that Hitler’s German population was so hungry for relief that Hitler’s German population was so hungry for relief that Hitler’s German population was so hungry for relief that Hitler’s scapegoating of the Jews by arguing for their eradication scapegoating of the Jews by arguing for their eradication scapegoating of the Jews by arguing for their eradication scapegoating of the Jews by arguing for their eradication seemed like a reasonable proposition, especially since the Jews had a long history of persecution. The offer of a solution to a seemingly impossible problem caused widespread support of Hitler and his agenda.

Another famous example of this dark side of charisma involves the Reverend Jim Jones and the mass suicide of People’s Temple members at Jonestown. Jones inspired great loyalty in his followers based in part on his personal appeal and communication style, but also because of his ideologies, which promoted racial harmony and a coming

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

312

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 312 1/4/12 11:20 AM
