age of reconciliation (see Maaga). However, Jones inspired

such loyalty and was able to so heavily centralize his

authority over group members that his followers lost any

sense of self apart from the group and Jones himself. This

was especially true once the group was isolated at the

Jonestown, Guyana compound. When Jones claimed that

the group was threatened, many members were willing to

take their own lives at his behest rather than relinquish

their investment in their leader.

However, all sides of charismatic leadership are However, all sides of charismatic leadership are However, all sides of charismatic leadership are

not dark, nor is it only the domain of new religious not dark, nor is it only the domain of new religious not dark, nor is it only the domain of new religious not dark, nor is it only the domain of new religious not dark, nor is it only the domain of new religious

movements. Traditional religions can also point to this movements. Traditional religions can also point to this movements. Traditional religions can also point to this movements. Traditional religions can also point to this movements. Traditional religions can also point to this

influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the influence, even at the time of their origins. In Judaism, the

prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly prophets of the Hebrew Bible were outside of the priestly

class and depended instead on claims to direct divine class and depended instead on claims to direct divine class and depended instead on claims to direct divine class and depended instead on claims to direct divine class and depended instead on claims to direct divine class and depended instead on claims to direct divine class and depended instead on claims to direct divine class and depended instead on claims to direct divine

guidance for their pronouncements (see Jeremiah 1:6–10 guidance for their pronouncements (see Jeremiah 1:6–10 guidance for their pronouncements (see Jeremiah 1:6–10 guidance for their pronouncements (see Jeremiah 1:6–10 guidance for their pronouncements (see Jeremiah 1:6–10

as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul as an example). Similarly, in Christianity, the Apostle Paul

asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples asserted that his authority did not come from the disciples

who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a who had known the historical Jesus, but rather from a

direct encounter with the risen Christ (Gal. 1:15–17). In direct encounter with the risen Christ (Gal. 1:15–17). In direct encounter with the risen Christ (Gal. 1:15–17). In direct encounter with the risen Christ (Gal. 1:15–17). In

Islam, the entire prophetic tradition is based on the belief Islam, the entire prophetic tradition is based on the belief Islam, the entire prophetic tradition is based on the belief Islam, the entire prophetic tradition is based on the belief

that God gave direct revelation to humanity through a

succession of prophets, ending with Muhammad, and

then the continuing survival of Islam depended upon

Muhammad’s persuasive preaching and personality. More

recently, Joseph Smith and his successor Brigham Young

displayed charismatic leadership in the creation and

establishment of Mormonism.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

313

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 313 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Maaga, Mary McCormick. Hearing the Voices of Jonestown. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1998.

Weber, Max. On Charisma and Institution Building. S.N. Eisenstadt, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

314

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 314 1/4/12 11:20 AM
