Jerusalem has religious significance to Christians and

Muslims as well, but for Jewish people the city is most

notable as the site of the first and second temples.

The Temple

Solomon’s Temple

Solomon constructed the temple on Mt. Moriah, north of

the ancient City of David. The temple was built according

to plans that David received from the Lord and passed on to

Solomon (1 Chr. 28:11–13, 19). The division into a sanctu-

ary and inner sanctuary corresponds to the division of the

tabernacle into the holy place and Most Holy Place. tabernacle into the holy place and Most Holy Place. tabernacle into the holy place and Most Holy Place.

Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc.

The first temple, built by King Solomon, stood

for over four hundred years (see “History”). This first

temple was a symbol of Zion, the covenantal belief that

YHWH dwelled uniquely in the temple and protected

the land ruled by an everlasting Davidic monarchy.

The belief in Zion persisted even after the first temple

was destroyed and the Jewish people were exiled by the

Neo-Babylonians. However, the meaning of Zion shifted

to refer to a future reality in which the people would

celebrate the restoration of the Davidic monarchy. The

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

27

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 27 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

second temple, begun under the rule of Persian king Cyrus in approximately 536 BCE and expanded during the Greek and Roman occupations, was eventually destroyed by the Roman army in 70 CE. The remaining western wall of this second temple is a pilgrimage site for Jewish people, as well as for Christians who remember it as the temple which stood at the time of Jesus.

Texts

Over its long history, the Jewish people developed stories, laws, poetry, prophetic utterances, and other oral stories, laws, poetry, prophetic utterances, and other oral stories, laws, poetry, prophetic utterances, and other oral stories, laws, poetry, prophetic utterances, and other oral stories, laws, poetry, prophetic utterances, and other oral traditions. Eventually collected into the Jewish canon, traditions. Eventually collected into the Jewish canon, traditions. Eventually collected into the Jewish canon, traditions. Eventually collected into the Jewish canon, traditions. Eventually collected into the Jewish canon, traditions. Eventually collected into the Jewish canon, traditions. Eventually collected into the Jewish canon, these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A these traditions were preserved primarily in Hebrew. A canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred canon is an authoritative group of writings with sacred significance to a certain community. The Jewish canon is significance to a certain community. The Jewish canon is significance to a certain community. The Jewish canon is significance to a certain community. The Jewish canon is significance to a certain community. The Jewish canon is significance to a certain community. The Jewish canon is significance to a certain community. The Jewish canon is called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s called the Tanakh, which is an acronym for the canon’s three sections: Torah (Law), Nevi’im (Prophets), and three sections: Torah (Law), Nevi’im (Prophets), and three sections: Torah (Law), Nevi’im (Prophets), and three sections: Torah (Law), Nevi’im (Prophets), and three sections: Torah (Law), Nevi’im (Prophets), and three sections: Torah (Law), Nevi’im (Prophets), and three sections: Torah (Law), Nevi’im (Prophets), and Ketuvim (Writings). Ketuvim (Writings).

Torah as Scripture Torah as Scripture Torah as Scripture

The Torah is the first section of the Hebrew Bible, and The Torah is the first section of the Hebrew Bible, and The Torah is the first section of the Hebrew Bible, and The Torah is the first section of the Hebrew Bible, and it contains the books of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy. While “Torah” usually translates as “law,” and while the last three books in the Torah contain large sections of covenantal law given to Moses, not everything in the Torah is legal code. This section of the Hebrew Bible also contains stories of human origins, patriarchs and matriarchs, the liberation of the Hebrew slaves from Egypt, and much more. For Jews, the Torah is central to their faith; it is so important to Jewish identity that over

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

28

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 28 1/4/12 11:19 AM
