the course of a given year, the entire text of the Torah will

be read in the synagogue.

The second section of the Hebrew Bible, called

Nevi’im, contains books that Christians categorize as

historical narratives (Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings)

and prophetic books (Isaiah, Jeremiah, Micah, etc.). The

events in the Nevi’im roughly correspond with the period

during which the Jewish people were “in the land” of

Canaan, first as a confederation of twelve tribes, then

as a united kingdom, and finally as a divided kingdom as a united kingdom, and finally as a divided kingdom as a united kingdom, and finally as a divided kingdom

besieged by foreign powers. However, scholars think besieged by foreign powers. However, scholars think besieged by foreign powers. However, scholars think besieged by foreign powers. However, scholars think besieged by foreign powers. However, scholars think

that the prophetic books were collected and preserved that the prophetic books were collected and preserved that the prophetic books were collected and preserved that the prophetic books were collected and preserved that the prophetic books were collected and preserved

in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably in written form well after the events described, probably

around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and around the time of the Babylonian Exile (see “Origins and

Early History”). Early History”).

The Ketuvim, the final collection of the Tanakh, is The Ketuvim, the final collection of the Tanakh, is The Ketuvim, the final collection of the Tanakh, is The Ketuvim, the final collection of the Tanakh, is The Ketuvim, the final collection of the Tanakh, is

also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim also the most literarily diverse. The books of the Ketuvim

include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature include poetry (Psalms, Song of Songs), wisdom literature

(Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther, (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes), and short stories (Esther,

Ruth), among others. This third category also includes Ruth), among others. This third category also includes Ruth), among others. This third category also includes Ruth), among others. This third category also includes

works which were reclassified in the Christian canon as works which were reclassified in the Christian canon as works which were reclassified in the Christian canon as works which were reclassified in the Christian canon as

historical or prophetic works, such as the Chronicles and

Daniel. Taken with the Torah and Nevi’im, the Ketuvim

completes the collection of the twenty-four books which

comprise Jewish sacred Scripture.

Rituals

As with so many aspects of Judaism, central rituals

and rites of passage are related to significant events

in biblical history. Some rituals are sacred events that

are repeated daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly. Other

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

29

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 29 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

important rites are events which occur only once in a person’s lifetime.

Practices

Daily ritual emphasizes the covenantal relationship with God that is so important to Judaism. Keeping kosher, or distinguishing between clean and unclean foods and behaviors, is based on the Mosaic Law. Daily prayer rituals include recitation of the Shema from the book of Deuteronomy and wearing yarmulkes (head coverings), tefillin (leather pouches containing the Torah), and tallit tefillin (leather pouches containing the Torah), and tallit tefillin (leather pouches containing the Torah), and tallit tefillin (leather pouches containing the Torah), and tallit tefillin (leather pouches containing the Torah), and tallit (square shawls) which are fringed at the corners with (square shawls) which are fringed at the corners with (square shawls) which are fringed at the corners with (square shawls) which are fringed at the corners with (square shawls) which are fringed at the corners with (square shawls) which are fringed at the corners with (square shawls) which are fringed at the corners with tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based tzitzit (see picture). The wearing of these items is based on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and on Torah commandments in Numbers 15:38–40 and Deuteronomy 6:8. While daily prayers can be performed Deuteronomy 6:8. While daily prayers can be performed Deuteronomy 6:8. While daily prayers can be performed Deuteronomy 6:8. While daily prayers can be performed Deuteronomy 6:8. While daily prayers can be performed Deuteronomy 6:8. While daily prayers can be performed Deuteronomy 6:8. While daily prayers can be performed individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue individually, groups will often gather at the synagogue for collective daily prayer. A minyan, or minimum of ten for collective daily prayer. A minyan, or minimum of ten for collective daily prayer. A minyan, or minimum of ten for collective daily prayer. A minyan, or minimum of ten for collective daily prayer. A minyan, or minimum of ten for collective daily prayer. A minyan, or minimum of ten for collective daily prayer. A minyan, or minimum of ten adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary adults (men only in Orthodox synagogues), is necessary for this type of prayer. for this type of prayer.

Holy Days Holy Days

The most important weekly ritual in Judaism is the celebration of the Sabbath, or day of rest. The Sabbath recalls the first Genesis creation story, in which God rested after six days of creating the universe (Gen. 2:3–4). Since that story describes the days of creation as beginning in the evening, the Sabbath begins at nightfall on Friday and lasts until dusk Saturday.

After welcoming the Sabbath Friday evening with a family meal, a blessing, and the lighting of candles, observant Jews devote themselves to prayer and worship,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

30

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 30 1/4/12 11:19 AM
