and refrain from work, in accordance with another Torah

commandment (Ex. 20:8–10). The definition of what

constitutes “work” varies, however. For some people,

refraining from work means spending time with family

and engaging in Torah study while still enjoying modern

conveniences; others define work strictly, and they abstain

from using appliances, driving, cooking, and even pushing

elevator buttons. One’s understanding of what constitutes

work, as well as when Sabbath worship is held, is most

often related to the group within Judaism to which one often related to the group within Judaism to which one often related to the group within Judaism to which one

belongs (see “Groups”).

Most yearly rituals are related to biblical mandates Most yearly rituals are related to biblical mandates Most yearly rituals are related to biblical mandates Most yearly rituals are related to biblical mandates Most yearly rituals are related to biblical mandates

as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with as well. The Jewish religious year begins in the fall, with

the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the the celebration of Rosh Hashanah (meaning “Head of the

Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Year”). In the Bible, Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of

Blowing Horns (Lev. 23:24; Num. 29:1). In a modern-Blowing Horns (Lev. 23:24; Num. 29:1). In a modern-Blowing Horns (Lev. 23:24; Num. 29:1). In a modern-Blowing Horns (Lev. 23:24; Num. 29:1). In a modern-Blowing Horns (Lev. 23:24; Num. 29:1). In a modern-

day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still day synagogue service, the shofar (ram’s horn) is still

blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the blown to call the people to a time of reflection upon the

misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation, misdeeds of the previous year. Ten days of contemplation,

reflection, and repentance follow Rosh Hashanah, leading reflection, and repentance follow Rosh Hashanah, leading reflection, and repentance follow Rosh Hashanah, leading reflection, and repentance follow Rosh Hashanah, leading

to Yom Kippur (the Day of Atonement). Yom Kippur to Yom Kippur (the Day of Atonement). Yom Kippur to Yom Kippur (the Day of Atonement). Yom Kippur to Yom Kippur (the Day of Atonement). Yom Kippur

is also described in the Torah as a day to “afflict your

souls” (Lev. 16:29). Yom Kippur services last throughout

the day, and activities include reading the book of Jonah

and praying for forgiveness and reconciliation with God.

People often fast for the entire day, from sunset to sunset,

even refraining from drinking water, as a sign of their

repentance. Together, these two days constitute the Days

of Awe, the most important holy days of the religious year.

Passover, another yearly ritual, is celebrated in the

spring. This day remembers the exodus from Egypt (see

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

31

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 31 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

“History”). While the Days of Awe emphasize synagogue worship, Passover is more family-oriented and focuses on a seder meal at the home. Over the course of the meal, the events of Exodus are recounted both verbally and through the food. The seder plate (see picture), a central feature at the dinner, traditionally includes a lamb shank, representing the lamb’s blood painted on the doorframes of Hebrew houses on the night of the first Passover; an egg, symbolizing new life; bitter herbs, commemorating the bitterness of Egyptian slavery; charoset, an apple, the bitterness of Egyptian slavery; charoset, an apple, the bitterness of Egyptian slavery; charoset, an apple, and cinnamon chutney, representing the mortar used for and cinnamon chutney, representing the mortar used for and cinnamon chutney, representing the mortar used for and cinnamon chutney, representing the mortar used for and cinnamon chutney, representing the mortar used for building while the Hebrews were enslaved; and a green building while the Hebrews were enslaved; and a green building while the Hebrews were enslaved; and a green building while the Hebrews were enslaved; and a green building while the Hebrews were enslaved; and a green vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering vegetable like parsley dipped in salt water, remembering the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional the tears of the enslaved. Along with these traditional foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of foods, the story of the liberation is retold in the form of questions and answers, with a young child inquiring of the questions and answers, with a young child inquiring of the questions and answers, with a young child inquiring of the questions and answers, with a young child inquiring of the questions and answers, with a young child inquiring of the adults what makes the Passover night “different from all adults what makes the Passover night “different from all adults what makes the Passover night “different from all adults what makes the Passover night “different from all adults what makes the Passover night “different from all adults what makes the Passover night “different from all adults what makes the Passover night “different from all other nights.”

While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major While these three holy days constitute the major celebrations of the Jewish year, non-Jews (especially celebrations of the Jewish year, non-Jews (especially celebrations of the Jewish year, non-Jews (especially celebrations of the Jewish year, non-Jews (especially in the United States) are probably most familiar with in the United States) are probably most familiar with in the United States) are probably most familiar with in the United States) are probably most familiar with Hanukah, the winter festival of lights. It is important for non-Jews to recognize that Hanukah is not a Jewish version of Christmas, although the two holidays often occur at the same time of year. Instead, Hanukah is a holiday of political and religious liberation, recalling a story in the books of the Maccabees about a rebellion under Greek rule in 164 BCE (see “Post-Biblical Judaism”). The Maccabees are important Jewish historical writings that are not in the Tanakh, but which do appear in the Christian Apocrypha. When the Greek army desecrated

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

32

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 32 1/4/12 11:19 AM

G44 - Expansion of Palestine

Under Maccabee (166-76 B.C.) Judaism

Expansion of Palestine Under the Maccabees

Sidon

Damascus

Tyre Panias N

Mediterranean

Sea

Ptolemais

Sea of

Galilee Expanded

Border

Scythopolis Borders of Pella Judea Prior

to Maccabean

er Revolt iv

Joppa Samaria R an rd Jo

Bethel Philadelphia

Jericho

Jerusalem Medeba

Ascalon

Dead Machaerus Dead

Gaza Hebron Sea

Masada 0 0 40 Mi. 40 Km.

Beersheba

© Thomas Nelson, Inc.

the second temple by making unclean offerings to Zeus,

a group of faithful Jews retook the temple and protected

it long enough to rededicate it to God. In fact, the word

Hanukah means “rededication.”

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

33

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 33 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

To make the temple a sacred place again, the Maccabean revolutionaries needed to keep the menorah, a candle stand, lit for eight days; unfortunately, there was only enough oil for one day. However, the oil miraculously lasted eight days, allowing the Jewish revolutionaries to finally reclaim the temple. From this story, the celebration of Hanukah developed to include the lighting of candles each night. Children also play a game with dreidels, spinning tops with the Hebrew letters nun, gadol, he, and shin to represent the sentence “A Great Thing Happened to represent the sentence “A Great Thing Happened to represent the sentence “A Great Thing Happened There [the Temple]” in Hebrew. Children spin the dreidel There [the Temple]” in Hebrew. Children spin the dreidel There [the Temple]” in Hebrew. Children spin the dreidel There [the Temple]” in Hebrew. Children spin the dreidel There [the Temple]” in Hebrew. Children spin the dreidel and collect or give gelt (coins, often chocolate covered and collect or give gelt (coins, often chocolate covered and collect or give gelt (coins, often chocolate covered and collect or give gelt (coins, often chocolate covered and collect or give gelt (coins, often chocolate covered in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the in gold foil) based on the letter that comes up when the dreidel stops spinning. dreidel stops spinning. dreidel stops spinning.

Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout Many other minor holidays are celebrated throughout the religious year, and most of them also draw on key the religious year, and most of them also draw on key the religious year, and most of them also draw on key the religious year, and most of them also draw on key the religious year, and most of them also draw on key events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In events in the Bible and throughout Jewish history. In the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the the fall, after the Days of Awe, people remember the wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching wandering of the Hebrews in the wilderness by pitching tabernacles or booths outside their homes and synagogues. tabernacles or booths outside their homes and synagogues. tabernacles or booths outside their homes and synagogues. tabernacles or booths outside their homes and synagogues. This festival is called Sukkoth (meaning “booths”) and This festival is called Sukkoth (meaning “booths”) and This festival is called Sukkoth (meaning “booths”) and This festival is called Sukkoth (meaning “booths”) and many families hold evening meals or prayers in their sukkahs. In the spring, Jewish people retell the story of Esther with costumes and revelry at the Purim festival and recall YHWH giving the Torah to Moses at Shavu’ot.

Rites

Whereas a Jewish person might celebrate holy days many times, other rituals are performed only once to mark transitions from one stage of life to the next. These events are called rites of passage, and they begin for

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

34

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 34 1/4/12 11:19 AM
