the Jewish person shortly after birth. Eight days after a

baby boy is born, Jewish families will hold a bris milah,

or covenant of circumcision. A specially trained person

called a mohel performs the bris, either in a synagogue or

in the family’s home. In some Jewish families, a naming

ceremony for girls, called Simchat Bat or Brit Bat, is also

performed within the first month of the baby’s life.

When a child grows to an appropriate age to take on

the religious obligations of the Torah for himself or herself,

a second rite of passage occurs: the Bar or Bat Mitzvah. a second rite of passage occurs: the Bar or Bat Mitzvah. a second rite of passage occurs: the Bar or Bat Mitzvah.

The word mitzvah means commandment, and in this means commandment, and in this means commandment, and in this means commandment, and in this means commandment, and in this

coming-of-age rite a youth (usually about 13 years old) is coming-of-age rite a youth (usually about 13 years old) is coming-of-age rite a youth (usually about 13 years old) is coming-of-age rite a youth (usually about 13 years old) is coming-of-age rite a youth (usually about 13 years old) is

declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah. declared responsible for the commandments of the Torah.

In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew In most bar or bat mitzvot, the youth will read in Hebrew

a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with a portion of the Torah which she or he has prepared with

the help of the synagogue’s rabbi and cantor. The cantor the help of the synagogue’s rabbi and cantor. The cantor the help of the synagogue’s rabbi and cantor. The cantor the help of the synagogue’s rabbi and cantor. The cantor the help of the synagogue’s rabbi and cantor. The cantor

is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue is the person who sings the Scriptures in a synagogue

service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated service. Historically, only young men have participated

in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and in a bar mitzvah (meaning “son of the covenant”), and

this remains true in Orthodox Jewish communities (see this remains true in Orthodox Jewish communities (see this remains true in Orthodox Jewish communities (see this remains true in Orthodox Jewish communities (see

“Groups”). However, some Jewish communities have “Groups”). However, some Jewish communities have “Groups”). However, some Jewish communities have “Groups”). However, some Jewish communities have

begun to celebrate a similar rite for young women (the bat

mitzvah, or “daughter of the covenant”).

Marriage is also a rite of passage in Judaism. In

the marriage rite, the couple is often married under a

chuppah, or canopy, which represents the new home the

couple will share and recalls the story of Rebecca and

Isaac, in which a couple was married when he took her

into his mother’s tent (Gen. 24:67). The ceremony includes

an exchange of vows and rings, as in many other religious

traditions, but also includes signing a ketubah (marriage

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

35

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 35 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

G41 - Alexander's Greek Empire

Alexander’s Greek Empire

(Daniel 2, 7, 8, 11)

Sardis

A L E X A N D E R ' S E M P I R E

Tarsus Carchemish

Issus Nineveh

CYPRUS

Ecbatana

Sidon Damascus Tyre

Samaria Babylon Susa

Alexandria Jerusalem

Ur

Pelusium

Memphis

A R A B I A

EGYPT N

0 200 Mi. 0 200 Km.

© Thomas Nelson, Inc.

contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of contract) and stomping on a glass at the conclusion of the service. This last tradition is of disputed origin, but the service. This last tradition is of disputed origin, but the service. This last tradition is of disputed origin, but the service. This last tradition is of disputed origin, but the service. This last tradition is of disputed origin, but some people believe that the shattered glass is to remind some people believe that the shattered glass is to remind some people believe that the shattered glass is to remind some people believe that the shattered glass is to remind the assembly that, even while great joy is celebrated, the temple is still in ruins.

The solemnity of death is also marked by several traditional Jewish practices. When a member of the community dies, family members will sit shiva for seven days, receiving guests and remembering the life of the departed. A family member sitting shiva will cover all mirrors to avoid vanity while focusing on the life of the deceased, wear no shoes, sit on low stools, and tear at the edges or pockets of her or his clothes. This last practice

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

36

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 36 1/4/12 11:19 AM
