is in keeping with the biblical tradition of tearing, or

rending, one’s garments when mourning.

Post-Biblical Judaism

Judaism’s biblical history ends with the building of the

second temple because that is the latest historical event

mentioned in the Jewish Scripture. This temple became

a central theme in the next five hundred years of post-

biblical Judaism, spanning the Persian, Greek, and Roman

conquests of Palestine. The refurbished temple became a

source of conflict for both Greece and Rome, leading to source of conflict for both Greece and Rome, leading to source of conflict for both Greece and Rome, leading to source of conflict for both Greece and Rome, leading to source of conflict for both Greece and Rome, leading to

rebellion and, ultimately, to destruction. rebellion and, ultimately, to destruction. rebellion and, ultimately, to destruction. rebellion and, ultimately, to destruction. rebellion and, ultimately, to destruction. rebellion and, ultimately, to destruction. rebellion and, ultimately, to destruction.

In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the In the middle of the third century BCE, Alexander the

Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside, Great extended Greek rule over the Judean countryside,

which resulted in the spreading of Greek culture and which resulted in the spreading of Greek culture and which resulted in the spreading of Greek culture and which resulted in the spreading of Greek culture and which resulted in the spreading of Greek culture and which resulted in the spreading of Greek culture and which resulted in the spreading of Greek culture and

values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered, values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered, values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered, values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered, values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered, values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered, values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered, values (called Hellenism) to the lands he conquered,

including Judea. Hellenistic values were not well received including Judea. Hellenistic values were not well received including Judea. Hellenistic values were not well received including Judea. Hellenistic values were not well received including Judea. Hellenistic values were not well received including Judea. Hellenistic values were not well received including Judea. Hellenistic values were not well received

by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see by many Jews, as they conflicted with monotheism (see

“Beliefs”). In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea . In the 100s BCE, local Greek leaders in Judea

were adamant that the Jewish people must submit to were adamant that the Jewish people must submit to were adamant that the Jewish people must submit to were adamant that the Jewish people must submit to

Hellenistic values; this included remaining uncircumcised, Hellenistic values; this included remaining uncircumcised, Hellenistic values; this included remaining uncircumcised, Hellenistic values; this included remaining uncircumcised,

eating unclean foods in violation of kosher laws, and

worshipping Greek gods. According to the Maccabees,

the second century Greek leader Antiochus IV demanded

that the Jews call him Epiphanes (“God made manifest”)

and instructed his army to sacrifice a pig to Zeus in the

holiest part of the Jewish Temple. Such a desecration was

horrifying to many Jews, who rebelled and took back the

temple to try to make it holy again. These events formed

the foundation for the miraculous rededication of the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

37

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 37 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

temple commemorated during Hanukkah (see “Practices and Holy Days”).

The cleansing of the temple marked the beginning of a brief period of independence, called the Hasmonean Period. During this time, the Maccabean family who led the revolt against Hellenism established a priesthood at the temple and became an authority. This period lasted until the Hasmoneans allied themselves with Rome, eventually falling again under foreign occupation by 63 BCE.

Under Roman rule, the official policy toward Judaism Under Roman rule, the official policy toward Judaism Under Roman rule, the official policy toward Judaism Under Roman rule, the official policy toward Judaism Under Roman rule, the official policy toward Judaism was one of tolerance because of Judaism’s status as was one of tolerance because of Judaism’s status as was one of tolerance because of Judaism’s status as was one of tolerance because of Judaism’s status as was one of tolerance because of Judaism’s status as an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often an ancient religion. However, in practice Rome often persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their persecuted the Jewish people for sedition and their failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish failure to worship the emperor. Unsurprisingly, Jewish people began to articulate a belief in a Messiah who people began to articulate a belief in a Messiah who people began to articulate a belief in a Messiah who people began to articulate a belief in a Messiah who people began to articulate a belief in a Messiah who would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word would liberate them from Roman oppression. The word messiah is from the Hebrew word mashiakh, which means is from the Hebrew word mashiakh is from the Hebrew word is from the Hebrew word mashiakh mashiakh mashiakh mashiakh mashiakh , which means “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to “anointed one.” This messianic hope reflected a desire to return to the anointed, chosen rule of the Davidic line. return to the anointed, chosen rule of the Davidic line. return to the anointed, chosen rule of the Davidic line. return to the anointed, chosen rule of the Davidic line. Messianism became closely tied to apocalypticism, or the Messianism became closely tied to apocalypticism, or the Messianism became closely tied to apocalypticism, or the Messianism became closely tied to apocalypticism, or the belief that a world controlled by evil would be overcome by good and be made new under the rule of God’s chosen Messiah. Some Jewish people saw themselves as living in this apocalyptic time, and sought to overturn Roman rule violently. In response to numerous rebellions between 60 BCE and 60 CE, the Roman army laid siege to Jerusalem and destroyed the second temple in 70 CE.

The temple was not rebuilt, and shortly after its destruction, the Romans dispersed the Jewish people from their homeland. During this period of diaspora,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

38

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 38 1/4/12 11:19 AM
