Jews settled into communities in Europe, Asia, and

North Africa. In the places, people reimagined Judaism.

Previously, Judaism had emphasized certain beliefs and

practices related to the temple, as outlined in the Torah.

For example, Jews commonly made pilgrimage to the

temple and performed sacrifices with the assistance of

temple priests, with reverence for the presence of God

within the Holy of Holies inside the temple. However,

after 70 CE, Judaism needed to adapt to a world without

the Jerusalem temple. Synagogues, or gathering spaces for the Jerusalem temple. Synagogues, or gathering spaces for the Jerusalem temple. Synagogues, or gathering spaces for

worship and prayer, became more important. The Torah worship and prayer, became more important. The Torah worship and prayer, became more important. The Torah worship and prayer, became more important. The Torah worship and prayer, became more important. The Torah

took on a more central place, and interpreters of the took on a more central place, and interpreters of the took on a more central place, and interpreters of the took on a more central place, and interpreters of the took on a more central place, and interpreters of the

Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called Torah were given greater authority. These teachers, called

rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple rabbis, became the key leaders of post-Second Temple

Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the Judaism, so the diaspora period is often also called the

beginning of rabbinic Judaism. beginning of rabbinic Judaism. beginning of rabbinic Judaism. beginning of rabbinic Judaism. beginning of rabbinic Judaism.

During this period, rabbis made two key During this period, rabbis made two key During this period, rabbis made two key During this period, rabbis made two key During this period, rabbis made two key During this period, rabbis made two key During this period, rabbis made two key During this period, rabbis made two key

contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization contributions to modern Judaism: the final canonization

of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of of the Tanakh (see “Texts”), and the development of

Torah interpretations known as Mishnah and Talmud Torah interpretations known as Mishnah and Talmud Torah interpretations known as Mishnah and Talmud Torah interpretations known as Mishnah and Talmud

over several subsequent centuries. These interpretations over several subsequent centuries. These interpretations over several subsequent centuries. These interpretations over several subsequent centuries. These interpretations

helped Judaism continue to thrive in the diaspora

because they made the Scripture relevant to believers,

regardless of where or when they might live. The rabbis

helped diaspora Jews know how to observe the Sabbath

rest. They answered people’s questions about why God

demanded Abraham’s sacrifice of Isaac.

Two other religious traditions developed from

Judaism’s sacred text and belief in monotheism.

Christianity grew from a sect of Judaism that

believed Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah. After the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

39

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 39 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

destruction of the temple, these two groups began a process of separating from each other with Christianity emphasizing the inclusion of Gentiles (non-Jewish people) and developing their own Scripture (the Christian New Testament). As Christianity grew in prominence and became the official religion of the Roman Empire, many Christians began to regard the Jewish people as heretics based on a faulty interpretation of the Christian Gospel of Matthew. Christians commonly attacked their Jewish neighbors in pogroms, fueled by a belief in false rumors neighbors in pogroms, fueled by a belief in false rumors neighbors in pogroms, fueled by a belief in false rumors that Jewish people murdered Christians or caused the that Jewish people murdered Christians or caused the that Jewish people murdered Christians or caused the that Jewish people murdered Christians or caused the that Jewish people murdered Christians or caused the Black Plague. Many Jewish people were deported from Black Plague. Many Jewish people were deported from Black Plague. Many Jewish people were deported from Black Plague. Many Jewish people were deported from Black Plague. Many Jewish people were deported from Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small Christian-controlled lands, or forced to live in small communities called ghettos. communities called ghettos. communities called ghettos. communities called ghettos.

Islam is another religion that recognizes the same Islam is another religion that recognizes the same Islam is another religion that recognizes the same Islam is another religion that recognizes the same Islam is another religion that recognizes the same Islam is another religion that recognizes the same Islam is another religion that recognizes the same Islam is another religion that recognizes the same God and prophets as Judaism, and Islam draws many of God and prophets as Judaism, and Islam draws many of God and prophets as Judaism, and Islam draws many of God and prophets as Judaism, and Islam draws many of God and prophets as Judaism, and Islam draws many of God and prophets as Judaism, and Islam draws many of its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical its traditions from Jewish and Christian non-canonical traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread traditions that circulated in Arabia. As Islam spread from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, from the Middle East into Europe and North Africa, it, too, had an impact on diaspora Judaism. In general, it, too, had an impact on diaspora Judaism. In general, it, too, had an impact on diaspora Judaism. In general, it, too, had an impact on diaspora Judaism. In general, the interaction between Judaism and Islam was more the interaction between Judaism and Islam was more the interaction between Judaism and Islam was more the interaction between Judaism and Islam was more peaceful than that of Judaism and Christianity. In Spain, for example, Muslims ruled with toleration over the Jewish population for nearly 700 years beginning in 711 CE. Peaceful coexistence ended with the rise of Christian rule and subsequent expulsion or forced conversion of Muslims.

As Judaism moved into the modern era, Jewish leaders began to question how best to encounter the modern world. Some, like Moses Mendelssohn (1729–86), asked Jews to embrace modernity and become active

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

40

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 40 1/4/12 11:19 AM
