participants in the philosophy, scholarship, science, and

cultural activities of Europeans. In so doing, he believed

the Jewish people would avoid being left behind or

further segregated from their Christian neighbors. Others

disagreed, however, calling Jews to maintain traditional

interpretations of biblical commands and to resist

integrating into Gentile society. Samson Raphael Hirsch

(1808–88) was one such traditionalist. From these two

very different views came two different sects: Reform and

(neo) Orthodox Judaism (see “Groups”). (neo) Orthodox Judaism (see “Groups”). (neo) Orthodox Judaism (see “Groups”).

However they decided to approach modernity, Jewish However they decided to approach modernity, Jewish However they decided to approach modernity, Jewish However they decided to approach modernity, Jewish However they decided to approach modernity, Jewish

people still found relationships with their neighbors people still found relationships with their neighbors people still found relationships with their neighbors people still found relationships with their neighbors people still found relationships with their neighbors

in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful. in Europe difficult and bitter, if not outright hateful.

The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War The Holocaust under Hitler’s regime during World War

II is the best-known example of anti-Semitism (anti-II is the best-known example of anti-Semitism II is the best-known example of II is the best-known example of II is the best-known example of anti-Semitism anti-Semitism anti-Semitism anti-Semitism

Jewish sentiment and actions) during the twentieth Jewish sentiment and actions) during the twentieth Jewish sentiment and actions) during the twentieth Jewish sentiment and actions) during the twentieth Jewish sentiment and actions) during the twentieth

century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews century. However, even before the Holocaust, Jews

throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing throughout Europe were being herded into ghettos, facing

accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to accusations that they carried disease or conspired to

destroy Christian communities. Additionally, European destroy Christian communities. Additionally, European destroy Christian communities. Additionally, European destroy Christian communities. Additionally, European

Christians continued to brand Jews as heretics and Christians continued to brand Jews as heretics and Christians continued to brand Jews as heretics and Christians continued to brand Jews as heretics and

Christ-killers. Jews suffered economically and lacked

political redress in most European nations. Thus,

the Holocaust might be seen as the culmination of a

centuries-long hatred—the worst example among many.

Still, the Holocaust, in which millions of Jews were

murdered by the Nazi regime, was a wake-up call for

Europeans and Americans who failed to act on their

behalf. From this horrific event came a collective will

on the part of the Western world to protect the Jewish

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

41

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 41 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

people from future atrocities, and the result was the creation of the modern state of Israel.

As previously noted, the Jewish people had been forcibly removed from Palestine under Roman rule, and had moved into the wider Mediterranean world. However, as persecution in Europe grew, many Jews called for a return to this homeland, and the reestablishment of a Jewish state there. Theodor Herzl (1860–1904) was among the first to publicly promote Zionism, a movement supporting the organization of an Zionism, a movement supporting the organization of an Zionism, a movement supporting the organization of an independent Jewish homeland centered on Jerusalem. independent Jewish homeland centered on Jerusalem. independent Jewish homeland centered on Jerusalem. independent Jewish homeland centered on Jerusalem. independent Jewish homeland centered on Jerusalem. After World War II, and the horrors of the Holocaust, After World War II, and the horrors of the Holocaust, After World War II, and the horrors of the Holocaust, After World War II, and the horrors of the Holocaust, After World War II, and the horrors of the Holocaust, international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right international sentiment was such that the time was right to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over to realize Herzl’s dream. In 1948, England turned over its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations its Palestinian protectorate, and the United Nations declared it the modern State of Israel. declared it the modern State of Israel. declared it the modern State of Israel. declared it the modern State of Israel. declared it the modern State of Israel.

Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited Of course, this piece of property was not uninhabited at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. at the time of its new designation by the United Nations. Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century Christians had been living there since the first century CE, and Muslims since the seventh century; both claimed CE, and Muslims since the seventh century; both claimed CE, and Muslims since the seventh century; both claimed CE, and Muslims since the seventh century; both claimed Jerusalem as a holy city, as did the Jews. By turning the Jerusalem as a holy city, as did the Jews. By turning the Jerusalem as a holy city, as did the Jews. By turning the Jerusalem as a holy city, as did the Jews. By turning the lands over to the new Israel, many Christian and Muslim Palestinians were displaced and forced to seek refuge in camps or in adjoining countries. As a result, conflict has continued over the existence of Israel, the control of Jerusalem, and the rights of the Muslim and Christian refugees still living in camps.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

42

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 42 1/4/12 11:19 AM
