D E M O G R A P H I C S

Groups

As Judaism developed over many centuries, multiple

ways of practicing the religion also developed. We

have already seen how the Jewish faith adapted to the

destruction of the two temples, the needs of the diaspora,

persecution in Europe, immigration, and the development

of the state of Israel. These adaptations sometimes also

resulted in formal divisions or the creation of separate

sects—smaller groups with unique beliefs or practices. sects—smaller groups with unique beliefs or practices. sects—smaller groups with unique beliefs or practices. sects—smaller groups with unique beliefs or practices. sects—smaller groups with unique beliefs or practices.

While it would be very difficult to describe all the While it would be very difficult to describe all the While it would be very difficult to describe all the While it would be very difficult to describe all the While it would be very difficult to describe all the While it would be very difficult to describe all the While it would be very difficult to describe all the

diversity that currently exists in Judaism, below are four diversity that currently exists in Judaism, below are four diversity that currently exists in Judaism, below are four diversity that currently exists in Judaism, below are four diversity that currently exists in Judaism, below are four diversity that currently exists in Judaism, below are four diversity that currently exists in Judaism, below are four

of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of of the largest groups, along with brief descriptions of

what makes each unique. what makes each unique. what makes each unique. what makes each unique.

Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest Orthodox Judaism claims to have the longest

continuous history out of all the Jewish groups, drawing continuous history out of all the Jewish groups, drawing continuous history out of all the Jewish groups, drawing continuous history out of all the Jewish groups, drawing continuous history out of all the Jewish groups, drawing continuous history out of all the Jewish groups, drawing continuous history out of all the Jewish groups, drawing

upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed upon the Torah and the rabbinic Judaism that developed

after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox after the destruction of the second temple. Orthodox

Jews practice strict interpretation of the Torah, keeping Jews practice strict interpretation of the Torah, keeping Jews practice strict interpretation of the Torah, keeping Jews practice strict interpretation of the Torah, keeping

its commandments as literally as possible. For example, its commandments as literally as possible. For example, its commandments as literally as possible. For example, its commandments as literally as possible. For example,

the directives to keep kosher and to rest on the Sabbath

are held reverently. In the synagogue, men and women sit

separately to avoid distraction during prayer, and women

are not allowed to be rabbis. Sabbath worship is held on

Saturday, and the service is entirely in Hebrew.

Smaller groups exist within Orthodox Judaism.

Hasidism, a form of Ultra-Orthodox belief, developed in

the 1800s in Europe under the guidance of Baal Shem

Tov (a title, meaning “master of the good name”) who

insisted that Judaism look inward. Strict observance of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

43

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 43 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

the law, he believed, remained a central feature of Jewish life, but a mystical emphasis—focused on loving God with the whole heart and responding joyfully to that love—was also important. Thus, Hasidic Judaism today is deeply committed to Orthodox practice, while at the same time is devoted to a deep personal communion with God. Many Hasidic Jews have moved to the modern state of Israel as a reflection of their belief that the Messiah will one day arrive to claim the city of Jerusalem and establish a new temple there.

Reform Judaism developed out of the European Reform Judaism developed out of the European Reform Judaism developed out of the European Reform Judaism developed out of the European Reform Judaism developed out of the European Enlightenment. Confronted with the challenges of Enlightenment. Confronted with the challenges of Enlightenment. Confronted with the challenges of Enlightenment. Confronted with the challenges of Enlightenment. Confronted with the challenges of modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims modernity, many Jews came to believe that the claims of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer of the Hebrew Bible and Talmud could no longer be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously be sustained. Moses Mendelssohn most famously articulated these beliefs, calling for reform among the articulated these beliefs, calling for reform among the articulated these beliefs, calling for reform among the articulated these beliefs, calling for reform among the articulated these beliefs, calling for reform among the Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Jews of Europe in order to better integrate with their Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have Christian neighbors. Since that time, Reform Jews have continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, continued this tradition of integration and change, and many of these changes are evident in worship. For and many of these changes are evident in worship. For and many of these changes are evident in worship. For and many of these changes are evident in worship. For example, synagogues in the Reform tradition use almost example, synagogues in the Reform tradition use almost example, synagogues in the Reform tradition use almost example, synagogues in the Reform tradition use almost no Hebrew in worship, choosing instead the vernacular, the common language of the surrounding community. Worship is held Friday evening, and men and women sit together, unlike in Orthodox worship. The Reform tradition in the United States was also the first Jewish community in America to ordain women in 1972. In terms of ritual practice, Reform Jews generally do not keep kosher, do permit certain work on the Sabbath, and do not look for a coming political Messiah or the rebuilding of the temple in Jerusalem. The Reform

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

44

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 44 1/4/12 11:19 AM
