tradition contains the largest group of Jews in Europe

and the United States.

Some Jews in the United States, however, believed

Reform Judaism changed too much from Orthodox

tradition, while at the same time recognizing that many

older beliefs and practices were limiting in the modern

world. These Jews, under the leadership of Sabato Morais,

developed the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York

City, and this seminary has been the center for a third

movement, Conservative Judaism. Conservative Jews seek movement, Conservative Judaism. Conservative Jews seek

a middle ground between the perceived extremes of both a middle ground between the perceived extremes of both a middle ground between the perceived extremes of both a middle ground between the perceived extremes of both a middle ground between the perceived extremes of both

Orthodox and Reform groups, stating that biblical law is Orthodox and Reform groups, stating that biblical law is Orthodox and Reform groups, stating that biblical law is Orthodox and Reform groups, stating that biblical law is Orthodox and Reform groups, stating that biblical law is

both eternal and changeable. both eternal and changeable. both eternal and changeable. both eternal and changeable. both eternal and changeable. both eternal and changeable.

A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called A more recent development is a fourth group called

Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the Reconstructionist Judaism, begun in the 1920s in the

United States under the leadership of Rabbi Mordecai United States under the leadership of Rabbi Mordecai United States under the leadership of Rabbi Mordecai United States under the leadership of Rabbi Mordecai United States under the leadership of Rabbi Mordecai United States under the leadership of Rabbi Mordecai

Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks Kaplan. The Reconstructionist Jewish community seeks

to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of to reclaim and emphasize the cultural contributions of

Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition Jewish people. Kaplan famously stated that tradition

(like Torah or rabbinic interpretation) has “a vote but (like Torah or rabbinic interpretation) has “a vote but (like Torah or rabbinic interpretation) has “a vote but (like Torah or rabbinic interpretation) has “a vote but

not a veto.” Thus, while recognizing the Torah and not a veto.” Thus, while recognizing the Torah and not a veto.” Thus, while recognizing the Torah and not a veto.” Thus, while recognizing the Torah and

its important historical influence on Jewish culture, a

Reconstructionist does not feel obligated to keep its

commands. Instead, Reconstructionism emphasizes the

importance of the community and of sharing in the

inherited culture of the Jewish people.

U N D E R S T A N D I N G J U D A I S M

A profound sense of history, above all, gives Jewish people

their identity and belief system. The main text of Judaism,

the Tanakh, retells the very oldest histories of the people,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

45

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 45 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

and connects to that history current beliefs and practices. Throughout its history, the Jewish faith has encountered many challenges and difficulties, and over time has changed from a temple-focused religion to a rabbinic religion. In the modern era, the experience of persecution and the Holocaust has given rise to a renewed emphasis on the importance of the land of Israel. Certainly, the past has made Judaism what it is today.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Finkelstein, Israel and Amihai Mazar. The Quest for the Historical The The Quest Quest Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel. Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007. Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007. Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007. Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007. Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007. Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007. Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007. Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2007.

The Jewish Bible: Tanakh: The Holy Scriptures. Philadelphia: Jewish Bible: Tanakh: The Holy Scriptures Bible: Tanakh: The Holy Scriptures Bible: Tanakh: The Holy Scriptures Bible: Tanakh: The Holy Scriptures Bible: Tanakh: The Holy Scriptures Bible: Tanakh: The Holy Scriptures . Philadelphia: Jewish . Philadelphia: Jewish . Philadelphia: Jewish . Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2003. Publication Society, 2003.

Kaplan, Mordecai. Judaism as a Civilization: Toward a Reconstruction of Judaism as a Civilization: Toward a Reconstruction of a Civilization: Toward a Reconstruction of Civilization: Toward a Reconstruction of Civilization: Toward a Reconstruction of American-Jewish Life. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2010. . Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2010. . Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2010. . Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2010. . Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2010. . Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2010. . Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 2010.

Lundquist, John M. The Temple of Jerusalem: Past, Present, and Future. The Temple of Jerusalem: Past, Present, and Future Jerusalem: Past, Present, and Future Jerusalem: Past, Present, and Future Jerusalem: Past, Present, and Future Jerusalem: Past, Present, and Future Jerusalem: Past, Present, and Future Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing, 2008. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing, 2008. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing, 2008.

Neusner, Jacob. A Short History of Judaism: Three Meals, Three Epochs. A Short History of Judaism: Three Meals, Three Epochs History of Judaism: Three Meals, Three Epochs Judaism: Three Meals, Three Epochs Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 1992. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 1992. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 1992.

Shermer, Michael and Alex Gobman. Denying History: Who Says the Holocaust Never Happened and Why Do They Say It? Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2000.

Strassfeld, Michael, et al. The Jewish Holidays: A Guide and Commentary. New York: Harper and Row, 1985.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

46

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 46 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 47 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Clergyman

holding Eucharist holding Eucharist holding Eucharist

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 48 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Christianity

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Christianity developed out of Judaism, and the two

traditions continue to share much in common. However,

over Christianity’s 2,000-year history, Christians have

established many new beliefs, practices, scriptures,

and traditions. Today, while there are some common

ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked ideals which unite the tradition, Christianity is marked

much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter much more by diversity than uniformity. This chapter

will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and will address the rich diversity of Christian beliefs and

practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this practices, where they originated, and what impact this

diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today. diversity has on believers today.

H I S T O R Y

Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control Judea under Roman Control The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was The Roman Empire at the time of Jesus’s birth was

vast and exceedingly powerful. Rome controlled the vast and exceedingly powerful. Rome controlled the vast and exceedingly powerful. Rome controlled the vast and exceedingly powerful. Rome controlled the vast and exceedingly powerful. Rome controlled the

territories surrounding the Mediterranean, extending territories surrounding the Mediterranean, extending territories surrounding the Mediterranean, extending territories surrounding the Mediterranean, extending

into Africa, Europe, and the Middle East. Among the

protectorates of the Empire was a small strip of land

along the easternmost edge of the sea; this land, which

was called Judea, was historically important to the Jewish

people as it housed their holy temple in the capital

city of Jerusalem. Rome ruled over this protectorate as

it did most of the rest of its empire; obedience to the

emperor was expected, and acts of rebellion were severely

punished.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

49

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 49 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

The Jewish people living in Judea struggled with Roman demands for obedience. In Rome, civic duty was equated with religious reverence toward the emperor. Because Jews were strict monotheists, worshipping the emperor or using coins bearing his picture were forms of idolatry. Furthermore, Roman control over Jerusalem interfered with a scriptural covenant stating that a king from David’s line would someday reign there. For this reason, the Jewish people imagined a coming day in which Roman rule would end, and an anointed messiah-king Roman rule would end, and an anointed messiah-king Roman rule would end, and an anointed messiah-king would usher in a new kingdom ordained by God. would usher in a new kingdom ordained by God. would usher in a new kingdom ordained by God. would usher in a new kingdom ordained by God. would usher in a new kingdom ordained by God.

The Life of Jesus The Life of Jesus The Life of Jesus The Life of Jesus

Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written Information about the life of Jesus was not written down during his lifetime, in part because of this messianic down during his lifetime, in part because of this messianic down during his lifetime, in part because of this messianic down during his lifetime, in part because of this messianic down during his lifetime, in part because of this messianic down during his lifetime, in part because of this messianic down during his lifetime, in part because of this messianic expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the expectation. Those who believed that Jesus was the Messiah relied on oral rather than written communication Messiah relied on oral rather than written communication Messiah relied on oral rather than written communication Messiah relied on oral rather than written communication Messiah relied on oral rather than written communication Messiah relied on oral rather than written communication Messiah relied on oral rather than written communication to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this to share this conviction, since they thought the end of this world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could world was fast approaching, and the spoken word could reach greater numbers of people. However, when the first reach greater numbers of people. However, when the first reach greater numbers of people. However, when the first reach greater numbers of people. However, when the first generation that knew Jesus began to die, and the expected generation that knew Jesus began to die, and the expected generation that knew Jesus began to die, and the expected generation that knew Jesus began to die, and the expected eschaton (end of the world) did not come, believers began to collect stories of Jesus’s life, teachings, and death into gospels. The word “gospel” is related to the Greek world euangelion, or “good news.” Eventually, Christians canonized only a few of these gospels, giving final authority to four such books out of the many which were produced during the first few centuries of Christianity (see “Sacred Texts”).

Only two of the canonical gospels—Luke and Matthew—tell of Jesus’s birth. These two accounts differ

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

50

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 50 1/4/12 11:19 AM
