The Land of the Gospels

20° E 30° E 40° E

40° N

LEBANON

Beirut . 34º N

Area of i R an

Detail Lit

I A

30° N Sidon IC Damascus

N

N O H E

Tyre P SYRIA

Golan Golan Heights Heights

Capernaum

Sea of

Galilee

MEDITERRANEAN Nazareth

SEA Caesarea DE CA

Bank* er West PO

Tel Aviv R S S AM A RIA A RIA an P E R E A 32º N rd Jo S AM iv LI Amman

Jerusalem

Bethlehem Bethlehem

Gaza

Gaza

Strip* J U D E A J U D E A

Raphia Dead

Sea

I D U M E A

ISRAEL JORDAN

EGYPT

NAME: denotes New Testament NAME: denotes modern day

Modern day boundaries

*The Gaza Strip has been governed by

Palestinian entities since Israel's withdrawal

in September 2005, although Israel retains 30º N control of its airspace and most means of access.

*The West Bank is occupied by Israel with current

status subject to the Israel-Palestinian Interim 100 miles Agreement; permanent status to be determined 100 kilometers through further negotiation

34º E 36º E

39 The Land of the Gospels © GeoNova

second proof 10/5/09

in many details, but they also share some common

themes: Jesus is born in Bethlehem, the city of David; his

parents are Mary and Joseph, the latter of whom is of the

lineage of David; and his birth coincides with a Roman

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

51

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 51 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

census, conducted for tax purposes in the outer regions of the Roman Empire. The gospel writers wish to stress both the persecution by Rome and the Davidic connection to Jesus; in so doing, they emphasize the messianic implications of Jesus’s birth. What the writers do not convey, however, is when Jesus’s birth took place. Both the season and the year are uncertain. The Christian tradition of celebrating Christmas midwinter is a much later development, as is the dating of the common calendar to the year of his birth. If Jesus was born during the reign of the year of his birth. If Jesus was born during the reign of the year of his birth. If Jesus was born during the reign of Augustus, when Quirinius was governor, his birth would Augustus, when Quirinius was governor, his birth would Augustus, when Quirinius was governor, his birth would Augustus, when Quirinius was governor, his birth would Augustus, when Quirinius was governor, his birth would be dated no later than 4 BCE. be dated no later than 4 BCE. be dated no later than 4 BCE.

The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s The gospel writers tell us even less about Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s boyhood, but to these writers, the years of Jesus’s public teaching are of great importance. In all four public teaching are of great importance. In all four public teaching are of great importance. In all four public teaching are of great importance. In all four public teaching are of great importance. In all four public teaching are of great importance. In all four public teaching are of great importance. In all four public teaching are of great importance. In all four canonical gospels, we read of Jesus gathering and canonical gospels, we read of Jesus gathering and canonical gospels, we read of Jesus gathering and canonical gospels, we read of Jesus gathering and canonical gospels, we read of Jesus gathering and instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through instructing disciples, teaching moral lessons through short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches short stories called parables, and giving public speeches on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter on interpretation of Scripture. An example of the latter is the Sermon on the Mount, recounted in the Gospel of is the Sermon on the Mount, recounted in the Gospel of is the Sermon on the Mount, recounted in the Gospel of is the Sermon on the Mount, recounted in the Gospel of Matthew. Jesus’s public teaching is central to the gospel Matthew. Jesus’s public teaching is central to the gospel Matthew. Jesus’s public teaching is central to the gospel Matthew. Jesus’s public teaching is central to the gospel writers’ idea of euangelion though the whole period likely lasts fewer than three years of Jesus’s life.

All four canonical gospel writers also emphasize Jesus’s conflict with authorities, both Jewish and Roman. Disagreements with Jewish authorities mostly center around proper biblical interpretation, such as what is lawful to do on the Sabbath (Mark 2:23–28), or what is the nature of resurrection (Matt. 22:23–30). Jesus’s conflict with Rome, however, is political. Any messianic claims could result in his death, since it would be akin

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

52

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 52 1/4/12 11:19 AM
