to Jesus appointing himself king over Judea, therefore

being a traitor to Rome. Indeed, at his crucifixion, the

sign displaying the charge against him reads, “King of the

Jews” (Mark 15:26). Given the method of his execution,

Jesus clearly is killed as a traitor; crucifixion was not a

punishment for religious offenses in Jesus’s time; instead,

it was a particularly cruel means of execution the Romans

used to both torture the victim and serve as graphic,

public warning to any who might follow the traitor’s

example.

However, the story of Jesus does not end at his However, the story of Jesus does not end at his However, the story of Jesus does not end at his However, the story of Jesus does not end at his However, the story of Jesus does not end at his

crucifixion. All four of the canonical gospel writers crucifixion. All four of the canonical gospel writers crucifixion. All four of the canonical gospel writers crucifixion. All four of the canonical gospel writers crucifixion. All four of the canonical gospel writers

include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include include stories of an empty tomb, and most include

appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days appearances of Jesus to his disciples three or more days

after his execution. These resurrection stories become a after his execution. These resurrection stories become a after his execution. These resurrection stories become a after his execution. These resurrection stories become a after his execution. These resurrection stories become a after his execution. These resurrection stories become a after his execution. These resurrection stories become a after his execution. These resurrection stories become a

central feature of Christian belief. The resurrection of the central feature of Christian belief. The resurrection of the central feature of Christian belief. The resurrection of the central feature of Christian belief. The resurrection of the central feature of Christian belief. The resurrection of the

dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish dead at the time of judgment is already a common Jewish

idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s idea at this time, but for the early Christians, Jesus’s

resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol resurrection has added significance. It becomes a symbol

of God’s power over death, the coming end of the world, of God’s power over death, the coming end of the world, of God’s power over death, the coming end of the world, of God’s power over death, the coming end of the world,

and—for some Christians—the end of the sacrificial and—for some Christians—the end of the sacrificial and—for some Christians—the end of the sacrificial and—for some Christians—the end of the sacrificial

system at the temple. Early Christians remember the

Resurrection by meeting to worship on the first day of

the week, a practice which still continues to this day.

From Judaism to Christianity

Many of Jesus’s followers took the message of his

life, teaching, and resurrection out into the Roman

world. They claimed that Jesus was the Messiah, though

a different kind of messiah than Jews expected at this

point in history. They further claimed that his death and

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

53

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 53 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

The Roman Empire in New Testament Times

10° E 20° E 30° E 40° E

N

DAL

MAT B L A C K S E A IA MOESIA

40° N Rome IA ON ITATHRACE LIA ED GALATIA AC M

ASIA PISIDIA

Carthage AC ICIA H CIL A

AIA RI SY

TRI PO LITA M EDIT E R RANEA N SEA

30° N NIA LIBYA A E D

EGYPT JU

600 miles

600 kilometers

© GeoNova

40 The Roman Empire in New Testament Times

first proof 8/10/09

resurrection marked the beginning of a new age, and that resurrection marked the beginning of a new age, and that resurrection marked the beginning of a new age, and that resurrection marked the beginning of a new age, and that resurrection marked the beginning of a new age, and that resurrection marked the beginning of a new age, and that resurrection marked the beginning of a new age, and that the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the the final judgment of humanity would soon be upon the world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” world. These people were called apostles, or “sent ones.” Among them was a man who never knew Jesus during Among them was a man who never knew Jesus during Among them was a man who never knew Jesus during Among them was a man who never knew Jesus during his lifetime, but who claimed to have received a special his lifetime, but who claimed to have received a special his lifetime, but who claimed to have received a special his lifetime, but who claimed to have received a special revelation of the risen Jesus. His name was Saul of Tarsus, otherwise known as Paul.

At first, Paul was an opponent of the new Christians. He writes that he persecuted Christians because he believed them to be heretics for claiming Jesus was the Messiah. However, according to his own account, at some point Paul received a revelation that changed his outlook (Gal. 3:12). From that point forward, he became an advocate not only of the new religion but of a specific form of Gentile (non-Jewish) Christianity. He taught that

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

54

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 54 1/4/12 11:19 AM
