Empire. Oftentimes, Christians encountered persecution

because of their beliefs or because of rumors against

them. Among the most famous of these rumors was

that Christians were cannibals, since Christians called

the wine “blood” and the bread “the body” during their

communion ritual. Though the Roman Empire was

responsible for much of the persecution against early

Christians, the policy of Rome changed significantly when

Galerius proclaimed an Edict of Toleration in 311 CE,

and Constantine followed with the Edict of Milan in 313

CE. Under these edicts, Christianity became one of the CE. Under these edicts, Christianity became one of the CE. Under these edicts, Christianity became one of the CE. Under these edicts, Christianity became one of the CE. Under these edicts, Christianity became one of the

officially sanctioned religions of the Empire. Christians officially sanctioned religions of the Empire. Christians officially sanctioned religions of the Empire. Christians officially sanctioned religions of the Empire. Christians officially sanctioned religions of the Empire. Christians

were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to were now allowed to meet openly and found it easier to

establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area establish hierarchies of church leadership, such as area

bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a bishops. Constantine also approved the convening of a

council in 325 CE to establish official Christian beliefs. council in 325 CE to establish official Christian beliefs. council in 325 CE to establish official Christian beliefs. council in 325 CE to establish official Christian beliefs. council in 325 CE to establish official Christian beliefs.

The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout The Council of Nicea was the first of many throughout

the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief, the centuries to discuss specific aspects of Christian belief,

especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”). especially the nature of the Trinity (see “Beliefs”).

The councils were one aspect of a movement in The councils were one aspect of a movement in The councils were one aspect of a movement in The councils were one aspect of a movement in

Christianity toward orthodoxy, establishing a single Christianity toward orthodoxy, establishing a single Christianity toward orthodoxy, establishing a single Christianity toward orthodoxy, establishing a single

set of accepted beliefs. While early Christianity was

a diverse tradition—there were Christians who kept

Torah, others who rejected Torah completely, still others

who were influenced by Greek philosophy, and so on—

over a few centuries, many of these early beliefs were

declared unorthodox. Officials of the church informed

their parishioners which gospels were authoritative, and

told their opponents why their beliefs were heretical.

One prominent defender of orthodoxy was Augustine

(354–430 CE), a bishop who famously framed the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

57

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 57 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

concepts of just war and original sin. He also wrote many lengthy treatises against beliefs he deemed to be heretical, including Manichaeism—a religion which combined Zoroastrian and Christian beliefs, and which he had practiced before converting to Christianity. Another notable guardian of orthodoxy is Athanasius, also a bishop, who is famous for defending his opposition to Arianism, the belief that Christ is subordinate to God the Father, and for offering the first list of all twenty-seven canonical New Testament books as part of an Easter letter canonical New Testament books as part of an Easter letter canonical New Testament books as part of an Easter letter to his parishioners in 367 CE.

Over the next few centuries, Christianity continued Over the next few centuries, Christianity continued Over the next few centuries, Christianity continued Over the next few centuries, Christianity continued Over the next few centuries, Christianity continued to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the to grow. As it moved both east and west along the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Mediterranean basin, especially after the fall of the Roman Empire, local communities developed very Roman Empire, local communities developed very Roman Empire, local communities developed very Roman Empire, local communities developed very Roman Empire, local communities developed very Roman Empire, local communities developed very Roman Empire, local communities developed very Roman Empire, local communities developed very different beliefs and traditions. In the East, priests were different beliefs and traditions. In the East, priests were different beliefs and traditions. In the East, priests were different beliefs and traditions. In the East, priests were different beliefs and traditions. In the East, priests were different beliefs and traditions. In the East, priests were allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and allowed to marry, Greek was the dominant language, and two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called two-dimensional paintings of Jesus or the saints, called icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained icons, were venerated. In the West, priests remained celibate, Latin was the preferred language, and icons celibate, Latin was the preferred language, and icons celibate, Latin was the preferred language, and icons celibate, Latin was the preferred language, and icons were considered to be idolatrous. These Christians also were considered to be idolatrous. These Christians also were considered to be idolatrous. These Christians also were considered to be idolatrous. These Christians also began to view the Bishop of Rome, the Pope, as the sole authority over all Christians; Christians in the East, however, viewed the Pope as one bishop among many who lived throughout the Mediterranean, and tended to favor the Bishop of Constantinople. Western Christians also added the phrase “and the Son” (in Latin, filioque) to the Nicene Creed’s description of the role of the Holy Spirit and how it proceeds from God the Father in the Trinity. Eastern Christians, however, did not endorse this theological change to the common creed.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

58

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 58 1/4/12 11:19 AM
