Inevitably, these differences caused a rift. In 1054 CE,

the Pope and the Bishop of Constantinople, known as the

Patriarch, excommunicated each other. Excommunication

is removing someone from the ritual and sacramental

life of the church, essentially condemning them until

and unless the excommunicated person formally repents.

Following this mutual excommunication, the church was

split into two divisions: Orthodox and Roman Catholic.

This was the first major split in Christianity, though not

the only one (see “Divisions”).

Around this same time, the division which was later Around this same time, the division which was later Around this same time, the division which was later Around this same time, the division which was later Around this same time, the division which was later

called Roman Catholicism initially embarked upon the called Roman Catholicism initially embarked upon the called Roman Catholicism initially embarked upon the called Roman Catholicism initially embarked upon the called Roman Catholicism initially embarked upon the

Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to Crusades, which lasted almost 200 years, in response to

the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who the Islamic presence in Jerusalem. Pope Urban II, who

famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at famously called for the first Crusade during a sermon at

Clermont, France, justified an armed attack to defend Clermont, France, justified an armed attack to defend Clermont, France, justified an armed attack to defend Clermont, France, justified an armed attack to defend Clermont, France, justified an armed attack to defend

Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the Jerusalem’s freedom (see Asbridge). In reality, however, the

Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across Crusades were a brutal series of religious attacks across

Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204 Europe. Even fellow Christians were not safe; in 1204

CE, when Crusaders came to the Orthodox stronghold of CE, when Crusaders came to the Orthodox stronghold of CE, when Crusaders came to the Orthodox stronghold of CE, when Crusaders came to the Orthodox stronghold of

Constantinople, they desecrated the altar and destroyed Constantinople, they desecrated the altar and destroyed Constantinople, they desecrated the altar and destroyed Constantinople, they desecrated the altar and destroyed

the icons in the Hagia Sophia Orthodox church, even

going so far as to place prostitutes on the holy seat of

the Patriarch. Many thousands of Jews, Muslims, and

Christians—including many who were not fighters—died

during the Crusades, and the original task of retaking

Jerusalem from Muslim Turks was never achieved.

In spite of the failure of the Crusades, Catholicism

continued to solidify its power in Europe. By the eve of

the Reformation, Catholicism was a force that exceeded

many European governments, and the Pope was the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

59

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 59 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

authority in both spiritual and state affairs. Among the displays of this power were massive European building projects funded by indulgences, fees paid to delay punishment for sins which had been confessed and absolved. At the time of the Reformation, the sale of indulgences was notoriously abused and used to manipulate ordinary people who feared the power of the Church. One person who challenged this practice was a German monk named Martin Luther, the eventual founder of Protestantism.

Protestantism

Luther believed that indulgences were both Luther believed that indulgences were both Luther believed that indulgences were both Luther believed that indulgences were both Luther believed that indulgences were both Luther believed that indulgences were both Luther believed that indulgences were both Luther believed that indulgences were both corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an corrupt and theologically incorrect. He drew upon an interpretation of the book of Romans, describing an interpretation of the book of Romans, describing an interpretation of the book of Romans, describing an interpretation of the book of Romans, describing an interpretation of the book of Romans, describing an interpretation of the book of Romans, describing an interpretation of the book of Romans, describing an unmediated relationship between God and humanity unmediated relationship between God and humanity unmediated relationship between God and humanity unmediated relationship between God and humanity unmediated relationship between God and humanity unmediated relationship between God and humanity unmediated relationship between God and humanity unmediated relationship between God and humanity based only on faith, thus rendering indulgences based only on faith, thus rendering indulgences based only on faith, thus rendering indulgences based only on faith, thus rendering indulgences based only on faith, thus rendering indulgences based only on faith, thus rendering indulgences based only on faith, thus rendering indulgences unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted The unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted unnecessary. To promote his ideas, Luther posted Ninety-Five Theses, or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the , or belief statements, on the door of the church in Wittenberg, Germany in 1517. In his twenty-church in Wittenberg, Germany in 1517. In his twenty-church in Wittenberg, Germany in 1517. In his twenty-church in Wittenberg, Germany in 1517. In his twenty-first statement, Luther writes, “Therefore those preachers first statement, Luther writes, “Therefore those preachers first statement, Luther writes, “Therefore those preachers first statement, Luther writes, “Therefore those preachers of indulgences are in error, who say that by the pope’s indulgences a man is freed from every penalty, and saved; . . . [for the indulgences], gain and avarice can be increased, but the result of the intercession of the Church is in the power of God alone.”

Luther’s act of rebellion against the Catholic Church resulted in him being forced to flee his home and seek refuge among the principates of Germany. Eventually, he was asked to defend his rebellious actions at the Diet

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

60

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 60 1/4/12 11:19 AM
