of Worms; a diet is a council which determines guilt or

innocence in church matters.

Luther’s demands for reform were both religious

and political. The Catholic Church at the time claimed

far-reaching political influence, and a rebellion against

church doctrine was a rebellion against civil order. Indeed,

as Germany adopted Lutheranism, it moved away from

the Catholic political structure and toward autonomous

statehood. Additionally, as the new protest movement

grew, other countries also moved away from Catholic grew, other countries also moved away from Catholic grew, other countries also moved away from Catholic

influence in civil affairs.

A second major Protestant reformer was John Calvin, A second major Protestant reformer was John Calvin, A second major Protestant reformer was John Calvin, A second major Protestant reformer was John Calvin, A second major Protestant reformer was John Calvin,

who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known who founded the denominations collectively known

as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with as Reformed Christianity. Calvin’s major dispute with

the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that the Catholic Church was also related to the belief that

one could purchase salvation, though Calvin answered one could purchase salvation, though Calvin answered one could purchase salvation, though Calvin answered one could purchase salvation, though Calvin answered one could purchase salvation, though Calvin answered

this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead this question differently from Martin Luther. Instead

of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s of suggesting that salvation was a free gift from God’s

abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was abundant love, Calvin believed that salvation was

predestined, or completely predetermined from the predestined, or completely predetermined from the predestined, or completely predetermined from the predestined, or completely predetermined from the

beginning of time for all humanity. beginning of time for all humanity. beginning of time for all humanity.

Calvin described predestination in his famous work

The Institutes of Christian Religion. Using scriptural support

and an appeal to logic, Calvin claimed that for all people,

God had already determined whether they were destined

for eternal bliss in heaven or eternal damnation in hell.

He argued that if it were up to humans to determine

their eternal state, then God would not be all-knowing—

since humans would have the freedom to make a real,

independent choice—nor would grace be God’s free

gift, since it would have to be equally available to all.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

61

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 61 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Furthermore, the biblical text is full of examples of God choosing some people, like the Hebrews, and not others, or favoring certain individuals over others, like Jacob over Esau. To Calvin, this was irrefutable proof that God had already determined who would be saved or condemned. Calvin believed that Christians, whom he called the elect, should live out their days without worrying about their eternal states. Calvin was most active in Switzerland, where he set up communities dedicated to these principles, and his beliefs went on to influence to these principles, and his beliefs went on to influence to these principles, and his beliefs went on to influence Presbyterianism and Dutch Reformism in Europe and the Presbyterianism and Dutch Reformism in Europe and the Presbyterianism and Dutch Reformism in Europe and the Presbyterianism and Dutch Reformism in Europe and the Presbyterianism and Dutch Reformism in Europe and the United States.

Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came Anglicanism is a third major denomination that came out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding out of the Protestant Reformation, although its founding was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism was more explicitly political than that of Lutheranism or Calvinism. As previously noted, the Catholic Church or Calvinism. As previously noted, the Catholic Church or Calvinism. As previously noted, the Catholic Church or Calvinism. As previously noted, the Catholic Church or Calvinism. As previously noted, the Catholic Church or Calvinism. As previously noted, the Catholic Church exercised significant power in both religious and political exercised significant power in both religious and political exercised significant power in both religious and political exercised significant power in both religious and political exercised significant power in both religious and political exercised significant power in both religious and political exercised significant power in both religious and political exercised significant power in both religious and political affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated affairs. In England, this meant that the king was obligated to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to to the Pope, and as a result, the king was expected to marry a wife who would be advantageous to the Catholic marry a wife who would be advantageous to the Catholic marry a wife who would be advantageous to the Catholic marry a wife who would be advantageous to the Catholic power structure. In the case of King Henry VIII, he was power structure. In the case of King Henry VIII, he was power structure. In the case of King Henry VIII, he was power structure. In the case of King Henry VIII, he was required to marry Catherine of Aragon, a member of the Spanish royalty. This marriage would solidify the relations between England and Spain, both of which were loyal to the Pope. However, Henry rejected Catherine, claiming that she was unable to bear a male heir to the throne. He wished to annul his marriage to her, but this was unacceptable under Catholic law.

To solve this problem, Henry declared himself the head of a new church, the Church of England. In his position as sole and final authority of this new church,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

62

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 62 1/4/12 11:19 AM
