Henry declared his marriage to Catherine invalid and

married Anne Boleyn instead. Henry also went on to

marry four other women over his reign. The church he

founded struggled to continue, most notably during the

reign of Mary Tudor, who reverted the English state

religion to Catholicism. Eventually, however, the Church

of England established its reformed Anglican identity by

means of the Thirty-Nine Articles, written during the reign

of Queen Elizabeth I in 1563.

Luther, Calvin, and Henry all tried to correct Luther, Calvin, and Henry all tried to correct Luther, Calvin, and Henry all tried to correct

perceived abuses of power in the Church, but theirs were perceived abuses of power in the Church, but theirs were perceived abuses of power in the Church, but theirs were perceived abuses of power in the Church, but theirs were perceived abuses of power in the Church, but theirs were

not the only attempts at reform. Catholics also made not the only attempts at reform. Catholics also made not the only attempts at reform. Catholics also made not the only attempts at reform. Catholics also made not the only attempts at reform. Catholics also made

attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to attempts to reform from within and sought to respond to

Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came Protestant charges in several ways. Some reforms came

from grass-roots movements, even before the outside from grass-roots movements, even before the outside from grass-roots movements, even before the outside from grass-roots movements, even before the outside from grass-roots movements, even before the outside from grass-roots movements, even before the outside from grass-roots movements, even before the outside from grass-roots movements, even before the outside

protests. For example, to address the perception that protests. For example, to address the perception that protests. For example, to address the perception that protests. For example, to address the perception that protests. For example, to address the perception that protests. For example, to address the perception that

Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their Catholic clergy were overly secular because of their

engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the engagement in politics, new monastic orders like the

Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy Theatines were founded with the goal of improving clergy

spiritual formation. The Capuchin order ministered spiritual formation. The Capuchin order ministered spiritual formation. The Capuchin order ministered spiritual formation. The Capuchin order ministered

among the poor and sick, attempting to live in the most among the poor and sick, attempting to live in the most among the poor and sick, attempting to live in the most among the poor and sick, attempting to live in the most

austere manner possible, in contrast to the massive

wealth of the Vatican. Additionally, the Ursuline order

was founded in Italy to educate children, particularly

young girls, so that they might read the Scriptures for

themselves. These monastic reforms were astoundingly

successful, but they were not immediately validated by

Church leadership. During most of the Reformation

period, the official papal position was articulated by the

Council of Trent (1545–63), which vehemently opposed

the ideas of Protestant dissenters. In contrast, the Council

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

63

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 63 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

reaffirmed the belief in transubstantiation, the authority of the Pope, and the importance of works as well as faith for salvation, denying the essential arguments of Protestant reformers.

As a part of its counter-Reformation plan, the Catholic Church also attempted to reclaim a spiritual foothold among territories lost to Protestantism. Founded by Ignatius of Loyola in 1540, the Jesuits, or Society of Jesus, were pivotal to this endeavor. Ignatius envisioned a new order of monks, governed by the strict standards a new order of monks, governed by the strict standards a new order of monks, governed by the strict standards of his own writings called Spiritual Exercises, in which Spiritual Spiritual Spiritual Exercises Exercises members saw themselves as missionaries, warriors, members saw themselves as missionaries, warriors, members saw themselves as missionaries, warriors, members saw themselves as missionaries, warriors, members saw themselves as missionaries, warriors, and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the and monks. The Jesuits were fervent defenders of the Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of Pope. They spread throughout Europe with hopes of reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on reconverting heretical Protestants, and then continued on to Asia. The Jesuits were successful in stemming the tide to Asia. The Jesuits were successful in stemming the tide to Asia. The Jesuits were successful in stemming the tide to Asia. The Jesuits were successful in stemming the tide to Asia. The Jesuits were successful in stemming the tide of Protestantism in Europe, particularly in France and the of Protestantism in Europe, particularly in France and the of Protestantism in Europe, particularly in France and the of Protestantism in Europe, particularly in France and the of Protestantism in Europe, particularly in France and the of Protestantism in Europe, particularly in France and the of Protestantism in Europe, particularly in France and the Netherlands.

Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was Over the next several centuries, Christianity was again transformed, this time by its spread to Africa, again transformed, this time by its spread to Africa, again transformed, this time by its spread to Africa, again transformed, this time by its spread to Africa, the Americas, and East Asia by means of Spanish the Americas, and East Asia by means of Spanish the Americas, and East Asia by means of Spanish the Americas, and East Asia by means of Spanish conquistadors and dissident groups from the Church of England, including the Puritans and the Quakers.

In recent times, Christianity has also struggled with the challenge of modernity. With the rise of scientific thinking and equality movements like feminism, Christians have been forced to address how they relate to people who are at odds with the ancient beliefs of the church. Some Christian groups have embraced modernity, but others have rejected modern ideals in favor of more literal readings of the Bible. For example, fundamentalists

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

64

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 64 1/4/12 11:19 AM
