have rejected evolutionary theory and have promoted the

literal truth of the Genesis creation narrative, and some

fundamentalists have also favored more submissive roles

for women, mirroring those in the Bible, in contrast to the

principles described in the Equal Rights Amendment.

There are now more than two billion Christians

worldwide. While Christianity is diminishing in numbers

across Europe, Christian populations continue to grow in

parts of South America, Africa, and Asia.

D I V I S I O N S

Three main divisions exist within Christianity: Roman Three main divisions exist within Christianity: Roman Three main divisions exist within Christianity: Roman Three main divisions exist within Christianity: Roman Three main divisions exist within Christianity: Roman

Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. From

these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups these three main groups, many smaller splinter groups

also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy also arose. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy

grew out of the split between Christians in the East and grew out of the split between Christians in the East and grew out of the split between Christians in the East and grew out of the split between Christians in the East and grew out of the split between Christians in the East and grew out of the split between Christians in the East and grew out of the split between Christians in the East and

West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism West during the eleventh century (see “From Judaism

to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the to Christianity”). Then Protestantism arose during the

Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see Reformation, initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 (see

“Protestantism”). “Protestantism”).

Today, Roman Catholicism is the largest single Today, Roman Catholicism is the largest single Today, Roman Catholicism is the largest single Today, Roman Catholicism is the largest single

division in Christianity. Throughout the centuries,

Catholicism spread across the world as European nations

conquered other lands. Countries that were predominantly

Catholic, like France and Spain, took religion along with

them as they conquered other peoples, often forcibly

imposing it on the preexisting population. For this reason,

Catholic Christianity is now the largest religious group

in South and Central America, the United States, the

Philippines, and some parts of sub-Saharan Africa

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

65

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 65 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

(see https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world -factbook/fields/2122.html).

Catholic Christians maintain several unique beliefs and practices which distinguish them from other types of Christians. For example, Catholics view the Pope as the sole authority over all Christians, and they believe that the statements he makes ex cathedra—from the seat of papal authority—are infallible. Catholicism also maintains a celibate, unmarried, male priesthood, and incorporates the existence of purgatory, a realm in the afterlife where the existence of purgatory, a realm in the afterlife where the existence of purgatory, a realm in the afterlife where sins may be cleansed so that a person might eventually sins may be cleansed so that a person might eventually sins may be cleansed so that a person might eventually sins may be cleansed so that a person might eventually sins may be cleansed so that a person might eventually enter heaven. Transubstantiation, or the belief that the enter heaven. Transubstantiation, or the belief that the enter heaven. Transubstantiation, or the belief that the enter heaven. Transubstantiation, or the belief that the enter heaven. Transubstantiation, or the belief that the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the bread and wine of the Eucharist mystically become the body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. body and blood of Christ, is also specific to Catholicism. While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be While the Catholic Church used to mandate that Mass be celebrated in Latin only, contemporary Catholic practice celebrated in Latin only, contemporary Catholic practice celebrated in Latin only, contemporary Catholic practice celebrated in Latin only, contemporary Catholic practice celebrated in Latin only, contemporary Catholic practice celebrated in Latin only, contemporary Catholic practice allows for Mass in the common language, or vernacular, of allows for Mass in the common language, or vernacular, of allows for Mass in the common language, or vernacular, of allows for Mass in the common language, or vernacular, of allows for Mass in the common language, or vernacular, of allows for Mass in the common language, or vernacular, of allows for Mass in the common language, or vernacular, of the congregation.

The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide The second largest group of Christians worldwide is collectively known as Orthodox; though some people is collectively known as Orthodox; though some people is collectively known as Orthodox; though some people is collectively known as Orthodox; though some people describe this group as “Eastern Orthodox,” simply describe this group as “Eastern Orthodox,” simply describe this group as “Eastern Orthodox,” simply describe this group as “Eastern Orthodox,” simply “Orthodox” is the more preferred term. Orthodox Christianity is actually composed of several smaller groups, usually identified by language or geographical area: Greek Orthodox, Russian Orthodox, Armenian Orthodox, and Egyptian Orthodox (Coptic) are all examples.

In Orthodox Christianity, worship typically includes the use of icons, which are paintings of Jesus or the saints. These paintings are created according to exact standards for both the images and the materials. Usually placing

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

66

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 66 1/4/12 11:19 AM
