these icons in churches or homes, Orthodox Christians

often pray and light candles in front of them. Non-

Orthodox Christians sometimes misunderstand the role

of icons in Orthodox worship, confusing these veneration

practices with idol worship. However, icons serve as aids

in worshipping God, not the actual objects of worship.

Just as a non-Orthodox Christian might light a candle

to improve focus before offering a prayer, an Orthodox

Christian might use an icon as a sort of window through

which a person may better see the mystery of God. Icons which a person may better see the mystery of God. Icons which a person may better see the mystery of God. Icons

also serve as visual reminders of Scripture and the lives of also serve as visual reminders of Scripture and the lives of also serve as visual reminders of Scripture and the lives of also serve as visual reminders of Scripture and the lives of also serve as visual reminders of Scripture and the lives of

the saints, both of which serve as ethical models for the the saints, both of which serve as ethical models for the the saints, both of which serve as ethical models for the the saints, both of which serve as ethical models for the the saints, both of which serve as ethical models for the

believer.

Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique Orthodox Christians also have a unique

organizational structure, being composed of several organizational structure, being composed of several organizational structure, being composed of several organizational structure, being composed of several organizational structure, being composed of several organizational structure, being composed of several organizational structure, being composed of several organizational structure, being composed of several

self-governing groups, whereas the Catholic Church is a self-governing groups, whereas the Catholic Church is a self-governing groups, whereas the Catholic Church is a self-governing groups, whereas the Catholic Church is a self-governing groups, whereas the Catholic Church is a

single entity, united under the singular authority of the single entity, united under the singular authority of the single entity, united under the singular authority of the single entity, united under the singular authority of the single entity, united under the singular authority of the single entity, united under the singular authority of the single entity, united under the singular authority of the single entity, united under the singular authority of the

Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch Pope. Though Orthodox Christians give the Patriarch

of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not of Constantinople a great deal of respect, he does not

have the same level of authority as the Pope. In addition, have the same level of authority as the Pope. In addition, have the same level of authority as the Pope. In addition, have the same level of authority as the Pope. In addition,

whereas Catholic priests must remain unmarried and whereas Catholic priests must remain unmarried and whereas Catholic priests must remain unmarried and whereas Catholic priests must remain unmarried and

celibate, Orthodox priests are allowed to marry while

serving congregations. However, Orthodox bishops are

expected to remain celibate.

Protestantism is the third major Christian division,

having origins in sixteenth-century protest movements

against perceived abuses by the Catholic Church.

Protestants reject the centralized authority of the Pope

as well as the belief that an intermediary like a priest

is needed to interpret Scripture or offer reconciliation.

Protestantism had an early emphasis on decentralization

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

67

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 67 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

and autonomy, and as a result, Protestant beliefs vary widely.

In spite of this diversity of beliefs, Protestants share an enhanced emphasis on Scripture over church leadership or sacrament as the means through which to encounter God. Protestants contend that all believers are priests and are capable of understanding and interpreting Scripture. Martin Luther called this concept Sola Scriptura, or “Scripture Alone.” For this reason, most Protestant churches emphasize preaching based on biblical passages churches emphasize preaching based on biblical passages churches emphasize preaching based on biblical passages in their worship services.

Today, Protestantism is constituted of many Today, Protestantism is constituted of many Today, Protestantism is constituted of many Today, Protestantism is constituted of many Today, Protestantism is constituted of many denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest denominations, most of which stem from the protest movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the movements of Martin Luther or John Calvin, or the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the rebellion of the Church of England. Lutheranism is the dominant form of Christianity in Germany, Finland, dominant form of Christianity in Germany, Finland, dominant form of Christianity in Germany, Finland, dominant form of Christianity in Germany, Finland, dominant form of Christianity in Germany, Finland, dominant form of Christianity in Germany, Finland, Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the Denmark, and Sweden; it is also widespread in the United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants United States, particularly in areas where immigrants from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the from these nations came to reside. Lutherans are also the majority Christian group in Namibia. Calvinist groups majority Christian group in Namibia. Calvinist groups majority Christian group in Namibia. Calvinist groups majority Christian group in Namibia. Calvinist groups include the various Reformed congregations, including include the various Reformed congregations, including include the various Reformed congregations, including include the various Reformed congregations, including Presbyterianism and the Dutch Reformed churches. Calvinism is popular in Holland and Scotland, and today there are also large Reformed communities in Iowa and Michigan. The Church of England is still the official state church in Great Britain, and Anglicanism has spawned several denominations of its own, including Episcopalianism and Methodism. New Zealand, Australia, Nigeria, and Uganda also have significant Anglican populations.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

68

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 68 1/4/12 11:19 AM
