While Lutheranism, Calvinism, and Anglicanism

make up the largest Protestant denominations, the

diversity of modern Protestantism extends far beyond

these three groups. For example, some Protestants

come from “free spirit” movements of the Reformation,

including the Unitarians, who reject Trinitarianism.

Others come from the Anabaptist reforms, which also

have origins in the Reformation. Anabaptists (literally,

“re-baptizers”) claimed that only adult baptism was

true baptism; thus, those baptized as infants must be true baptism; thus, those baptized as infants must be true baptism; thus, those baptized as infants must be

re-baptized. Mennonites, Amish Christians, and members re-baptized. Mennonites, Amish Christians, and members re-baptized. Mennonites, Amish Christians, and members re-baptized. Mennonites, Amish Christians, and members re-baptized. Mennonites, Amish Christians, and members

of the Church of the Brethren continued this tradition in of the Church of the Brethren continued this tradition in of the Church of the Brethren continued this tradition in of the Church of the Brethren continued this tradition in of the Church of the Brethren continued this tradition in

the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is the United States. Interestingly, the scholarly consensus is

that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their that modern-day Baptist denominations do not trace their

history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement history to the Anabaptists, but to a separatist movement

that splintered from the Church of England. Baptist that splintered from the Church of England. Baptist that splintered from the Church of England. Baptist that splintered from the Church of England. Baptist that splintered from the Church of England. Baptist

churches in America were heavily influenced by the churches in America were heavily influenced by the churches in America were heavily influenced by the churches in America were heavily influenced by the churches in America were heavily influenced by the churches in America were heavily influenced by the churches in America were heavily influenced by the churches in America were heavily influenced by the

revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth revivalism movements of the eighteenth and nineteenth

centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic centuries, and are still marked by a charismatic

orientation.

B E L I E F S

Though it is difficult to pinpoint any universal Christian

beliefs, there are a few key ideas which are widespread

across many Christian groups, including belief in the

Trinity, the sacredness of Scripture, and a linear view of

time.

The Trinity is the Christian concept that God is one

deity in three persons, usually named as Father, Son,

and Holy Spirit. While the word “trinity” is nowhere in

the Bible, within a few centuries of the death of Jesus,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

69

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 69 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Trinitarianism was a defining feature of Christian belief, primarily because a series of church councils met specifically to discuss the Trinity. Early in Christian history, believers were faced with a key question: Who is Jesus? Jewish messianism emphasized the military and political role of the “anointed one,” but did not claim that the coming Messiah was divine, since this would be an affront to monotheism (for more on Jewish monotheism, see “Beliefs” in the section on Judaism in this book). However, Jesus was not a military or political savior, as However, Jesus was not a military or political savior, as However, Jesus was not a military or political savior, as had been expected; in fact, he suffered a humiliating had been expected; in fact, he suffered a humiliating had been expected; in fact, he suffered a humiliating had been expected; in fact, he suffered a humiliating had been expected; in fact, he suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of Rome. Christians began to view defeat at the hands of Rome. Christians began to view defeat at the hands of Rome. Christians began to view defeat at the hands of Rome. Christians began to view defeat at the hands of Rome. Christians began to view Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his Jesus not as a political liberator, but as a spiritual one; his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his “humiliating” death was actually an important part of his unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve unique status as God’s son, and was necessary to achieve human salvation.

Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts Since early Christians drew from Jewish concepts of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique of monotheism, but still wanted to claim a unique relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to relationship between God and Jesus, they needed to explain the connection between Father and Son. Was explain the connection between Father and Son. Was explain the connection between Father and Son. Was explain the connection between Father and Son. Was Jesus a true child, whom God had procreated, or was the Jesus a true child, whom God had procreated, or was the Jesus a true child, whom God had procreated, or was the Jesus a true child, whom God had procreated, or was the Christ eternally an aspect of God? How did the human Jesus contain divinity—that is, God’s “substance?” And how did both Father and Son relate to a third biblical concept, The Holy Spirit, as described in Matthew, John, and the Pauline epistles? It was these questions that the series of ecumenical councils sought to answer. While an outsider may consider these matters to be of minimal importance, for Christians they were critical to establishing orthodoxy and avoiding beliefs that might lead to damnation. From this series of very intense and

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

70

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 70 1/4/12 11:19 AM
