occasionally angry discussions came several statements of

orthodox Christian belief, known as creeds.

The first ecumenical council to discuss this issue was

held in Nicea, in modern-day Turkey. In 325 CE, bishops

met to begin constructing the Nicene Creed, which is

still used in churches today. It describes the relationship

between Father, Son, and Holy Spirit as, “One God,

the Father Almighty . . . and one Lord, Jesus Christ, the

son of God, the only-begotten of the Father, that is of

the substance of the Father, God from God, light from the substance of the Father, God from God, light from the substance of the Father, God from God, light from

light, true God from true God, begotten not made . . . light, true God from true God, begotten not made light, true God from true God, begotten not made light, true God from true God, begotten not made light, true God from true God, begotten not made

and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who

proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the

Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of Son together is worshiped and glorified.” The concept of

the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most the Trinity continues to be a formative belief for most

Christians, with the notable exception of Unitarians. Christians, with the notable exception of Unitarians. Christians, with the notable exception of Unitarians. Christians, with the notable exception of Unitarians. Christians, with the notable exception of Unitarians. Christians, with the notable exception of Unitarians.

A second common conviction among Christians is A second common conviction among Christians is A second common conviction among Christians is A second common conviction among Christians is A second common conviction among Christians is A second common conviction among Christians is A second common conviction among Christians is A second common conviction among Christians is

the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider the authority of Scripture. Christians generally consider

the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what the Bible to be the inspired word of God, though what

this means varies widely across traditions. For some, this means varies widely across traditions. For some, this means varies widely across traditions. For some, this means varies widely across traditions. For some,

inspiration refers to God’s relationship with humans inspiration refers to God’s relationship with humans inspiration refers to God’s relationship with humans inspiration refers to God’s relationship with humans

being the source of the Scriptures; these Christians affirm

that human beings wrote the Bible, and that human

error is possible in its pages. On the other extreme, some

Christians contend that inspiration means that God wrote

each word of the text using the hand of a human writer,

and that the resultant text is therefore devoid of human

error. This idea is known as inerrancy, and is commonly

held among fundamentalist forms of Christianity.

Regardless of their positions on the authorship of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

71

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 71 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Scripture, most Christians see the Bible as a source of guidance and assurance in their day-to-day lives.

Finally, like their Abrahamic counterparts, Christians largely believe time to be a linear phenomenon. This makes Christianity different from traditions like Hinduism and Buddhism, in which people view the world as endlessly regenerating. For Christians, each person lives only one time, and at death (or on a future day of resurrection), he or she will face individual judgment. Similarly, Christians believe the world came into existence Similarly, Christians believe the world came into existence Similarly, Christians believe the world came into existence at one point in history and will end someday in the at one point in history and will end someday in the at one point in history and will end someday in the at one point in history and will end someday in the at one point in history and will end someday in the future. This belief is most pronounced in apocalyptic future. This belief is most pronounced in apocalyptic future. This belief is most pronounced in apocalyptic future. This belief is most pronounced in apocalyptic future. This belief is most pronounced in apocalyptic Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in Christian movements, which consider the descriptions in the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a the Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, to be a literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time. literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time. literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time. literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time. literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time. literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time. literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time. literal description of God’s judgment at the end of time.

Sacred Texts

Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of Not only was Christianity born from Jewish ideas of messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians messianism and apocalypticism, but the early Christians drew their first scriptures from Judaism as well. The drew their first scriptures from Judaism as well. The drew their first scriptures from Judaism as well. The drew their first scriptures from Judaism as well. The Hebrew Bible, which Christians eventually called the Old Hebrew Bible, which Christians eventually called the Old Hebrew Bible, which Christians eventually called the Old Hebrew Bible, which Christians eventually called the Old Testament, contains Jewish origins, laws, promises, and prophecies. Most early Christians saw the Hebrew Bible as connected to and fulfilled by the life of Jesus. Both Paul and the author of the Gospel of Matthew, for example, often quote Hebrew scriptures to support their claims that Jesus is a unique fulfillment of God’s promises. These scriptures became the first part of the Christian canon.

Along with the Hebrew Bible, early Christians also gave authority to additional writings. The first writings to gain prominence were the epistles of Paul, which were

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

72

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 72 1/4/12 11:19 AM
