letters written to Paul’s various churches and which

were eventually circulated more widely throughout the

Mediterranean. These letters were occasional, meaning

that they were prompted by certain events in the churches

to which Paul felt he needed to respond, and they vary

widely in tone and length.

Paul writes often about the way Jesus’s life, death, and

resurrection make possible a new relationship between

God and all people, including Gentiles, or non-Jews. This

new relationship is not because of any deserving human new relationship is not because of any deserving human new relationship is not because of any deserving human

actions, according to Paul, but instead depends on God actions, according to Paul, but instead depends on God actions, according to Paul, but instead depends on God actions, according to Paul, but instead depends on God actions, according to Paul, but instead depends on God

acting in love through Jesus, and then humans receiving acting in love through Jesus, and then humans receiving acting in love through Jesus, and then humans receiving acting in love through Jesus, and then humans receiving acting in love through Jesus, and then humans receiving

that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith that gift graciously—an act he calls justification “by faith

apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28). apart from works prescribed by the law” (Romans 3:28).

Because this justification requires no human action, which Because this justification requires no human action, which Because this justification requires no human action, which Because this justification requires no human action, which Because this justification requires no human action, which Because this justification requires no human action, which Because this justification requires no human action, which Because this justification requires no human action, which

Paul calls “works,” anyone can be reconciled to God. Paul Paul calls “works,” anyone can be reconciled to God. Paul Paul calls “works,” anyone can be reconciled to God. Paul Paul calls “works,” anyone can be reconciled to God. Paul Paul calls “works,” anyone can be reconciled to God. Paul Paul calls “works,” anyone can be reconciled to God. Paul

thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male thus emphasizes, “There is neither Jew nor Greek, male

nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus” nor female, slave nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus”

(Gal. 3:28).

However, Paul’s epistles were not the only letters However, Paul’s epistles were not the only letters However, Paul’s epistles were not the only letters However, Paul’s epistles were not the only letters

being circulated among early Christians. Other apostles being circulated among early Christians. Other apostles being circulated among early Christians. Other apostles being circulated among early Christians. Other apostles

wrote to their churches, too. These epistles sometimes

clashed with Paul’s assessments. The writer of the Epistle

of James, for example, claimed that “faith by itself, if it

has no works, is dead” (2:17), a sentiment with which Paul

would have certainly disagreed. The author of the Epistles

of Peter proclaims that a person should “address as Father

the one who judges impartially according to each one’s

works” (1 Peter 1:17).

In another group of letters often called the Pastoral

Epistles, some scholars doubt Pauline authorship. Those

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

73

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 73 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

scholars instead believe that authors claimed Pauline authority at least a generation after Paul’s death. For scholars pseudonymity would allow believers to adapt Paul’s ideas to their new situation with a more complex church structure. The church accepted these letters as written by Paul, but other letters were rejected as heretical. A total of twenty-one epistles are a part of the Christian canon.

Along with these letters, the Christian church eventually canonized four gospels. The gospels were not composed when Jesus was alive, and they certainly do composed when Jesus was alive, and they certainly do composed when Jesus was alive, and they certainly do not predate the authentic letters of Paul. Scholars believe not predate the authentic letters of Paul. Scholars believe not predate the authentic letters of Paul. Scholars believe not predate the authentic letters of Paul. Scholars believe not predate the authentic letters of Paul. Scholars believe that the earliest of the canonical gospels is Mark, which that the earliest of the canonical gospels is Mark, which that the earliest of the canonical gospels is Mark, which that the earliest of the canonical gospels is Mark, which that the earliest of the canonical gospels is Mark, which was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years was likely written around 70 CE, nearly forty years after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke after Jesus’s death. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was were written a decade later, and the Gospel of John was completed another decade after that. completed another decade after that. completed another decade after that. completed another decade after that. completed another decade after that.

The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records The gospels are not intended to be day-to-day records of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good of Jesus’s every word and deed. Focused on the good news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was news of the “kingdom of God,” which Jesus preached was coming on earth, the gospel writers make no claim that coming on earth, the gospel writers make no claim that coming on earth, the gospel writers make no claim that coming on earth, the gospel writers make no claim that every event in his life was equally important. Indeed, large every event in his life was equally important. Indeed, large every event in his life was equally important. Indeed, large every event in his life was equally important. Indeed, large periods of Jesus’s life are not mentioned at all. Instead, the gospel writers focus almost exclusively on three types of material related to Jesus’s life: sayings, miracle stories, and passion (suffering and death) narratives.

Among the most well-known of Jesus’s sayings are parables. Parables are short stories, often in an agrarian setting, that use metaphor to describe the “kingdom of God” about which Jesus so frequently preached. The meaning behind the parables is not always clear. They are not allegories, in which every item in the story represents

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

74

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 74 1/4/12 11:19 AM
