something in the real world. Instead, the parables are

word-pictures, meant to evoke feelings and images rather

than a straightforward equation of ideas. Even with this

ambiguity, images from parables have persisted and have

become part of our common vocabulary; the phrases

“good Samaritan,” “lost sheep,” “prodigal son,” and “pearls

before swine” all come from parable sources.

Both nature miracles and healing miracle stories

are common in the gospels. The nature miracles include

stories of Jesus stilling storms (Mark 4:35–41), turning stories of Jesus stilling storms (Mark 4:35–41), turning stories of Jesus stilling storms (Mark 4:35–41), turning

water into wine (John 2:1–11), and cursing a fig tree water into wine (John 2:1–11), and cursing a fig tree water into wine (John 2:1–11), and cursing a fig tree water into wine (John 2:1–11), and cursing a fig tree water into wine (John 2:1–11), and cursing a fig tree

until it withers (Matt. 21:18–22). Healing miracles until it withers (Matt. 21:18–22). Healing miracles until it withers (Matt. 21:18–22). Healing miracles until it withers (Matt. 21:18–22). Healing miracles until it withers (Matt. 21:18–22). Healing miracles

include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19), include restoring a paralyzed man (Luke 5:18–19),

healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and healing a hemorrhaging woman (Mark 5:24–29), and

raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The raising Lazarus from death to life (John 11:1–46). The

healing and nature miracles are intended to point to healing and nature miracles are intended to point to healing and nature miracles are intended to point to healing and nature miracles are intended to point to healing and nature miracles are intended to point to

the compassion of God for the least in society as well as the compassion of God for the least in society as well as the compassion of God for the least in society as well as the compassion of God for the least in society as well as the compassion of God for the least in society as well as the compassion of God for the least in society as well as the compassion of God for the least in society as well as the compassion of God for the least in society as well as

God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century God’s power over the forces of chaos. For first-century

Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a Christians, these stories would have affirmed Jesus as a

chosen one of God, a messiah. chosen one of God, a messiah.

While sayings and miracle stories are key components While sayings and miracle stories are key components While sayings and miracle stories are key components While sayings and miracle stories are key components

of each gospel, the gospel writers emphasize the passion

of Jesus above all else. These stories are the most detailed

in the gospels; almost each moment from the Passover

meal to the burial is vividly described. While they differ

in many details, the four canonical gospel writers all

emphasize a shared Passover meal to which Jesus ascribes

new meaning, Jesus’s betrayal by his disciple Judas, and

the physical suffering and death of Jesus on a cross. The

gospel writers note that after Jesus’s execution and the

Sabbath day of rest, some female disciples visit the tomb

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

75

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 75 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

to anoint Jesus’s body and find the tomb empty. The message of Jesus’s resurrection in the canonical gospels is the culmination of the passion narratives and the central euangelion of the early church.

A third category of New Testament literature is apocalyptic in nature. There is only one full-length apocalypse in the canon, the Apocalypse of John, which is the last book in the Christian New Testament. People generally write apocalyptic literature during times of intense persecution, and they use veiled language and intense persecution, and they use veiled language and intense persecution, and they use veiled language and imagery to communicate to the oppressed about a imagery to communicate to the oppressed about a imagery to communicate to the oppressed about a imagery to communicate to the oppressed about a imagery to communicate to the oppressed about a coming day of liberation. Coded language is necessary coming day of liberation. Coded language is necessary coming day of liberation. Coded language is necessary coming day of liberation. Coded language is necessary coming day of liberation. Coded language is necessary to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. to protect the community from further persecution. For example, John uses the term Babylon, a very old For example, John uses the term For example, John uses the term Babylon For example, John uses the term Babylon For example, John uses the term For example, John uses the term Babylon For example, John uses the term Babylon Babylon Babylon Babylon Babylon , a very old , a very old empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was empire that once destroyed Jerusalem and then itself was eventually destroyed, to refer to the coming destruction eventually destroyed, to refer to the coming destruction eventually destroyed, to refer to the coming destruction eventually destroyed, to refer to the coming destruction eventually destroyed, to refer to the coming destruction of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would of the Roman Empire. Coded language like this would make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them make sense to John’s audience, and would give them comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential comfort in times of distress, but would also keep potential persecutors from seeing the true message. As much later persecutors from seeing the true message. As much later persecutors from seeing the true message. As much later persecutors from seeing the true message. As much later readers, modern Christians sometimes misunderstand the readers, modern Christians sometimes misunderstand the readers, modern Christians sometimes misunderstand the readers, modern Christians sometimes misunderstand the meaning and purpose of apocalyptic imagery, leading to end-of-the-world predictions which fail to materialize.

The gospels (including the two-part Luke-Acts), epistles, and Apocalypse of John make up the entire Christian New Testament. Along with the Hebrew Bible, these books form the common canon of all Christians. During the Reformation, Protestants rejected fourteen additional books which had been included in the Old Testament until that time. These books are known collectively as the Apocrypha, or deuterocanonical books.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

76

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 76 1/4/12 11:19 AM
