Rites and Rituals

As with sacred writings, rites and rituals among

Christians vary depending on denomination. Orthodox

Christians and Roman Catholics identify seven sacred

rites and rituals, called sacraments; most Protestants

identify two, and some recognize no rites or rituals at all.

For most Christians, entrance into the faith

community is marked by baptism, a ritual washing with

water. Baptism is rooted in biblical practices, especially

Jesus’s own baptism in the Jordan River (Mark 1:9–13) Jesus’s own baptism in the Jordan River (Mark 1:9–13) Jesus’s own baptism in the Jordan River (Mark 1:9–13)

and the recommendation of baptism as an alternative to and the recommendation of baptism as an alternative to and the recommendation of baptism as an alternative to and the recommendation of baptism as an alternative to and the recommendation of baptism as an alternative to and the recommendation of baptism as an alternative to and the recommendation of baptism as an alternative to

circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian circumcision for Gentiles (Col. 2:11–13). Modern Christian

baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and baptismal practice varies widely, both in terms of age and

method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but method. Most Christians practice infant baptism, but

some believe that consent of the baptized is necessary and some believe that consent of the baptized is necessary and some believe that consent of the baptized is necessary and some believe that consent of the baptized is necessary and some believe that consent of the baptized is necessary and some believe that consent of the baptized is necessary and some believe that consent of the baptized is necessary and

practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully practice only adult baptism. While some Christians fully

immerse the baptized person, many others use poured or immerse the baptized person, many others use poured or immerse the baptized person, many others use poured or immerse the baptized person, many others use poured or immerse the baptized person, many others use poured or immerse the baptized person, many others use poured or immerse the baptized person, many others use poured or

sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that sprinkled water. Most Christians do agree, however, that

baptism is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Baptism is practiced baptism is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Baptism is practiced baptism is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Baptism is practiced baptism is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Baptism is practiced baptism is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Baptism is practiced baptism is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Baptism is practiced

by all Christian denominations. by all Christian denominations. by all Christian denominations.

For Catholic and Orthodox Christians, another For Catholic and Orthodox Christians, another For Catholic and Orthodox Christians, another

sacrament is Confirmation, which is the act of personally

accepting the vows of church membership taken by

one’s parents at baptism. Since these churches practice

infant baptism, confirmation allows a young adult to

independently confirm the basic beliefs of the church

community. Confirmation often involves preparatory

classes at the young adult’s church, and is sometimes

paired with First Communion.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

77

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 77 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Communion—also called Eucharist, the Lord’s Supper, or Mass—is another common Christian sacrament. This sacrament is a ritual remembrance of Jesus’s last supper with his disciples, at the Passover, before his betrayal and crucifixion. Today, Christians remember this meal by consuming bread and wine (or, in some churches, juice) as a community, usually during a worship service. While the practice of communion is common to most Christians, the associated meaning varies widely depending on denomination. meaning varies widely depending on denomination. meaning varies widely depending on denomination. Roman Catholics and some Orthodox Christians, for Roman Catholics and some Orthodox Christians, for Roman Catholics and some Orthodox Christians, for Roman Catholics and some Orthodox Christians, for Roman Catholics and some Orthodox Christians, for example, believe that the elements of communion are example, believe that the elements of communion are example, believe that the elements of communion are example, believe that the elements of communion are example, believe that the elements of communion are transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at transformed into the true body and blood of Christ at the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called the moment the priest elevates them, a process called transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead transubstantiation. Lutheran Protestants claim instead that the bread and wine remains bread and wine while at that the bread and wine remains bread and wine while at that the bread and wine remains bread and wine while at that the bread and wine remains bread and wine while at that the bread and wine remains bread and wine while at the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called the same time holding the body of Christ, an idea called consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, consubstantiation. Still other groups, including Baptists, believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and believe that the bread and wine are purely symbolic and do not change.

Marriage is considered a sacred rite by most Marriage is considered a sacred rite by most Marriage is considered a sacred rite by most Marriage is considered a sacred rite by most Christians, and is seen as the fourth of seven sacraments in the Orthodox and Catholic Churches. Christian marriage usually involves the blessing of a clergy person and an exchange of vows and rings, though practices vary widely depending on local customs and culture.

The Sacrament of Penance, often called reconciliation or confession, is a fifth sacrament in non-Protestant churches. Reconciliation is the process of admitting one’s sins to a priest, who offers absolution to the individual. In Catholic churches, reconciliation often takes place

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

78

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 78 1/4/12 11:19 AM
