in confessionals, which are small booths to the side of

the main sanctuary. These booths allow the priest and

confessor to hear one another without being face-to-

face. In the United States, sins confessed to a priest are

considered protected communication and cannot be used

against that person in a court of law.

A sixth sacrament in Orthodox and Catholic

traditions is that of Holy Orders, which include bishops,

deacons, priests, monks, and nuns. Ordination is the

process by which these holy orders are conferred upon a process by which these holy orders are conferred upon a process by which these holy orders are conferred upon a

candidate or initiate, a person who has chosen a lifelong candidate or initiate, a person who has chosen a lifelong candidate or initiate, a person who has chosen a lifelong candidate or initiate, a person who has chosen a lifelong candidate or initiate, a person who has chosen a lifelong

commitment to church service and who takes vows commitment to church service and who takes vows commitment to church service and who takes vows commitment to church service and who takes vows commitment to church service and who takes vows

expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic expressing that commitment. In the Roman Catholic

Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements Church, poverty, obedience, and celibacy are requirements

for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates for those taking Holy Orders. Eastern Orthodox ordinates

share these vows, though priests can be ordained if they share these vows, though priests can be ordained if they share these vows, though priests can be ordained if they share these vows, though priests can be ordained if they share these vows, though priests can be ordained if they

are already married. If they are currently unmarried or are already married. If they are currently unmarried or are already married. If they are currently unmarried or are already married. If they are currently unmarried or are already married. If they are currently unmarried or are already married. If they are currently unmarried or are already married. If they are currently unmarried or are already married. If they are currently unmarried or

widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination. widowed, however, they must not marry after ordination.

Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament, Protestants do not consider the Holy Orders a sacrament,

but they do ordain pastors, bishops, and deacons. In but they do ordain pastors, bishops, and deacons. In but they do ordain pastors, bishops, and deacons. In but they do ordain pastors, bishops, and deacons. In

Protestant churches, celibacy is not required of the Protestant churches, celibacy is not required of the Protestant churches, celibacy is not required of the Protestant churches, celibacy is not required of the

ordained, and some churches have expanded ordination

rites to include traditionally under-represented groups,

such as women and homosexuals.

The final sacrament is variously known as the

Anointing of the Sick, Holy Unction, or Last Rites. In

Orthodox churches, anointing with oil is available to ill

people, even if they are not near death. In Catholicism,

though one need not be on the point of death to receive

the sacrament, the Vatican reserves this ritual for those

“in danger of death from sickness or old age,” according

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

79

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 79 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

to the Catechism of the Catholic Church. The Anointing of the Sick is an opportunity for the ill or dying person to prepare for death. The priest performing last rites will hear the confession of the dying person and absolve these sins, and then the priest will often offer the Eucharist as a reminder of the resurrection; this final Eucharist is called viaticum.

Along with these sacramental rites, most Christians share a series of holy days throughout the year. The most important are in the spring, beginning with Ash most important are in the spring, beginning with Ash most important are in the spring, beginning with Ash Wednesday and continuing through Lent, a forty-day Wednesday and continuing through Lent, a forty-day Wednesday and continuing through Lent, a forty-day Wednesday and continuing through Lent, a forty-day Wednesday and continuing through Lent, a forty-day period of preparation concluding with the celebration of period of preparation concluding with the celebration of period of preparation concluding with the celebration of period of preparation concluding with the celebration of period of preparation concluding with the celebration of Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts Easter. Lent is often marked by fasting, prayer, and acts of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent of mercy among Christians who keep this season. Lent commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates commemorates the last days of Jesus’s life and culminates in Holy Week. Holy Week begins with Palm Sunday, in Holy Week. Holy Week begins with Palm Sunday, in Holy Week. Holy Week begins with Palm Sunday, in Holy Week. Holy Week begins with Palm Sunday, in Holy Week. Holy Week begins with Palm Sunday, remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before remembering Jesus’s lauded entry into Jerusalem before his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy his betrayal. The following Thursday is known as Maundy Thursday, from the Latin word maundatum, meaning Thursday, from the Latin word Thursday, from the Latin word maundatum maundatum maundatum maundatum maundatum maundatum , meaning , meaning commandment, which remembers Jesus’s last supper with commandment, which remembers Jesus’s last supper with commandment, which remembers Jesus’s last supper with commandment, which remembers Jesus’s last supper with his disciples and his commandment to “love one another” his disciples and his commandment to “love one another” his disciples and his commandment to “love one another” his disciples and his commandment to “love one another” (John 13:34–35). The next day is remembered as Good Friday, recalling the day of the crucifixion, and is followed by Easter, the Sunday celebration of the resurrection. Eastern Orthodox Christians use a different calendar to calculate the date of Easter than Roman Catholic and Protestant Christians, and all traditions have a moveable date for the holiday based on the time of the full moon after the Spring equinox. Fifty days after Easter, Christians celebrate Pentecost, recalling when God sent the Holy Spirit to form the Christian Church (Acts 2:1–4).

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

80

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 80 1/4/12 11:19 AM
