A second holy season occurs in late fall and early

winter, comprised of the four Sundays of Advent leading

to Christmas, and continuing to Epiphany. Advent is

considered a time of preparation for Christmas, as Lent

is for Easter, but is generally regarded as a more festive

time; for example, no fasting is required during Advent

like it is during Lent. Sundays in Advent are usually

marked with the lighting of four candles to mark the

passing weeks; this candle lighting culminates with a

Christmas Eve service in which the Christ candle is lit,

and the birth of Jesus is commemorated as “the light of and the birth of Jesus is commemorated as “the light of and the birth of Jesus is commemorated as “the light of and the birth of Jesus is commemorated as “the light of and the birth of Jesus is commemorated as “the light of

the world” (John 8:12). Many Christians also illuminate the world” (John 8:12). Many Christians also illuminate the world” (John 8:12). Many Christians also illuminate the world” (John 8:12). Many Christians also illuminate the world” (John 8:12). Many Christians also illuminate

their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season. their homes and evergreen trees to celebrate the season.

The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on The date for Christmas is another that varies based on

denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on denomination; Protestants and Catholics celebrate on

December 25 according to the Gregorian calendar; Greek December 25 according to the Gregorian calendar; Greek December 25 according to the Gregorian calendar; Greek December 25 according to the Gregorian calendar; Greek December 25 according to the Gregorian calendar; Greek

Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas according to

the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7 the older Julian calendar, which results in a January 7

date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians date for Christmas; and Armenian Orthodox Christians

celebrate Christmas on January 19. Twelve days called celebrate Christmas on January 19. Twelve days called celebrate Christmas on January 19. Twelve days called celebrate Christmas on January 19. Twelve days called

Christmastide follow the celebration of Christmas leading Christmastide follow the celebration of Christmas leading Christmastide follow the celebration of Christmas leading Christmastide follow the celebration of Christmas leading

to Epiphany, which means “manifestation.” During

Epiphany, Christians remember the coming of the wise

men as told in Matthew 2:1–12, as well as other miracles

in which God’s power was manifested through Jesus.

Some Christians do not celebrate the rites, rituals,

or holidays above. Christian diversity yields sacred

practices as widely divergent as Christian belief. For

example, Jehovah’s Witnesses do not celebrate Easter or

Christmas, and they offer the Lord’s Supper, which they

call the Memorial, only once a year. As another example,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

81

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 81 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Protestants do not believe in the Sacrament of Penance, instead believing that forgiveness must be asked directly of God, not through a priestly intermediary. This diversity ought not lead anyone to believe that some Christians are “more authentic” than others; instead, it simply indicates the ways the very ancient message of Jesus has been appropriated to be meaningful to a wide variety of believers.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Asbridge, Thomas. The First Crusade: A New History. Oxford Crusade: A New History Crusade: A New History Crusade: A New History Crusade: A New History University Press: Oxford, 2005. University Press: Oxford, 2005. University Press: Oxford, 2005. University Press: Oxford, 2005.

Browning, W.R.F., ed. A Dictionary of the Bible. Oxford: Oxford A A A Dictionary Dictionary Dictionary the the Bible Bible . Oxford: Oxford . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. University Press, 1996.

Coogan, Michael, et al. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with Apocrypha. Coogan, Michael, et al. The New Oxford Annotated Bible New Annotated Annotated Bible Bible Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.

Ferguson, Everett. Backgrounds of Early Christianity. Eerdmans: Grand Backgrounds of Early Christianity Early Christianity Christianity Christianity . Eerdmans: Grand . Eerdmans: Grand Rapids, 2003.

MacCollough, Diarmaid. Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years. MacCollough, Diarmaid. Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years New York: Penguin, 2010. New York: Penguin, 2010. New York: Penguin, 2010.

Nichols, Stephen J. The Reformation: How a Monk and a Mallet Changed the World. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2007.

Payton, James R. Light from the Christian East: An Introduction to the Orthodox Tradition. Downers Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press, 2007.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

82

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 82 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 83 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Man praying

in mosque

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 84 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Islam

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Islam has many features in common with Judaism and

Christianity. These three religions share the same God,

similar prophets, and the same linear view of human

history with a beginning, middle, and ultimate day of

judgment. The three also share Abraham as a common

ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic ancestor, and therefore are often called Abrahamic

religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians religions. Some people call Muslims, Jews, and Christians

“People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three “People of the Book” because they believe all three

religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in religions have scriptures revealed by God. However, in

spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians spite of their commonalities, many Jews and Christians

misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better misunderstand Islam. This chapter will provide a better

understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at understanding of Islamic beliefs and practices, while at

the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held the same time correcting misconceptions commonly held

by non-Muslims. by non-Muslims. by non-Muslims. by non-Muslims.

H I S T O R Y

In the sixth century CE, the city of Mecca on the Arabian In the sixth century CE, the city of Mecca on the Arabian In the sixth century CE, the city of Mecca on the Arabian In the sixth century CE, the city of Mecca on the Arabian

Peninsula was a bustling center of trade and religion.

Inside the city was a very old stone, possibly a meteorite,

which had become a pilgrimage site dedicated to local

deities. Though the common religion in Arabia was

polytheistic, this pilgrimage site was also known to Jews

and Christians. Religious pilgrims brought economic

prosperity and abundant trade to Mecca. Muhammad was

born into this religious diversity at around 570 CE.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

85

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 85 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Muhammad’s early life was difficult. His parents died while he was still young, leaving him orphaned and illiterate. He was raised by an uncle but never received any formal education. When he was in his twenties, he worked with a caravan company and fell in love with Khadija, the caravan owner and a distant cousin of Muhammad. They married when he was twenty-five, and she was forty. Together they had two sons and four daughters.

As he grew older, Muhammad began meditating in mountain caves outside Mecca. Through his travels with mountain caves outside Mecca. Through his travels with mountain caves outside Mecca. Through his travels with the caravan, Muhammad had encountered Judaism, the caravan, Muhammad had encountered Judaism, the caravan, Muhammad had encountered Judaism, the caravan, Muhammad had encountered Judaism, the caravan, Muhammad had encountered Judaism, Christianity, and probably Zoroastrianism, all of which Christianity, and probably Zoroastrianism, all of which Christianity, and probably Zoroastrianism, all of which Christianity, and probably Zoroastrianism, all of which Christianity, and probably Zoroastrianism, all of which share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad share a belief in one god, or Allah in Arabic. Muhammad had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, had also experienced the religious diversity of Mecca, but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by but he believed that the worship of many gods favored by most of his people was idolatrous. According to Islamic most of his people was idolatrous. According to Islamic most of his people was idolatrous. According to Islamic most of his people was idolatrous. According to Islamic most of his people was idolatrous. According to Islamic tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation tradition, in 611 CE, Muhammad was in contemplation about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a about these religious matters when he received a revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer revelation. The angel Gabriel, to whom Muslims refer as Jibril, appeared to him saying, “Recite!” Muhammad, as Jibril, appeared to him saying, “Recite!” Muhammad, as Jibril, appeared to him saying, “Recite!” Muhammad, as Jibril, appeared to him saying, “Recite!” Muhammad, though uneducated, submitted to God’s command. He though uneducated, submitted to God’s command. He though uneducated, submitted to God’s command. He though uneducated, submitted to God’s command. He remembered and recited Jibril’s words, which were sent from God, and this act of submission gave the world the Qur’an (see “Sacred Texts”).

The revelations to Muhammad happened over a period of several years, but the message he received was always consistent: God is one, and all people should submit to God’s will. The religion which eventually developed from these revelations is called Islam, which means “submission.” One who submits to God’s will is therefore known as a Muslim.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

86

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 86 1/4/12 11:19 AM
