Muhammad’s submission to God had immediate

and important consequences. First, the revelations to

Muhammad were collected and became the Qur’an,

which was completed and closed within a generation

of Muhammad’s lifetime. Furthermore, as Jibril had

commanded, Muhammad went into the city of Mecca

proclaiming the oneness of God, a belief known as

monotheism (see “Major Beliefs”). However, polytheism

was deeply ingrained in the surrounding culture, so

Muhammad’s proclamations were not well received, and Muhammad’s proclamations were not well received, and Muhammad’s proclamations were not well received, and

the few people who converted were heavily persecuted. the few people who converted were heavily persecuted. the few people who converted were heavily persecuted. the few people who converted were heavily persecuted. the few people who converted were heavily persecuted.

Eventually, Muhammad and the small band of converts Eventually, Muhammad and the small band of converts Eventually, Muhammad and the small band of converts Eventually, Muhammad and the small band of converts Eventually, Muhammad and the small band of converts

were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed were forced to flee to nearby Yathrib, later renamed

Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is Medina, to avoid persecution. This event in 622 CE is

known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars known as the Hijra, or migration, and Muslim calendars

are dated from this year. For example, 2011 on the are dated from this year. For example, 2011 on the are dated from this year. For example, 2011 on the are dated from this year. For example, 2011 on the are dated from this year. For example, 2011 on the are dated from this year. For example, 2011 on the

common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah. common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah. common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah. common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah. common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah. common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah. common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah. common calendar is year 1432 AH, after the Hijrah.

In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though In Yathrib, Muhammad’s situation improved, though

it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political it was not perfect. The Prophet was given some political

authority, and Muslims were recognized as one of the authority, and Muslims were recognized as one of the authority, and Muslims were recognized as one of the authority, and Muslims were recognized as one of the

city’s tribes. However, a charter was created to protect city’s tribes. However, a charter was created to protect city’s tribes. However, a charter was created to protect city’s tribes. However, a charter was created to protect

other religions in the city, including Christianity and

Judaism. Muhammad was particularly in conflict with

the Jewish population of Yathrib, and it was during this

time that Muhammad began encouraging his believers to

pray facing Mecca instead of Jerusalem. In Yathrib, the

number of Muslim converts grew rapidly, and by 630 CE,

Muhammad returned to Mecca along with 10,000 Muslim

followers to take the city and rededicate the sanctuary of

the sacred stone, called the Ka’aba, to Allah. From that

date forward, Mecca became a Muslim city and remains

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

87

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 87 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

so to this day; presently, Saudi law prohibits non-Muslims from entering the holy city.

Muhammad only lived for two more years after his victory in Mecca. He died in 632 CE. At his funeral, his good friend abu-Bakr stated, “If anyone worships Muhammad, Muhammad is dead, but if anyone worships Allah, he is alive and dies not.” The words of abu-Bakr serve to remind us that even at this early date in the history of Islam, Muhammad was not regarded as a deity to be worshipped. From his first revelation until deity to be worshipped. From his first revelation until deity to be worshipped. From his first revelation until his death, people understood Muhammad to be fully his death, people understood Muhammad to be fully his death, people understood Muhammad to be fully his death, people understood Muhammad to be fully his death, people understood Muhammad to be fully human. Muslims believe that his submission made the human. Muslims believe that his submission made the human. Muslims believe that his submission made the human. Muslims believe that his submission made the human. Muslims believe that his submission made the revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and revelation of the Qur’an possible, which is a miracle and blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, blessing, but Muhammad himself was not perfect. Instead, Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the Muslims call Muhammad “The Prophet,” often with the designation PBUH, which means “Peace Be Upon Him.” designation PBUH, which means “Peace Be Upon Him.” designation PBUH, which means “Peace Be Upon Him.” designation PBUH, which means “Peace Be Upon Him.” designation PBUH, which means “Peace Be Upon Him.”

After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male After Muhammad’s death, Muhammad had no male heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had heir to become his successor; though Muhammad had a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single a number of children during his lifetime, only a single daughter Fatima outlived him. As a result, conflict daughter Fatima outlived him. As a result, conflict daughter Fatima outlived him. As a result, conflict daughter Fatima outlived him. As a result, conflict arose over how the new leader should be chosen. One arose over how the new leader should be chosen. One arose over how the new leader should be chosen. One arose over how the new leader should be chosen. One side argued that future leaders should be chosen by the community and need not be biologically related to the Prophet. The other side contended that leadership should remain within Muhammad’s family. This difference of opinion created a rift, worsened by the suspicious death of Ali, Muhammad’s son-in-law and potential hereditary successor, in 661 CE. Ali’s death, as well as the death of Ali’s son Husayn at the battle of Karbala (modern Iraq) in 680 CE, solidified the division between these two groups. Today Islam remains in two major factions; the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

88

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 88 1/4/12 11:19 AM
