and the prophetic line, as summarized in this statement,

constitute the core of Islam.

First and foremost, Islam is a monotheistic religion.

Muslims believe in the oneness of God, and that this

one God is separate from, while still in relationship with,

humankind. God created the world, is sovereign over it,

and will judge its inhabitants on the resurrection day.

Above all, for devout Muslims:

Allah is One.

Allah is he on whom all depend. Allah is he on whom all depend. Allah is he on whom all depend. He begets not, nor is he begotten. He begets not, nor is he begotten. He begets not, nor is he begotten. He begets not, nor is he begotten. He begets not, nor is he begotten. He begets not, nor is he begotten. And none is like him. (Surah 112) And none is like him. (Surah 112) And none is like him. (Surah 112) And none is like him. (Surah 112) And none is like him. (Surah 112)

As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using As already mentioned, Muslims refer to God using

the Arabic title Allah. Some non-Muslims think that this the Arabic title Allah. Some non-Muslims think that this the Arabic title Allah. Some non-Muslims think that this the Arabic title Allah. Some non-Muslims think that this the Arabic title Allah. Some non-Muslims think that this

title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews title indicates Muslims worship a different God than Jews

or Christians, but this is not the case. In fact, Arabic-or Christians, but this is not the case. In fact, Arabic-or Christians, but this is not the case. In fact, Arabic-or Christians, but this is not the case. In fact, Arabic-or Christians, but this is not the case. In fact, Arabic-or Christians, but this is not the case. In fact, Arabic-or Christians, but this is not the case. In fact, Arabic-

speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah. speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah. speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah. speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah. speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah. speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah. speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah. speaking Christians also refer to God as Allah.

The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad The second part of the Shahadah states, “Muhammad

is Allah’s Prophet.” Muhammad’s designation as the is Allah’s Prophet.” Muhammad’s designation as the is Allah’s Prophet.” Muhammad’s designation as the is Allah’s Prophet.” Muhammad’s designation as the

Prophet (rasul in Arabic) does not mean that he was Prophet (rasul in Arabic) does not mean that he was Prophet (rasul in Arabic) does not mean that he was in Arabic) does not mean that he was

divine, since that would be opposed to the strict

monotheism of Islam. It also does not mean that he was

a prognosticator, as the popular understanding of the

word “prophet” might suggest. Instead, it sets him as the

last in a long line of people who spoke on behalf of God

to humanity, including many figures recognizable to

Jews and Christians: Noah, Abraham, Ishmael, Moses,

John and Jesus, among others. Muslims contend that

throughout the centuries, these prophets have proclaimed

the oneness of God and the need for submission to God’s

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

91

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 91 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

perfect will. The Qur’anic story of Noah is a good example of this emphasis on proclamation. In the Jewish Torah and Christian Old Testament, Noah does not speak at all in the days preceding the flood. In the Qur’an, however, Noah gives a lengthy speech beginning with the call to submission: “O my people! Surely I am a plain warner to you: that you should serve Allah and be careful of (your duty to) Him.” (Surah 71). Muslims believe that the people did not properly receive Noah’s message, that the message was manipulated over time, or that it was the message was manipulated over time, or that it was the message was manipulated over time, or that it was forgotten until the revelation to Muhammad, after which forgotten until the revelation to Muhammad, after which forgotten until the revelation to Muhammad, after which forgotten until the revelation to Muhammad, after which forgotten until the revelation to Muhammad, after which no more revelations were needed. For this reason, Muslims no more revelations were needed. For this reason, Muslims no more revelations were needed. For this reason, Muslims no more revelations were needed. For this reason, Muslims no more revelations were needed. For this reason, Muslims often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” often refer to Muhammad as the “Seal of the Prophets,” meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before meaning that though many prophets have come before him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and him, no more will follow. Muhammad is the final and greatest prophet in this succession. greatest prophet in this succession. greatest prophet in this succession. greatest prophet in this succession. greatest prophet in this succession.

Salat

The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout The second pillar is Salat, or daily prayer. A devout Muslim is required to pray five times a day—before Muslim is required to pray five times a day—before Muslim is required to pray five times a day—before Muslim is required to pray five times a day—before sunrise, noon, late afternoon, after sunset, and at night— sunrise, noon, late afternoon, after sunset, and at night— sunrise, noon, late afternoon, after sunset, and at night— sunrise, noon, late afternoon, after sunset, and at night— facing the holy city of Mecca. Believers are called to prayer by a muezzin from a tall tower called a minaret in Muslim communities. Salat incorporates specific actions for the person praying. First, the believer washes hands, arms, face, and feet; then he or she clears space for prayer, often with a prayer rug. Next, the person faces Mecca and stands, bows, and prostrates, which means kneeling on the floor and touching one’s head and hands to the ground. Then he or she recites the prayers in Arabic, whether or not the person understands the Arabic language.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

92

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 92 1/4/12 11:19 AM
