Of course, not all prayer is as structured as Salat;

spontaneous prayer may occur at other times. However,

by such regulation, Salat is intended to create a feeling

of unity with other believers, who are all saying the same

words, facing the same direction, and positioning their

bodies in the same manner at similar times throughout

the day.

On Fridays, noon prayers are often said at the mosque,

the place of worship for the community. Mosques are

quite different from synagogues or churches; for example, quite different from synagogues or churches; for example, quite different from synagogues or churches; for example,

they lack seats since part of the Salat prayer requires they lack seats since part of the Salat prayer requires they lack seats since part of the Salat prayer requires they lack seats since part of the Salat prayer requires they lack seats since part of the Salat prayer requires

people to prostrate. Instead, thick carpet or prayer rugs people to prostrate. Instead, thick carpet or prayer rugs people to prostrate. Instead, thick carpet or prayer rugs people to prostrate. Instead, thick carpet or prayer rugs people to prostrate. Instead, thick carpet or prayer rugs

are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or are a common feature. Unlike in many churches or

synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the synagogues, men and women always pray separately in the

mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations mosque. Mosques also lack any artistic representations

of God, people, or animals to protect against potential of God, people, or animals to protect against potential of God, people, or animals to protect against potential of God, people, or animals to protect against potential of God, people, or animals to protect against potential

idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with idolatry. Instead, mosques are often decorated with

elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader elaborate calligraphy or geometric art. Finally, the leader

of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained of the mosque, the imam, is not a specially trained

member of the clergy but a respected community member member of the clergy but a respected community member member of the clergy but a respected community member member of the clergy but a respected community member

who interprets the Qur’an and leads the prayers. who interprets the Qur’an and leads the prayers. who interprets the Qur’an and leads the prayers. who interprets the Qur’an and leads the prayers.

Sawm

The third of the Five Pillars is Sawm, the fast held

during the month of Ramadan, the ninth month of the

Islamic lunar calendar. According to tradition, during

this month the Prophet received the first revelation

of the Qur’an. The fast during Ramadan requires

complete abstinence from food, drink, smoking, and

sexual intercourse between sunrise and sunset for

the entire twenty-eight day period. Instead, believers

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

93

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 93 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

are to rest, pray, act charitably, and study the Qur’an starting at daybreak, which is determined by the ability to differentiate a white thread from a black thread. As soon as darkness has fallen, when the threads are indistinguishable, friends and family members gather to break the fast, often with great celebration. The month-long fast can be a rigorous ordeal, especially when Ramadan occurs in the long, hot daylight hours of the summer months. As such, pregnant or nursing women, children, and sick people are exempted from the fast for children, and sick people are exempted from the fast for children, and sick people are exempted from the fast for their own protection. At the end of the lunar month, their own protection. At the end of the lunar month, their own protection. At the end of the lunar month, their own protection. At the end of the lunar month, their own protection. At the end of the lunar month, Muslims hold a three day feast called the Eid al-Fitr, or Muslims hold a three day feast called the Eid al-Fitr, or Muslims hold a three day feast called the Eid al-Fitr, or Muslims hold a three day feast called the Eid al-Fitr, or Muslims hold a three day feast called the Eid al-Fitr, or the feast of fast-breaking. the feast of fast-breaking. the feast of fast-breaking. the feast of fast-breaking. the feast of fast-breaking.

Zakat

The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and The fourth pillar is zakat, or acts of charity and kindness. Zakat involves giving a compulsory annual kindness. Zakat involves giving a compulsory annual kindness. Zakat involves giving a compulsory annual kindness. Zakat involves giving a compulsory annual kindness. Zakat involves giving a compulsory annual kindness. Zakat involves giving a compulsory annual kindness. Zakat involves giving a compulsory annual percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there percentage of one’s net worth to charity, though there is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact is little agreement among Muslims over what that exact percentage may be. Zakat is interpreted broadly, with percentage may be. Zakat is interpreted broadly, with percentage may be. Zakat is interpreted broadly, with percentage may be. Zakat is interpreted broadly, with one of the few stipulations being that the money should one of the few stipulations being that the money should one of the few stipulations being that the money should one of the few stipulations being that the money should go to help the poor and needy. They may donate to any charity or use their money however they choose, as long as the end result is to help those in need. Except for in a few Islamic states, no authority figure monitors zakat, and people are not expected to report their zakat giving to others; this obligation is strictly between the individual and Allah. Therefore, donations to the mosque to support daily operations are separate from zakat, which is distinctly charitable in nature.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

94

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 94 1/4/12 11:19 AM
