Hajj

The fifth pillar is the Hajj, or pilgrimage to Mecca,

which each Muslim should try to make once in his or

her lifetime. The pilgrimage takes place during a five-day

period of the final month of the Muslim lunar calendar.

When pilgrims arrive, men trade their own clothes for

a simple two-piece white garment. The simplicity of the

garment reminds people that in the sacred precinct, no

distinction is made between rich and poor. This is part

of ihram, the state of purity required of all pilgrims. of ihram, the state of purity required of all pilgrims. of ihram, the state of purity required of all pilgrims. of ihram, the state of purity required of all pilgrims.

Women are not required to wear the white garment, Women are not required to wear the white garment, Women are not required to wear the white garment, Women are not required to wear the white garment, Women are not required to wear the white garment, Women are not required to wear the white garment, Women are not required to wear the white garment,

but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle but are encouraged to dress modestly. Believers circle

the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque, the Ka’aba, a black stone housed in the Grand Mosque,

and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations. and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations. and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations. and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations. and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations. and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations. and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations. and seek to touch or kiss it on their circumambulations.

From there, believers move to the twin hills of Safa and From there, believers move to the twin hills of Safa and From there, believers move to the twin hills of Safa and From there, believers move to the twin hills of Safa and From there, believers move to the twin hills of Safa and From there, believers move to the twin hills of Safa and From there, believers move to the twin hills of Safa and

Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them Marwa, moving quickly back and forth between them

to remember the story of Abraham’s wife Hagar and to remember the story of Abraham’s wife Hagar and to remember the story of Abraham’s wife Hagar and to remember the story of Abraham’s wife Hagar and to remember the story of Abraham’s wife Hagar and to remember the story of Abraham’s wife Hagar and to remember the story of Abraham’s wife Hagar and

her frantic search for water for her son Ishmael when her frantic search for water for her son Ishmael when her frantic search for water for her son Ishmael when her frantic search for water for her son Ishmael when her frantic search for water for her son Ishmael when her frantic search for water for her son Ishmael when her frantic search for water for her son Ishmael when

they were exiled in the desert. In this story, Hagar’s they were exiled in the desert. In this story, Hagar’s they were exiled in the desert. In this story, Hagar’s they were exiled in the desert. In this story, Hagar’s they were exiled in the desert. In this story, Hagar’s they were exiled in the desert. In this story, Hagar’s

persistence is rewarded with a miraculous spring of water, persistence is rewarded with a miraculous spring of water, persistence is rewarded with a miraculous spring of water, persistence is rewarded with a miraculous spring of water,

the Zamzam spring, and pilgrims drink from this same the Zamzam spring, and pilgrims drink from this same the Zamzam spring, and pilgrims drink from this same

spring. Next, people move to nearby Mount Arafat. For

most of the day, the pilgrims fast, pray, and read the

Qur’an at Arafat; this part of the pilgrimage anticipates

the Day of Judgment, when at the end of time all people

will stand and be judged by God, and is considered the

most important day of the Hajj. Then pilgrims collect

stones and cast them at several walls in Mina over the

next few days; the walls represent the devil, and the ritual

remembers Abraham’s defeat of the devil when he made

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

95

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 95 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

pilgrimage to that place. At this point, pilgrims will often return to the Ka’aba to once again circumambulate, and many will conclude with the sacrifice of an animal that is then eaten and shared with those in need. Those people who do not wish to perform the sacrifice themselves can commission another person to perform it on their behalf. When the pilgrim returns from the Hajj, she or he is called a hajji, an honorific title among Muslims.

Sometimes jihad is called the sixth pillar. Many misconceptions exist about jihad, beginning with the misconceptions exist about jihad, beginning with the misconceptions exist about jihad, beginning with the translation of the term. Though some people believe that translation of the term. Though some people believe that translation of the term. Though some people believe that translation of the term. Though some people believe that translation of the term. Though some people believe that jihad means “holy war,” the true definition is “striving” jihad means “holy war,” the true definition is “striving” jihad means “holy war,” the true definition is “striving” jihad means “holy war,” the true definition is “striving” jihad means “holy war,” the true definition is “striving” or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive or “struggle.” Striving might take the form of defensive actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as actions against enemies or persecutors, but jihad is just as likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, likely to refer to a person’s inner struggle against greed, selfishness, and error. In the hadith, traditional sayings of selfishness, and error. In the hadith, traditional sayings of selfishness, and error. In the hadith, traditional sayings of selfishness, and error. In the hadith, traditional sayings of selfishness, and error. In the hadith, traditional sayings of the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The the Prophet, Muhammad is reported to have said, “The best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive best jihad is the word of justice in front of the oppressive ruler.”

Sacred Texts Sacred Texts Sacred Texts

The central, authoritative, and universally accepted sacred text of Islam is the Qur’an, which is also spelled Quran or Koran. The word Qur’an means “recitation,” which invokes both the command of Jibril to Muhammad and the importance of reciting the Qur’an aloud. The Qur’an captures the revelations given to Muhammad during his meditations in the caves outside of Mecca (see “History”). The Prophet passed them on to the first Muslims, who wrote them down shortly after his death. For Muslims, a sign of the Qur’an’s divine authority and

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

96

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 96 1/4/12 11:19 AM
