inspiration is that Muhammad, though illiterate, could

be the conduit for a text of such beauty and poetry.

The Qur’an is also recognized as the final and complete

revelation of the oneness of God, surpassing all previous

revelations, including the Hebrew Bible and Christian

New Testament. While Muslims do respect these texts

as previous revelations from God, in places where

the scriptures disagree, the Qur’an is always the final

authority.

When the Qur’an was completed, there were 114 When the Qur’an was completed, there were 114 When the Qur’an was completed, there were 114

surahs, or chapters. With the exception of the first surah, surahs, or chapters. With the exception of the first surah, surahs, or chapters. With the exception of the first surah, surahs, or chapters. With the exception of the first surah, surahs, or chapters. With the exception of the first surah,

the chapters are arranged roughly by length from longest the chapters are arranged roughly by length from longest the chapters are arranged roughly by length from longest the chapters are arranged roughly by length from longest the chapters are arranged roughly by length from longest

to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or to shortest and not chronologically by story, date, or

revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may revelation. Thus, when reading the Qur’an, one may

notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah notice that the story of the virgin birth of Jesus (Surah

19) appears before that of Noah (Surah 71). The words 19) appears before that of Noah (Surah 71). The words 19) appears before that of Noah (Surah 71). The words 19) appears before that of Noah (Surah 71). The words 19) appears before that of Noah (Surah 71). The words 19) appears before that of Noah (Surah 71). The words

of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in of the Qur’an are most authoritative in Arabic and in

spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible, spoken form, and although translations are permissible,

they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the they are not considered to be perfectly inspired in the

same way. Because of this emphasis, many Muslims strive same way. Because of this emphasis, many Muslims strive same way. Because of this emphasis, many Muslims strive same way. Because of this emphasis, many Muslims strive

to memorize and recite the Qur’an in Arabic. One who is to memorize and recite the Qur’an in Arabic. One who is to memorize and recite the Qur’an in Arabic. One who is to memorize and recite the Qur’an in Arabic. One who is

able to commit the entire text to memory is known as a

hafiz.

Sunni Muslims also recognize a collection of

traditional sayings, actions, and silent approvals (sunnah)

of the Prophet and his companions known as the

hadith. There are thousands of individual hadith, which

address a wide variety of legal and religious matters,

and which also relate stories of the exemplary life of the

Prophet. In Sunni Islam, these hadith are studied and

discussed among scholars alongside the Qur’an, and their

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

97

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 97 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

interpretations are used to help clarify proper day-to-day behavior. Shi’ite Muslims do not recognize the authority of the hadith.

Major Divisions

The two major divisions in Islam are rooted in an early dispute over succession following the death of the Prophet. At that time, he left no son to assume leadership, so the community elected leaders called caliphs to succeed him. The first three caliphs (abu-Bakr, Umar, and Uthman) were the Prophet’s close friends; the Umar, and Uthman) were the Prophet’s close friends; the Umar, and Uthman) were the Prophet’s close friends; the Umar, and Uthman) were the Prophet’s close friends; the Umar, and Uthman) were the Prophet’s close friends; the fourth, named Ali, was his son-in-law. Ali was killed, as fourth, named Ali, was his son-in-law. Ali was killed, as fourth, named Ali, was his son-in-law. Ali was killed, as fourth, named Ali, was his son-in-law. Ali was killed, as fourth, named Ali, was his son-in-law. Ali was killed, as fourth, named Ali, was his son-in-law. Ali was killed, as fourth, named Ali, was his son-in-law. Ali was killed, as was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people was his son and potential successor Husayn, by people associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to associated with the caliphate. Muslims who wished to keep succession in the family of Muhammad saw Ali and keep succession in the family of Muhammad saw Ali and keep succession in the family of Muhammad saw Ali and keep succession in the family of Muhammad saw Ali and keep succession in the family of Muhammad saw Ali and keep succession in the family of Muhammad saw Ali and keep succession in the family of Muhammad saw Ali and Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. Husayn as martyrs, which resulted in a permanent split. The group that followed the community-elected caliphs The group that followed the community-elected caliphs The group that followed the community-elected caliphs The group that followed the community-elected caliphs The group that followed the community-elected caliphs The group that followed the community-elected caliphs The group that followed the community-elected caliphs became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, became known as Sunni, referring to the traditions, or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers or sunnah, established by Muhammad; the followers of Ali who believed leadership should remain within of Ali who believed leadership should remain within of Ali who believed leadership should remain within of Ali who believed leadership should remain within Muhammad’s family were called Shia, or Shi’ites. Sunni Muhammad’s family were called Shia, or Shi’ites. Sunni Muhammad’s family were called Shia, or Shi’ites. Sunni Muhammad’s family were called Shia, or Shi’ites. Sunni Muslims currently make up nearly ninety percent of the world’s Islamic population. This is the dominant form of Islam in Saudi Arabia, North Africa, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Indonesia, and Central Asia. The largest Shi’ite population is in Iran, and majority populations are also in Azerbaijan, Bahrain, and Iraq.

Sunnis practice a form of Islam that recognizes the authority of the Qur’an and relies on the traditions (sunnah and hadith) of the Prophet to provide moral guidance (see “Sacred Texts”). Sunni communities

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

98

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 98 1/4/12 11:19 AM
