interpret these texts, a process known as fiqh, by means

of consensus, believing that God would not allow an

entire community to err in its interpretation. Sunni

communities also use the principle of analogy during fiqh,

responding to new situations by drawing parallels to older

interpretations. As a result, Sunni communities develop

different standards and laws (sharia) in different places

using these same principles. Four main schools of law

have developed from Sunni interpretive practice: Hanafi,

Maliki, Shafi’i and Hanbali. The interpretations by these Maliki, Shafi’i and Hanbali. The interpretations by these Maliki, Shafi’i and Hanbali. The interpretations by these

schools are divergent, ranging from traditional to liberal. schools are divergent, ranging from traditional to liberal. schools are divergent, ranging from traditional to liberal. schools are divergent, ranging from traditional to liberal. schools are divergent, ranging from traditional to liberal.

Therefore, sharia is not a singular, universal Islamic law. Therefore, sharia is not a singular, universal Islamic law. Therefore, sharia is not a singular, universal Islamic law. Therefore, sharia is not a singular, universal Islamic law. Therefore, sharia is not a singular, universal Islamic law.

Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that Rather, sharia is a diverse set of laws with specifics that

are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have are unique to the culture and community which have

interpreted them. interpreted them.

Shia Islam differs from Sunni in several important Shia Islam differs from Sunni in several important Shia Islam differs from Sunni in several important Shia Islam differs from Sunni in several important Shia Islam differs from Sunni in several important Shia Islam differs from Sunni in several important

ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the ways. First, where Sunni Muslims seek consensus in the

development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon development of community law, Shi’ites depend upon

the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word the mandates of Imams. Imams (the capitalized word

is different from the lowercase “imam,” which is simply is different from the lowercase “imam,” which is simply is different from the lowercase “imam,” which is simply is different from the lowercase “imam,” which is simply

a mosque leader) were historical heads of the Shia sect, a mosque leader) were historical heads of the Shia sect, a mosque leader) were historical heads of the Shia sect, a mosque leader) were historical heads of the Shia sect,

beginning with Ali and continuing in his lineage for

twelve subsequent generations. These twelve Imams are

understood by Shi’ites to share the authority of Ali after

Muhammad’s death; their directives to the community

are seen as absolute authority on all matters to this day.

One specific Shi’ite sect, called Twelvers, is uniquely

messianic in nature. Though the majority of Shi’ites are

Twelvers, not all Shi’ite Muslims are part of this sect.

Twelvers believe that the twelfth Imam, called al-Mahdi,

was taken to heaven in body prior to his death, and he

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

99

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 99 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

will someday return to participate in the judgment of the world. Though they still view Muhammad as the final prophet, Twelvers believe that the Mahdi will play an important role during the end times, so they wait expectantly for his return. In the meantime, the Mahdi guides the ayatollahs (high leaders within Twelver tradition) from his position in heaven.

Another key difference between the two sects is which sacred texts they accept. Whereas Sunni Muslims value the sunnah (as captured within the hadith) as an value the sunnah (as captured within the hadith) as an value the sunnah (as captured within the hadith) as an important source of morality and legislation, Shi’ites important source of morality and legislation, Shi’ites important source of morality and legislation, Shi’ites important source of morality and legislation, Shi’ites important source of morality and legislation, Shi’ites reject this tradition. From the Shi’ite perspective, the reject this tradition. From the Shi’ite perspective, the reject this tradition. From the Shi’ite perspective, the reject this tradition. From the Shi’ite perspective, the reject this tradition. From the Shi’ite perspective, the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the hadith are suspect because they do not mention Ali as the rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental rightful successor to Muhammad, which is a fundamental tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key tenet of Shi’ite belief. Since the sunnah plays such a key role in creating the diverse laws of Sunni communities, role in creating the diverse laws of Sunni communities, role in creating the diverse laws of Sunni communities, role in creating the diverse laws of Sunni communities, role in creating the diverse laws of Sunni communities, it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar it is no surprise that Shi’ite communities lack similar legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they legal diversity. Instead, relying on the ayatollahs, they employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and employ a more hierarchical structure for the creation and enforcement of community regulations. enforcement of community regulations.

There is also a smaller sect known as Sufi, which can There is also a smaller sect known as Sufi, which can There is also a smaller sect known as Sufi, which can There is also a smaller sect known as Sufi, which can exist within either Sunni or Shi’ite traditions. Sufism is a mystical sect of Islam which emphasizes becoming one with God through prayer and meditation. The word “Sufi” is of uncertain origin, but may be related to the word suf, which means “wool” in Arabic and describes the simple garments of the Sufi. This movement grew out of a reaction to the growing political power of Islam in the eighth century as it began to spread. The main emphasis of Sufi mysticism is fana, or extinction of the self and total union with the divine. Fana is achieved through

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

100

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 100 1/4/12 11:19 AM
