rigorous devotional and meditation practices, the best

known of which is a whirling dance, which gives rise

to the term “whirling dervishes” used to describe Sufi

practitioners. The dervishes spin in place, arms extended,

head to one side, seeking to overcome the separation

between themselves and God in the ecstatic trance

produced by this dance.

U N D E R S T A N D I N G I S L A M

Since September 11, 2001, there has been an increase Since September 11, 2001, there has been an increase

in anti-Islamic sentiment in the United States. Even ten in anti-Islamic sentiment in the United States. Even ten in anti-Islamic sentiment in the United States. Even ten in anti-Islamic sentiment in the United States. Even ten in anti-Islamic sentiment in the United States. Even ten

years later, the Pew Forum reports nearly forty percent years later, the Pew Forum reports nearly forty percent years later, the Pew Forum reports nearly forty percent years later, the Pew Forum reports nearly forty percent years later, the Pew Forum reports nearly forty percent

of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam, of Americans have an unfavorable perception of Islam,

and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than and thirty-five percent believe Islam is more likely than

other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum. other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum. other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum. other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum. other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum. other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum. other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum. other religions to encourage violence (http://pewforum.

org/Muslim/Public-Remains-Conflicted-Over-Islam.aspx). org/Muslim/Public-Remains-Conflicted-Over-Islam.aspx). org/Muslim/Public-Remains-Conflicted-Over-Islam.aspx). org/Muslim/Public-Remains-Conflicted-Over-Islam.aspx). org/Muslim/Public-Remains-Conflicted-Over-Islam.aspx). org/Muslim/Public-Remains-Conflicted-Over-Islam.aspx). org/Muslim/Public-Remains-Conflicted-Over-Islam.aspx).

Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it Unfortunately, this bigotry simply displays ignorance; it

recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims recognizes neither the close connections between Muslims

and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being and other Western religions nor the diverse ways of being

Muslim. Instead, the bias against Muslims is based on Muslim. Instead, the bias against Muslims is based on Muslim. Instead, the bias against Muslims is based on Muslim. Instead, the bias against Muslims is based on

a stereotyped picture of Muslims as Arab terrorists who a stereotyped picture of Muslims as Arab terrorists who a stereotyped picture of Muslims as Arab terrorists who a stereotyped picture of Muslims as Arab terrorists who

worship a foreign god. However, true Islam is a religion of

finding peace through submission to the unified God of

Jews, Christians, and Muslims through attention to one’s

inner and outer state. The largest group of Muslims in the

world is not even from the Arabian Peninsula, but from

Indonesia. While non-Muslims may not embrace Islam

as their own faith, correcting these dangerous and ill-

informed stereotypes is the first step in building avenues

of trust among the three Abrahamic Religions.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

101

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 101 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Arberry, A. J. The Koran Interpreted: A Translation. Austin: Touchstone, 1996.

Armstrong, Karen. Muhmmad: A Prophet for Our Time. New York: HarperOne, 2007.

Gottschalk, Peter and Gabriel Greenburg. Islamophobia: Making Muslims the Enemy. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2008.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. Islam: Religion, History and Civilization. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 2003.

Pew Forum Research Center. “The Future of the Global Pew Forum Research Center. “The Future of the Global Pew Forum Research Center. “The Future of the Global Pew Forum Research Center. “The Future of the Global Pew Forum Research Center. “The Future of the Global Muslim Population.” http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1872/ Muslim Population.” http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1872/ Muslim Population.” http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1872/ Muslim Population.” http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1872/ Muslim Population.” http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1872/ muslim-population-projections-worldwide-fast-growth. muslim-population-projections-worldwide-fast-growth. muslim-population-projections-worldwide-fast-growth. muslim-population-projections-worldwide-fast-growth. muslim-population-projections-worldwide-fast-growth. muslim-population-projections-worldwide-fast-growth. muslim-population-projections-worldwide-fast-growth.

Sonn, Tamara. A Brief History of Islam. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. Brief History of . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. . Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

102

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 102 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 103 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Hindu goddess

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 104 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Hinduism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Hinduism is the world’s third largest religion, and is

also one of the oldest. The term Hindu itself refers to the

Indus River. As travelers came into the area they began

calling Indian people who were neither Muslim nor

Christian “Hindu” because of their location. Over time,

this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu) this collection of beliefs (now understood to be Hindu)

crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a crystallized within Indian society. Though India itself is a

democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and democratic country with official separation of church and

state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded state, the religious traditions of Hinduism are embedded

in Indian society. in Indian society. in Indian society. in Indian society. in Indian society.

H I S T O R Y

Hinduism’s origin cannot be tied to one founder, but Hinduism’s origin cannot be tied to one founder, but Hinduism’s origin cannot be tied to one founder, but Hinduism’s origin cannot be tied to one founder, but Hinduism’s origin cannot be tied to one founder, but Hinduism’s origin cannot be tied to one founder, but Hinduism’s origin cannot be tied to one founder, but

archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu archaeologists have found evidence of a pre-Hindu

civilization near the Indus River in part of modern civilization near the Indus River in part of modern civilization near the Indus River in part of modern civilization near the Indus River in part of modern civilization near the Indus River in part of modern civilization near the Indus River in part of modern

Pakistan which dates back to around 3000 BCE. There Pakistan which dates back to around 3000 BCE. There Pakistan which dates back to around 3000 BCE. There Pakistan which dates back to around 3000 BCE. There

are various theories about how Hinduism came to be, are various theories about how Hinduism came to be, are various theories about how Hinduism came to be, are various theories about how Hinduism came to be,

but it is likely a blending of the beliefs of Indo-European

migrants into the region along with those of the

preexisting Indian culture.

B E L I E F S

At first glance, Hinduism may seem like a polytheistic

tradition, but in reality we would classify it as monism.

Monism is the belief that there is one essence or ultimate

reality, Brahman, which is within many forms. This

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

105

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 105 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

should not be confused with monotheistic traditions in which one god is worshiped. For monotheisms, the concept of god is intact and separate from all other spirits. For Hinduism, Brahman is so huge that it would be impossible to worship; therefore, Hindus worship many deities who represent different attributes of Brahman. By breaking down the parts of Brahman into many unique identities, Hindus are able to fully encounter the divine.

There are deities with humanlike appearances and those who look like animals, including Ganesha, the those who look like animals, including Ganesha, the those who look like animals, including Ganesha, the elephant-headed god who is the remover of obstacles. elephant-headed god who is the remover of obstacles. elephant-headed god who is the remover of obstacles. elephant-headed god who is the remover of obstacles. elephant-headed god who is the remover of obstacles. There are both male and female deities as well. Some There are both male and female deities as well. Some There are both male and female deities as well. Some There are both male and female deities as well. Some There are both male and female deities as well. Some deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of deities are responsible for nature, like Indra, the god of storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the storm. A hierarchy of gods exists and the top three are the Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent Trimurti, often called the Hindu trinity. They represent the full circle of life: Brahma (not to be confused with the full circle of life: Brahma (not to be confused with the full circle of life: Brahma (not to be confused with the full circle of life: Brahma (not to be confused with the full circle of life: Brahma (not to be confused with Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the Brahman) the creator, Vishnu the sustainer, and Shiva the destroyer.

Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates Brahma sets the world into motion. He initiates the process, and then daily operations become the the process, and then daily operations become the the process, and then daily operations become the the process, and then daily operations become the responsibility of Vishnu, who sustains existence with responsibility of Vishnu, who sustains existence with responsibility of Vishnu, who sustains existence with responsibility of Vishnu, who sustains existence with the help of Shiva. In Hinduism, there is no evil or hell, though there is an acknowledgement of demons. However, demons are not defined as evil; rather, they reject their religious duty (dharma) and instead act selfishly. This selfishness distinguishes them from the devas (the Hindu deities), who are flawed and sometimes make mistakes, but who still ultimately submit to dharma. So even though Shiva is the god of destruction, that does not mean that Shiva is evil; rather, this focus on destruction is merely an acknowledgment that things come to an

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

106

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 106 1/4/12 11:19 AM
