end. Vishnu and Shiva work together in a partnership

of preservation, destruction, and restoration. The many

adventures of the Hindu deities are captured in a vast

number of Hindu scriptures.

Sacred Scriptures

Hindus have two major bodies of scripture: sruti

(“heard”) and smriti (“remembered”). Hindus believe that

the sruti was divinely revealed to holy men. The sruti

includes the Vedas, which are the oldest Hindu texts, and

the later addition of the Upanishads. the later addition of the Upanishads. the later addition of the Upanishads. the later addition of the Upanishads.

The smriti are scriptures attributed to human creation The smriti are scriptures attributed to human creation The smriti are scriptures attributed to human creation The smriti are scriptures attributed to human creation The smriti are scriptures attributed to human creation The smriti are scriptures attributed to human creation The smriti are scriptures attributed to human creation

that are also respected and worshiped. These include the that are also respected and worshiped. These include the that are also respected and worshiped. These include the that are also respected and worshiped. These include the that are also respected and worshiped. These include the that are also respected and worshiped. These include the that are also respected and worshiped. These include the that are also respected and worshiped. These include the

epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana), epic stories of the gods (Mahabharata and Ramayana),

the Laws of Manu (civil code), and the Puranas (more the Laws of Manu (civil code), and the Puranas (more the Laws of Manu (civil code), and the Puranas (more the Laws of Manu (civil code), and the Puranas (more the Laws of Manu (civil code), and the Puranas (more the Laws of Manu (civil code), and the Puranas (more the Laws of Manu (civil code), and the Puranas (more

mythology and genealogies of royal families). mythology and genealogies of royal families). mythology and genealogies of royal families). mythology and genealogies of royal families). mythology and genealogies of royal families). mythology and genealogies of royal families). mythology and genealogies of royal families). mythology and genealogies of royal families).

The Vedas (literally meaning “truth”) are written in The Vedas (literally meaning “truth”) are written in The Vedas (literally meaning “truth”) are written in The Vedas (literally meaning “truth”) are written in The Vedas (literally meaning “truth”) are written in The Vedas (literally meaning “truth”) are written in The Vedas (literally meaning “truth”) are written in

Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn) Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn) Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn) Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn) Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn) Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn) Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn) Sanskrit and are divided into four sections: Rig (hymn)

Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and Veda, Yajur (ceremonial) Veda, Sama (chants) Veda, and

Artharva (practical prayers) Veda. The Rig Veda is the Artharva (practical prayers) Veda. The Rig Veda is the Artharva (practical prayers) Veda. The Rig Veda is the Artharva (practical prayers) Veda. The Rig Veda is the

oldest and considered to be the most important because it oldest and considered to be the most important because it oldest and considered to be the most important because it oldest and considered to be the most important because it

contains the stories of the creation of the universe.

Later there was a shift in the understanding of

worship within the Upanishads, which means “sitting

near.” The Upanishads show intangible ways to worship

the gods with hearts and minds rather than externally

through chants, dances, or sacrifices.

The Upanishads also outline a basic understanding

of the universe and set forth guidelines for how people

should live their lives. Within the many forms of

Brahaman, humans are included, and the human soul is

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

107

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 107 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

called the atman. Each human being is born into samsara, which is the cycle of birth, life, death, and rebirth. While the atman is trapped within samsara, there is a universal law of action, karma, which drives behavior based on the individual’s dharma, their duty or responsibility in life.

Karma is not just the idea of “what goes around comes around.” For Hindus, the concept of karma is more complex. In a person’s life, both positive and negative things happen as a natural consequence of that person’s actions not only in this life, but in past lives as well. These actions not only in this life, but in past lives as well. These actions not only in this life, but in past lives as well. These positive and negative consequences are the result not positive and negative consequences are the result not positive and negative consequences are the result not positive and negative consequences are the result not positive and negative consequences are the result not necessarily of whether a person has been “good or bad,” necessarily of whether a person has been “good or bad,” necessarily of whether a person has been “good or bad,” necessarily of whether a person has been “good or bad,” necessarily of whether a person has been “good or bad,” but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her but rather of how well he or she has observed his or her religious duty, or dharma. religious duty, or dharma. religious duty, or dharma. religious duty, or dharma.

A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her A person’s dharma is determined based on his or her caste and life stage. Dharma will guide the choices of a caste and life stage. Dharma will guide the choices of a caste and life stage. Dharma will guide the choices of a caste and life stage. Dharma will guide the choices of a caste and life stage. Dharma will guide the choices of a person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative person in gaining positive karma and minimizing negative karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated karma. In the cycle of samsara, the atman is reincarnated and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. and given repeated opportunities to build positive karma. Over several lifetimes, the atman that has eliminated Over several lifetimes, the atman that has eliminated Over several lifetimes, the atman that has eliminated Over several lifetimes, the atman that has eliminated negative karma will be liberated from samsara and negative karma will be liberated from samsara and negative karma will be liberated from samsara and negative karma will be liberated from samsara and reunited with Brahman. This liberation is called moksha.

One important idea in Hinduism is that of maya, or illusion. This world in which we are living is ultimately transitory. Therefore, one should not become too attached to the physical world and lose sight of the interconnectedness of existence. All is one. All is Brahman. This is the central reality of Hinduism. However, in their daily lives, many Hindus focus less on the quest for moksha and more on the life of the religion,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

108

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 108 1/4/12 11:19 AM
