which includes ritual practice, holiday celebrations, and

community interaction.

Epics

The great epics make up one category of the many

sacred Hindu texts, falling into the smriti tradition.

Perhaps the most significant of these epics is called the

Mahabharata, which is probably the longest epic poem

in history. This epic focuses on the four most important

life goals for a Hindu: dharma (duty), kama (pleasure),

artha (success) and moksha (liberation). It tells the story artha (success) and moksha (liberation). It tells the story artha (success) and moksha (liberation). It tells the story artha (success) and moksha (liberation). It tells the story artha (success) and moksha (liberation). It tells the story

of cousins, the Pandavas and Kauravas, who are fighting of cousins, the Pandavas and Kauravas, who are fighting of cousins, the Pandavas and Kauravas, who are fighting of cousins, the Pandavas and Kauravas, who are fighting of cousins, the Pandavas and Kauravas, who are fighting of cousins, the Pandavas and Kauravas, who are fighting of cousins, the Pandavas and Kauravas, who are fighting

for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so for the throne of the kingdom. The story is written so

that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main that the reader sympathizes with the Pandavas; the main

character is Arjuna, the warrior prince who is leading his character is Arjuna, the warrior prince who is leading his character is Arjuna, the warrior prince who is leading his character is Arjuna, the warrior prince who is leading his character is Arjuna, the warrior prince who is leading his character is Arjuna, the warrior prince who is leading his character is Arjuna, the warrior prince who is leading his

family to battle. family to battle.

The sixteenth chapter of the Mahabharata is the The sixteenth chapter of the Mahabharata is the The sixteenth chapter of the Mahabharata is the The sixteenth chapter of the Mahabharata is the The sixteenth chapter of the Mahabharata is the The sixteenth chapter of the Mahabharata is the The sixteenth chapter of the Mahabharata is the

Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered Bhagavad Gita, one of the most famous and revered

Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers Hindu texts. Often called the Gita, this narrative centers

on a dialogue between Arjuna and Krishna. Krishna is on a dialogue between Arjuna and Krishna. Krishna is on a dialogue between Arjuna and Krishna. Krishna is on a dialogue between Arjuna and Krishna. Krishna is

an avatar (another physical manifestation) of Vishnu, an avatar (another physical manifestation) of Vishnu, an avatar (another physical manifestation) of Vishnu, an avatar (another physical manifestation) of Vishnu,

the preserver deity, but Arjuna does not realize that he is

speaking with Krishna. Arjuna is conflicted about going

to battle because he realizes that despite many years of

war, nothing has been resolved. He knows that on the

other side of the field his family will die in this battle.

Krishna, disguised as his chariot driver, is both literally

and figuratively taking Arjuna into battle. Krishna

explains to Arjuna his responsibility to fulfill his dharma,

which includes following his role as a warrior as well as

seeking immortality of the soul.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

109

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 109 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Krishna also tells Arjuna that there are paths of yoga (union) with Brahman that he can practice to better understand his role in society and relationship to Brahman. The types of yoga are karma yoga (action union or good works), jñana yoga (wisdom union through the study of scriptures), raja yoga (meditation union), hatha yoga (energy union) and bhakti yoga (devotional union with the deities). Finally, Krishna reveals his identity to Arjuna. At that point, Arjuna falls to his knees in awe and makes his decision to fight.

The Ramayana, another great epic, follows another The Ramayana, another great epic, follows another The Ramayana, another great epic, follows another The Ramayana, another great epic, follows another The Ramayana, another great epic, follows another avatar of Vishnu named Rama. Rama is beloved in avatar of Vishnu named Rama. Rama is beloved in avatar of Vishnu named Rama. Rama is beloved in avatar of Vishnu named Rama. Rama is beloved in avatar of Vishnu named Rama. Rama is beloved in Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a Hinduism because he is the ideal hero. Rama is born a warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the warrior prince and is destined to inherit the throne of the kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to kingdom of Ayodhya. His father, the king, is prepared to name him heir when one of his wives (not Rama’s mother) name him heir when one of his wives (not Rama’s mother) name him heir when one of his wives (not Rama’s mother) name him heir when one of his wives (not Rama’s mother) name him heir when one of his wives (not Rama’s mother) comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her comes and reminds him of a promise the king made her when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. when he was very ill, and this wife was taking care of him. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. The king promised that her son Baharata would be heir. Upon hearing this, Rama encourages his father to honor Upon hearing this, Rama encourages his father to honor Upon hearing this, Rama encourages his father to honor Upon hearing this, Rama encourages his father to honor his word. Rama agrees to leave Ayodhya along with his his word. Rama agrees to leave Ayodhya along with his his word. Rama agrees to leave Ayodhya along with his his word. Rama agrees to leave Ayodhya along with his wife Sita and his other brother Lakshmana. They set up camp in the forest, and Rama leads a life of simplicity and humility, punctuated with occasional acts of heroism. For example, once he fights off a demon that has been attacking gurus (spiritual teachers) who live in the forest. This demon is actually a musician who is under a curse, and in defeating him, Rama lifts the curse and returns this demon to his human form.

At one point, Rama leaves Sita alone, and the evil demon king Ravana kidnaps her. When Rama returns,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

110

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 110 1/4/12 11:19 AM
