he sees that Sita is missing and begins to look for her.

With the help of the loyal monkey king Sugriva and the

monkey-deity Hanuman, Sita is rescued from the land

of Lanka. After Hanuman safely returns Sita to Rama,

Hanuman has his army build a bridge for Rama to cross

so that Rama can go battle Ravana once and for all,

ultimately defeating the demon king. Afterward, Rama

questions Sita’s purity after her long stay in another

man’s house, and as a result, Sita endures a “trial by fire,”

willingly entering a pyre to prove herself. She exits the fire willingly entering a pyre to prove herself. She exits the fire willingly entering a pyre to prove herself. She exits the fire

unscathed, thus defending her purity to Rama, and they unscathed, thus defending her purity to Rama, and they unscathed, thus defending her purity to Rama, and they unscathed, thus defending her purity to Rama, and they unscathed, thus defending her purity to Rama, and they

all return to Aydhoya. Their return marks the celebration all return to Aydhoya. Their return marks the celebration all return to Aydhoya. Their return marks the celebration all return to Aydhoya. Their return marks the celebration all return to Aydhoya. Their return marks the celebration

of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the of Diwali, the festival of lights, which commemorates the

lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home. lamps that lined their path home.

Worship

The Upanishads outline a shift in the way Hindus The Upanishads outline a shift in the way Hindus The Upanishads outline a shift in the way Hindus The Upanishads outline a shift in the way Hindus The Upanishads outline a shift in the way Hindus The Upanishads outline a shift in the way Hindus The Upanishads outline a shift in the way Hindus

worship from the external expression of faith to one that worship from the external expression of faith to one that worship from the external expression of faith to one that worship from the external expression of faith to one that worship from the external expression of faith to one that worship from the external expression of faith to one that worship from the external expression of faith to one that worship from the external expression of faith to one that

is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day is more inwardly focused. There is not one specific day

on which Hindus worship. Instead, they worship any day on which Hindus worship. Instead, they worship any day on which Hindus worship. Instead, they worship any day on which Hindus worship. Instead, they worship any day

of the week in a mandir, or temple. Some temples create of the week in a mandir, or temple. Some temples create of the week in a mandir, or temple. Some temples create of the week in a mandir, or temple. Some temples create

individual schedules of communal worship, but most are

open all the time. Practitioners can stop by to worship on

their own at any time. Priests will do ritual worship called

puja to the deities on behalf of the community every day.

Puja takes many forms, from simple prayers or

mediation to bathing and dressing of the deities. Most

mandirs are dedicated to one specific deity. Many temples

are dedicated to either Vishnu or Shiva because of their

significance in everyday life. Priests keep the deities happy

in the temples because the belief is that the shrines are the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

111

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 111 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

homes for the gods, and if they are not protected, the gods will abandon the temples. Most temples typically contain images dedicated to the central deity of the temple. For Hindus, the physical images of the gods are understood to be representations of the one larger essence of Brahman. In worshipping before these images, Hindus are showing their submission to this larger reality, not worshipping the image itself.

Most Hindu families also have household shrines. The household shrine typically is devoted to one central The household shrine typically is devoted to one central The household shrine typically is devoted to one central deity and contains a picture or statue of that deity. The deity and contains a picture or statue of that deity. The deity and contains a picture or statue of that deity. The deity and contains a picture or statue of that deity. The deity and contains a picture or statue of that deity. The family will put pictures of deceased loved ones, flowers, family will put pictures of deceased loved ones, flowers, family will put pictures of deceased loved ones, flowers, family will put pictures of deceased loved ones, flowers, family will put pictures of deceased loved ones, flowers, and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The and incense around the shrine to honor the deity. The family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails family will also perform puja to the deity, which entails saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for saying prayers or chants, and sometimes leaving food for the deity. In both temple and home puja, people bathe the deity. In both temple and home puja, people bathe the deity. In both temple and home puja, people bathe the deity. In both temple and home puja, people bathe the deity. In both temple and home puja, people bathe and dress the deities as a sign of respect, praise, love, and and dress the deities as a sign of respect, praise, love, and and dress the deities as a sign of respect, praise, love, and and dress the deities as a sign of respect, praise, love, and and dress the deities as a sign of respect, praise, love, and and dress the deities as a sign of respect, praise, love, and and dress the deities as a sign of respect, praise, love, and thankfulness.

The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was The popularity of certain household deities was traditionally based on geographic location. Each village traditionally based on geographic location. Each village traditionally based on geographic location. Each village traditionally based on geographic location. Each village would have a particular deity, but as villages grew, regions would have a particular deity, but as villages grew, regions would have a particular deity, but as villages grew, regions would have a particular deity, but as villages grew, regions began to influence each other. Today the family, not the village, determines which deity will be at the center of the household shrine. Other deities, depending on need, can also be included on the shrine. For example, Ganesha, the remover of obstacles, is a popular deity to call upon in times of adversity.

The concept of yoga is also part of worshipping in Hinduism. Yoga, related to the concept of union, refers to various pathways of union with Brahman. In the United States, yoga usually refers to an exercise done in

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

112

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 112 1/4/12 11:19 AM
