a gym. This type of yoga is called hatha yoga, or “force”

yoga. Hatha yoga is the practice of balancing the physical

body’s components and aligning the breath of self with

the ultimate breath of life. Yoga is only one among many

possible pathways to union with Brahman.

There are four other yogic paths to union with

Brahman: karma yoga, jñana yoga, raja yoga, and bhakti

yoga. Karma yoga is the practice of charity or action

union, emphasizing good works. Jñana yoga is practicing

the knowledge that underlies the truth of reality, the the knowledge that underlies the truth of reality, the the knowledge that underlies the truth of reality, the

difference between our ever-changing physical existence difference between our ever-changing physical existence difference between our ever-changing physical existence difference between our ever-changing physical existence difference between our ever-changing physical existence

and the eternal nature of Brahman. This yoga is often and the eternal nature of Brahman. This yoga is often and the eternal nature of Brahman. This yoga is often and the eternal nature of Brahman. This yoga is often and the eternal nature of Brahman. This yoga is often

understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is understood to be more of an academic quest. Raja yoga is

striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and striving for union with Brahman through meditation and

mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by mental focus. Finally, bhakti yoga is the path to union by

devotion to the deities at the temple and through home devotion to the deities at the temple and through home devotion to the deities at the temple and through home devotion to the deities at the temple and through home devotion to the deities at the temple and through home

puja. A person could practice any or all of these forms of puja. A person could practice any or all of these forms of puja. A person could practice any or all of these forms of puja. A person could practice any or all of these forms of puja. A person could practice any or all of these forms of puja. A person could practice any or all of these forms of puja. A person could practice any or all of these forms of

yoga.

Sects

Two important sects in Hinduism are Vaishnavism, Two important sects in Hinduism are Vaishnavism, Two important sects in Hinduism are Vaishnavism, Two important sects in Hinduism are Vaishnavism,

focusing on Vishnu, or Shaivism, focusing on Shiva.

Another sect called Shaktism focuses on the divine

feminine aspect, the many powerful forms of Shakti.

In Vaishnavism, people worship the ten incarnations

of Vishnu. Each time Vinshu comes to the earth, his

mission is to help humanity. This concept of incarnation

shapes the relationship between humans and Vishnu.

Vaishnavites believe that Vishnu is a personal god and

strive to develop a relationship with him. Typically, a

Vaishnavite can be distinguished by the white marking on

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

113

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 113 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

their forehead in the shape of a “V” with a red dot in the center representing Vishnu’s wife Lakshmi.

Practitioners of Shaivism believe in Shiva as the supreme god. Though widely known as the god of destruction, Shiva is also simultaneously recreating. For example, sometimes forests are set on fire in order to stimulate new growth; similarly, Shiva’s destructive actions create opportunities for new life to arise. Shaivites understand Shiva to be separate and different from humans. Traditionally, Shaivites are seen with three humans. Traditionally, Shaivites are seen with three humans. Traditionally, Shaivites are seen with three horizontal lines, symbolic of the Trimurti, on their horizontal lines, symbolic of the Trimurti, on their horizontal lines, symbolic of the Trimurti, on their horizontal lines, symbolic of the Trimurti, on their horizontal lines, symbolic of the Trimurti, on their foreheads. A red vertical line in the center symbolizes foreheads. A red vertical line in the center symbolizes foreheads. A red vertical line in the center symbolizes foreheads. A red vertical line in the center symbolizes foreheads. A red vertical line in the center symbolizes Shiva’s all-knowing nature. Shiva’s all-knowing nature. Shiva’s all-knowing nature. Shiva’s all-knowing nature. Shiva’s all-knowing nature. Shiva’s all-knowing nature.

Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine Shaktism focuses on Shakti (the divine feminine energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. energy) in the form of the goddess, who has many names. Shakti is the Mother Goddess, the creative force of the Shakti is the Mother Goddess, the creative force of the Shakti is the Mother Goddess, the creative force of the Shakti is the Mother Goddess, the creative force of the Shakti is the Mother Goddess, the creative force of the universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to universe, the essence of fertility, and the complement to the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti the masculine energy of Shaivism or Vaishnavism. Shakti has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-has many forms, including Parvati (the kind mother-goddess), Durga (the warrior goddess), and Kali (the goddess), Durga (the warrior goddess), and Kali (the goddess), Durga (the warrior goddess), and Kali (the goddess), Durga (the warrior goddess), and Kali (the goddess of destruction). goddess of destruction). goddess of destruction).

Even though each of these sects focuses upon a particular deity, most Hindus also worship other deities and participate in puja to these deities as well. For example, the celebration of Durga Puja is a popular festival which honors the change of season at the beginning of autumn, with Durga as the central deity. The festival is most commonly celebrated in South India.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

114

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 114 1/4/12 11:19 AM
