fourth sight—a holy man. This man seemed content, even

though he had nothing. Siddhartha asked the man how he

possibly could be content while so much suffering existed

in the world. The holy man explained that he had taken a

vow of renunciation and had dedicated his life to seeking

enlightenment. These experiences moved Siddhartha, so

he left the palace, his wife, and his child forever.

For the next six years, Siddhartha became a

renunciant, which meant living with no possessions

and engaging in extreme ascetic practices. By trying to and engaging in extreme ascetic practices. By trying to and engaging in extreme ascetic practices. By trying to

minimize his focus on physical comfort and the material minimize his focus on physical comfort and the material minimize his focus on physical comfort and the material minimize his focus on physical comfort and the material minimize his focus on physical comfort and the material

world, he hoped to transcend his present existence and world, he hoped to transcend his present existence and world, he hoped to transcend his present existence and world, he hoped to transcend his present existence and world, he hoped to transcend his present existence and

achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and achieve enlightenment. Siddhartha practiced fasting and

holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These holding his breath for extended periods of time. These

extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to extreme practices brought him close to death, but failed to

bring him closer to enlightenment. This led Siddhartha to bring him closer to enlightenment. This led Siddhartha to bring him closer to enlightenment. This led Siddhartha to bring him closer to enlightenment. This led Siddhartha to bring him closer to enlightenment. This led Siddhartha to

realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism: realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism: realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism: realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism: realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism: realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism: realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism: realize one of the most important concepts in Buddhism:

the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at the doctrine of the Middle Way. After living his life at

both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to both ends of the spectrum from extreme pleasure to

extreme asceticism, he realized extremes are not the extreme asceticism, he realized extremes are not the extreme asceticism, he realized extremes are not the extreme asceticism, he realized extremes are not the

answer. He began to believe that enlightenment is only answer. He began to believe that enlightenment is only answer. He began to believe that enlightenment is only answer. He began to believe that enlightenment is only

possible when both the body and the soul are well.

One day he sat underneath a sacred fig tree, also

known as the Bodhi Tree, the tree of enlightenment.

He was determined not to move from that point until

he had achieved nirvana. Buddhist tradition tells us

that Siddhartha began to transcend his current physical

reality and entered a spiritual realm where he encountered

a series of temptations by Mara, the Lord of Death.

After successfully defeating Mara, Siddhartha finally

confronted an image of his own powerful ego, and he

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

119

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 119 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

responded, “Let the Earth be my witness. You are an illusion.” This declaration allowed him to achieve nirvana. In his state of enlightenment, he saw all his past lives and understood the nature of the cycle of life, death, and rebirth (samsara). Siddhartha was awakened, and from that point he became the Buddha, “the enlightened one.”

The Buddha felt compelled to share what he had learned. He delivered a sermon to a group of ascetic skeptics, who were still living the extreme life that the Buddha had rejected. Others called this sermon the Buddha had rejected. Others called this sermon the Buddha had rejected. Others called this sermon “Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dharma” because the “Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dharma” because the “Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dharma” because the “Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dharma” because the “Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dharma” because the Buddha explained the problem of suffering as well as the Buddha explained the problem of suffering as well as the Buddha explained the problem of suffering as well as the Buddha explained the problem of suffering as well as the Buddha explained the problem of suffering as well as the solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to solution. He explained how people can bring an end to suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving suffering and how all people were capable of achieving enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and enlightenment. These ascetics became his disciples, and they began to share his teachings as well. they began to share his teachings as well. they began to share his teachings as well. they began to share his teachings as well. they began to share his teachings as well. they began to share his teachings as well.

B E L I E F S

Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept Buddhism is a very systematic religion; one major concept leads to another. Even though the Buddha paved a path leads to another. Even though the Buddha paved a path leads to another. Even though the Buddha paved a path leads to another. Even though the Buddha paved a path that led to his own enlightenment, this path may be that led to his own enlightenment, this path may be that led to his own enlightenment, this path may be that led to his own enlightenment, this path may be different for each person. One of the essential teachings of the Buddha was that everyone’s path is unique.

The Three Marks of Existence

The Three Marks of Existence are universal truths that apply to all being. These are:

eternal soul. It is consciousness that is reincarnated, not

the soul.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

120

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 120 1/4/12 11:19 AM
