constantly changing, and change cannot be stopped. In the same way that the essence of a river cannot be cap-tured, neither can anything be captured in existence.

the impermanence of the material world. Nothing we grow attached to will last forever, and we will only suffer when it is gone.

The Four Noble Truths

Just as a diagnosis points to a disease and a Just as a diagnosis points to a disease and a Just as a diagnosis points to a disease and a Just as a diagnosis points to a disease and a Just as a diagnosis points to a disease and a Just as a diagnosis points to a disease and a

prescription offers the solution, the Four Noble Truths prescription offers the solution, the Four Noble Truths prescription offers the solution, the Four Noble Truths prescription offers the solution, the Four Noble Truths prescription offers the solution, the Four Noble Truths

explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the explain the problem of suffering and then describe the

solution.

can escape suffering because there is no ego and every-can escape suffering because there is no ego and every can escape suffering because there is no ego and every can escape suffering because there is no ego and every can escape suffering because there is no ego and every can escape suffering because there is no ego and every can escape suffering because there is no ego and every can escape suffering because there is no ego and every thing is constantly changing. thing is constantly changing. thing is constantly changing. thing is constantly changing. thing is constantly changing. thing is constantly changing. thing is constantly changing.

desire (tanha) and attachment to the physical world. desire (tanha) and attachment to the physical world. desire (tanha) and attachment to the physical world. desire (tanha) and attachment to the physical world. All different types of desire, whether for people, posses-All different types of desire, whether for people, posses All different types of desire, whether for people, posses All different types of desire, whether for people, posses sions, or things you wish to own, cause suffering.

to end desire and attachment.

Path, a set of ideal practices to minimize desire, thereby minimizing one’s suffering.

Some people question the desire to achieve

enlightenment and how that fits in with larger Buddhist

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

121

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 121 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

ideals. The idea is that each person should be smart about the types of desires in his or her life. Desires for popularity or financial success ideally will be replaced by the desire to seek enlightenment. Since desire is innately human, there is no way to completely eliminate it, but one can reduce the negative impact of desire in one’s life, ultimately reducing human suffering.

The Eightfold Path

The Eightfold Path looks like a code of conduct, and traditionally the list has been translated with each and traditionally the list has been translated with each and traditionally the list has been translated with each and traditionally the list has been translated with each and traditionally the list has been translated with each path beginning with the word “right.” However, a better path beginning with the word “right.” However, a better path beginning with the word “right.” However, a better path beginning with the word “right.” However, a better path beginning with the word “right.” However, a better path beginning with the word “right.” However, a better path beginning with the word “right.” However, a better translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” translation may be, “Try the very best that you can.” The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-The Eightfold Path is usually represented by an eight-spoked wheel, a traditional symbol of Buddhism. This spoked wheel, a traditional symbol of Buddhism. This spoked wheel, a traditional symbol of Buddhism. This spoked wheel, a traditional symbol of Buddhism. This spoked wheel, a traditional symbol of Buddhism. This spoked wheel, a traditional symbol of Buddhism. This spoked wheel, a traditional symbol of Buddhism. This wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to wheel is often called the Wheel of Dharma, referring to the enduring nature of Buddhist truths. Additionally, the enduring nature of Buddhist truths. Additionally, the enduring nature of Buddhist truths. Additionally, the enduring nature of Buddhist truths. Additionally, the enduring nature of Buddhist truths. Additionally, the enduring nature of Buddhist truths. Additionally, the enduring nature of Buddhist truths. Additionally, the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of the circular shape of the wheel invokes an awareness of samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold samsara, the cycle of rebirth from which the Eightfold Path promises release. The eight spokes of the wheel Path promises release. The eight spokes of the wheel Path promises release. The eight spokes of the wheel Path promises release. The eight spokes of the wheel correspond with the categories of wisdom (1, 2), ethical correspond with the categories of wisdom (1, 2), ethical correspond with the categories of wisdom (1, 2), ethical correspond with the categories of wisdom (1, 2), ethical conduct (3, 4, 5), and concentration (6, 7, 8).

Existence and the Four Noble Truths, one is able to see

things as they really are.

intents to renounce desire, to act with good will, and

to do no harm. These are required in order to put one’s

“right understanding” into action.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

122

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 122 1/4/12 11:19 AM
