killing, and sexual misconduct.

peacefully, and legally, choosing an occupation that supports the Eightfold Path and does not hinder it. For example, hunting involves killing animals for food, so being a hunter directly contradicts Right Action.

oping new negative qualities, to overcome existing neg-oping new negative qualities, to overcome existing neg oping new negative qualities, to overcome existing neg oping new negative qualities, to overcome existing neg oping new negative qualities, to overcome existing neg oping new negative qualities, to overcome existing neg oping new negative qualities, to overcome existing neg ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and ative qualities, to develop new positive qualities, and to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist to maintain those positive qualities which already exist within oneself. within oneself.

stay fully focused on the present with detachment and stay fully focused on the present with detachment and stay fully focused on the present with detachment and stay fully focused on the present with detachment and stay fully focused on the present with detachment and stay fully focused on the present with detachment and stay fully focused on the present with detachment and complete attention. complete attention.

frequent practice of meditation. frequent practice of meditation. frequent practice of meditation.

Buddhism is a universal religion because many

Buddhists believe that their beliefs can be applicable

to all people, and that anyone who dedicates his or her

life to following the Eightfold Path and lives a life of

moderation can reach nirvana. Consequently, there are

some Buddhists who reach out to others in order to help

them also become Buddhist.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

123

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 123 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

D E M O G R A P H I C S

Buddhism is the fourth largest religion in the world. Though most Buddhists live in Asia, Buddhism is a worldwide religion. There are three major schools of Buddhism: Theravada, Mahayana, and Vajrayana.

Theravada: “The Way of the Elders”

Theravada Buddhists are the most orthodox; they consider themselves to be the branch which follows most closely to the Buddha’s teachings. They are strict most closely to the Buddha’s teachings. They are strict most closely to the Buddha’s teachings. They are strict followers of the scripture called the Tripitaka, which followers of the scripture called the Tripitaka, which followers of the scripture called the Tripitaka, which followers of the scripture called the Tripitaka, which followers of the scripture called the Tripitaka, which followers of the scripture called the Tripitaka, which followers of the scripture called the Tripitaka, which translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated translates as “three baskets.” The Tripitaka is separated into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing into three sections. First is the Vinaya Pitaka, containing laws governing monks and nuns. The second section laws governing monks and nuns. The second section laws governing monks and nuns. The second section laws governing monks and nuns. The second section laws governing monks and nuns. The second section laws governing monks and nuns. The second section laws governing monks and nuns. The second section laws governing monks and nuns. The second section is the Sutta Pitaka, which holds the teachings of the is the Sutta Pitaka, which holds the teachings of the is the Sutta Pitaka, which holds the teachings of the is the Sutta Pitaka, which holds the teachings of the is the Sutta Pitaka, which holds the teachings of the is the Sutta Pitaka, which holds the teachings of the is the Sutta Pitaka, which holds the teachings of the Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— Buddha. Within the Sutta Pitaka is the Dhammapada— literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture literally, “path,”—the most well-known Buddhist scripture containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live containing teachings about how Buddhists should live their lives and broad truths about the universe. The final their lives and broad truths about the universe. The final their lives and broad truths about the universe. The final their lives and broad truths about the universe. The final their lives and broad truths about the universe. The final their lives and broad truths about the universe. The final portion is the Abhidamma, which contains metaphysical portion is the Abhidamma, which contains metaphysical portion is the Abhidamma, which contains metaphysical portion is the Abhidamma, which contains metaphysical commentaries on the Buddha’s teaching. The Tripitaka commentaries on the Buddha’s teaching. The Tripitaka commentaries on the Buddha’s teaching. The Tripitaka commentaries on the Buddha’s teaching. The Tripitaka is written in the Pali language and is often called the Pali Canon. This collection is revered by the Theravada community but not necessarily by other Buddhists.

The majority of Theravada Buddhists are monks and nuns who have dedicated their lives to achieving nirvana. Theravada Buddhists believe that the Buddha was an average man with extraordinary accomplishments. They dedicate their lives to following in the Buddha’s footsteps. Because of the strict commitment that is required,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

124

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 124 1/4/12 11:19 AM
