Theravada Buddhists believe that only a few people will

be able to achieve nirvana in this lifetime. However, those

who remain will be reincarnated and have the opportunity

to continue along the path to enlightenment. Sometimes

Mahayana Buddhists refer to Theravada Buddhism as

Hinayana, or the lesser vehicle. Theravada Buddhists

consider this term to be derogatory.

Mahayana: “The Great Vehicle”

Mahayana Buddhist are the most widespread

and diverse group. There are many different types of and diverse group. There are many different types of and diverse group. There are many different types of and diverse group. There are many different types of and diverse group. There are many different types of

Mahayana Buddhists, including Zen and Pure Land. One Mahayana Buddhists, including Zen and Pure Land. One Mahayana Buddhists, including Zen and Pure Land. One Mahayana Buddhists, including Zen and Pure Land. One Mahayana Buddhists, including Zen and Pure Land. One Mahayana Buddhists, including Zen and Pure Land. One Mahayana Buddhists, including Zen and Pure Land. One

significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada significant difference between Mahayana and Theravada

is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana is the veneration of Bodhisattvas. Some Mahayana

Buddhists believe that bodhisattvas are “enlightened Buddhists believe that bodhisattvas are “enlightened Buddhists believe that bodhisattvas are “enlightened Buddhists believe that bodhisattvas are “enlightened Buddhists believe that bodhisattvas are “enlightened Buddhists believe that bodhisattvas are “enlightened Buddhists believe that bodhisattvas are “enlightened

beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but beings” who achieved nirvana in their lifetime, but

who chose to be reincarnated in order to help other who chose to be reincarnated in order to help other who chose to be reincarnated in order to help other who chose to be reincarnated in order to help other who chose to be reincarnated in order to help other who chose to be reincarnated in order to help other who chose to be reincarnated in order to help other

people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists people achieve nirvana. Other Mahayana Buddhists

consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the consider bodhisattvas to be those who have taken the

vow to achieve enlightenment and have pledged to help vow to achieve enlightenment and have pledged to help vow to achieve enlightenment and have pledged to help vow to achieve enlightenment and have pledged to help

all sentient beings along the way. There are also many all sentient beings along the way. There are also many all sentient beings along the way. There are also many all sentient beings along the way. There are also many

different buddhas—those who have reached nirvana—in

Mahayana Buddhism. Additionally, whereas Theravada

Buddhists consider the Buddha to be an ordinary man

with extraordinary qualities, Mahayana Buddhists believe

in the Buddha’s divine nature, making him different from

the average person. Therefore, the path to nirvana is more

difficult for ordinary people because the Buddha’s nature

makes him impossible to fully emulate.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

125

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 125 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Vajrayana: “The Diamond Vehicle”

or “The Thunderbolt Vehicle”

Vajrayana Buddhism, also known as Tibetan Buddhism or esoteric Buddhism, has gained high visibility worldwide thanks to their leader Tenzin Gyatso, also known as the 14th Dalai Lama. Tibetan Buddhists believe that the Dalai Lama is a reincarnation of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, “the compassionate one.” They believe that Avalokiteshvara has been reincarnated lifetime after lifetime as the Dalai Lama in order to lead and serve the lifetime as the Dalai Lama in order to lead and serve the lifetime as the Dalai Lama in order to lead and serve the Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist people throughout history. Vajrayana traditions are unique in that they incorporate mystical traditions are unique in that they incorporate mystical traditions are unique in that they incorporate mystical traditions are unique in that they incorporate mystical traditions are unique in that they incorporate mystical traditions are unique in that they incorporate mystical traditions are unique in that they incorporate mystical traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists traditions and magical practices. Tibetan Buddhists engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras engage the senses through mandalas (circular art), mudras (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person (hand positions), and mantras (chants), allowing a person to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to recognize his or her humanity in a paradoxical attempt to let go of humanity during meditation. to let go of humanity during meditation. to let go of humanity during meditation. to let go of humanity during meditation. to let go of humanity during meditation. to let go of humanity during meditation. to let go of humanity during meditation. to let go of humanity during meditation.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

126

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 126 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 127 1/4/12 11:19 AM

The Golden Temple The Golden Temple The Golden Temple

of Amritsar, India of Amritsar, India of Amritsar, India

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 128 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Sikhism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

In the tradition of Sikhism, the word Sikh means

“disciple.” The sacred symbol of Sikhism, the khanda,

captures their history and central beliefs. The khanda

has a double-edged sword in the center, representing the

duality of the individual as both soldier and saint. Swords,

called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual called kirpans, cross on the outside, representing spiritual

and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle, and physical strength. At the center is a chakkar, or circle,

symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one symbolizing the unity of all people and the belief in one

god.

H I S T O R Y

The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named The Sikh religion has a single religious founder named

Guru Nanak, but a series of gurus, or spiritual teachers, Guru Nanak, but a series of gurus, or spiritual teachers, Guru Nanak, but a series of gurus, or spiritual teachers, Guru Nanak, but a series of gurus, or spiritual teachers, Guru Nanak, but a series of gurus, or spiritual teachers, Guru Nanak, but a series of gurus, or spiritual teachers, Guru Nanak, but a series of gurus, or spiritual teachers,

firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru firmly established the faith after Nanak’s death. Guru

Nanak was born in 1469 CE in Punjab, a province in Nanak was born in 1469 CE in Punjab, a province in Nanak was born in 1469 CE in Punjab, a province in Nanak was born in 1469 CE in Punjab, a province in Nanak was born in 1469 CE in Punjab, a province in Nanak was born in 1469 CE in Punjab, a province in

northern India. He was born into a higher caste of northern India. He was born into a higher caste of northern India. He was born into a higher caste of northern India. He was born into a higher caste of

Hinduism (see Hinduism). A narrative story called the Hinduism (see Hinduism). A narrative story called the Hinduism (see Hinduism). A narrative story called the Hinduism (see Hinduism). A narrative story called the

Janamsakhi explains that Nanak’s birth was special.

According to tradition, he was born in a mud hut in

the middle of the night. At the moment of his birth,

the hut filled with light. There was a prediction that

he would be a prophet that united many faiths. Stories

of his childhood say he spread peace and love to all he

encountered, and then as a young man, he received a

calling. One day he went to the nearby river to bathe, but

then he mysteriously disappeared. His family went to look

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

129

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 129 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

for him but found only his clothes. They believed Nanak had drowned. Three days later, Nanak reappeared and revealed that the one divine essence of the universe spoke to him. God blessed him and sent him out into the world as a prophet. Nanak’s response was, “There is no Hindu. There is no Muslim” (see Islam). Nanak emphasized the concept of monotheism and rejection of the caste system. He wrote poetry and hymns praising God. At the end of his life, he called upon one of his disciples and renamed him Angad, which means “a part of my own self.” Nanak him Angad, which means “a part of my own self.” Nanak him Angad, which means “a part of my own self.” Nanak believed that this renaming was a spiritual awakening for believed that this renaming was a spiritual awakening for believed that this renaming was a spiritual awakening for believed that this renaming was a spiritual awakening for believed that this renaming was a spiritual awakening for Angad which would allow him to succeed Nanak as the Angad which would allow him to succeed Nanak as the Angad which would allow him to succeed Nanak as the Angad which would allow him to succeed Nanak as the Angad which would allow him to succeed Nanak as the second guru.

Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the Angad wrote poetry and began signing it with the pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language pseudonym Nanak. He also developed a written language for the regional dialect of the Punjabi language called for the regional dialect of the Punjabi language called for the regional dialect of the Punjabi language called for the regional dialect of the Punjabi language called for the regional dialect of the Punjabi language called Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das Gurmukhi. Before his death, Angad named Amar Das as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he as the third guru. Amar Das continued to write, and he envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. envisioned a place of worship to be built in Amritsar. Then the fourth guru, Ram Das, actually began building Then the fourth guru, Ram Das, actually began building Then the fourth guru, Ram Das, actually began building Then the fourth guru, Ram Das, actually began building the Golden Temple at Amritsar, as Amar Das had the Golden Temple at Amritsar, as Amar Das had the Golden Temple at Amritsar, as Amar Das had the Golden Temple at Amritsar, as Amar Das had envisioned.

The fifth guru, Arjan, wrote more than 1,000 hymns. He was responsible for collecting the writings of the gurus into the sacred book, the Adi Granth. He divided the book into various sections by raga, or “melody.” For example, the first raga is Sri (“supreme”); thus, all the writings in that section praise the supremacy of the one God. The Adi Granth was completed on August 16, 1604. The Golden Temple was completed shortly thereafter. At that time, people in the surrounding society considered Sikhs to be

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

130

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 130 1/4/12 11:19 AM
