a threat. As a result, Arjan was imprisoned and tortured

to death, making him the first martyr of the faith. This

event shifted the nature of Sikhism from nonviolence to

aggression as the Sikhs fought back against persecution

with violence. Arjan’s son and the sixth guru, Har

Gobind, led this transition.

Har Gobind began to dress like a warrior and carried

two swords after his father’s death. The sword of spiritual

power was called the piri, and the sword of physical

power was the miri. Har Gobind decided that Sikhs power was the miri. Har Gobind decided that Sikhs power was the miri. Har Gobind decided that Sikhs

should abandon the principle of ahimsa (nonviolence) to should abandon the principle of ahimsa (nonviolence) to should abandon the principle of ahimsa (nonviolence) to should abandon the principle of ahimsa (nonviolence) to should abandon the principle of ahimsa (nonviolence) to

protect themselves from violent persecution. The ninth protect themselves from violent persecution. The ninth protect themselves from violent persecution. The ninth protect themselves from violent persecution. The ninth protect themselves from violent persecution. The ninth

guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a guru, Tegh Bahadur, was imprisoned and decapitated by a

Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to Muslim emperor who believed the Sikhs were a threat to

Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai, Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai, Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai, Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai, Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai, Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai, Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai, Islamic culture and power. The tenth guru, Gobind Rai,

responded by emphasizing physical power. responded by emphasizing physical power. responded by emphasizing physical power. responded by emphasizing physical power. responded by emphasizing physical power.

Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called Gobind Rai created a military group of Sikhs called

Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle Khalsa (“pure ones”). Part of Gobind Rai’s inner circle

formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished formed the first Khalsa, and these people distinguished

themselves by using five outward symbols beginning with themselves by using five outward symbols beginning with themselves by using five outward symbols beginning with themselves by using five outward symbols beginning with

K, often called the “Five Ks”: K, often called the “Five Ks”: K, often called the “Five Ks”:

sidered to be a sacred gift.

represents a willingness to fight for religious liberty and to protect the helpless.

turban to symbolize the importance of cleanliness.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

131

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 131 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

by warriors, and it reminds the wearer to maintain

self-control.

union of God and strength through its symbolic circular

shape.

Both men and women in the Khalsa wore the Five Ks, and continue to wear them today. Gobind Rai’s focus on military service earned him the name Gobind focus on military service earned him the name Gobind Singh (literally “Gobind the Lion”). His four sons were Singh (literally “Gobind the Lion”). His four sons were Singh (literally “Gobind the Lion”). His four sons were Singh (literally “Gobind the Lion”). His four sons were Singh (literally “Gobind the Lion”). His four sons were killed in battle, leaving no suitable successor. He feared killed in battle, leaving no suitable successor. He feared killed in battle, leaving no suitable successor. He feared killed in battle, leaving no suitable successor. He feared killed in battle, leaving no suitable successor. He feared killed in battle, leaving no suitable successor. He feared killed in battle, leaving no suitable successor. He feared imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without imprisonment, which would have left the Sikhs without a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final a leader. As a result, Gobind Rai declared that the final and everlasting guru would be the Adi Granth instead of and everlasting guru would be the Adi and everlasting guru would be the and everlasting guru would be the and everlasting guru would be the Adi Granth Granth Granth a person, which is why the Adi Granth is now often called a person, which is why the a person, which is why the Granth Granth Granth Granth Granth Granth is now often called is now often called the Guru Granth Sahib. the Guru Granth Sahib.

B E L I E F S

Though some people argue that Sikhism is a blending of Though some people argue that Sikhism is a blending of Though some people argue that Sikhism is a blending of Though some people argue that Sikhism is a blending of Islamic and Hindu beliefs, this is not completely correct. Islamic and Hindu beliefs, this is not completely correct. Islamic and Hindu beliefs, this is not completely correct. Islamic and Hindu beliefs, this is not completely correct. While Sikhs are monotheistic like Muslims, and though they believe in reincarnation like Hindus, Sikh beliefs and traditions are unique and contain many aspects that are unlike either Hinduism or Islam.

The place of worship in Sikhism is the gurdwara. Every sanctuary has a special altar for the Adi Granth. Sikhism has no hierarchal leadership; therefore, anyone can read from the sacred text or lead worship. At the heart of the gurdwara is the langar, which refers to the kitchen where the sacred community meal is served—not just to

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

132

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 132 1/4/12 11:19 AM
