O F P L A C E

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

143

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 143 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 144 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Taoism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Taoism, or Daoism (pronounced with a “D” sound), is

represented by the Yin Yang symbol, which is a half-white

and half-black circle divided in a flowing motion down

the center. The white half is associated with positivity,

masculinity, and passivity, while the opposing black half

represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side represents negativity, femininity, and activity. In each side

is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes is one small circle of the opposing color, which symbolizes

two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in two main ideas: all things should be balanced and in

harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the harmony, and one side ultimately cannot exist without the

other.

H I S T O R Y

Lao Tzu is considered the founder of Taoism, though some Lao Tzu is considered the founder of Taoism, though some Lao Tzu is considered the founder of Taoism, though some Lao Tzu is considered the founder of Taoism, though some Lao Tzu is considered the founder of Taoism, though some Lao Tzu is considered the founder of Taoism, though some Lao Tzu is considered the founder of Taoism, though some

people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds people question his historical existence. Tradition holds

that as an advisor to the Zhou Dynasty until age ninety, that as an advisor to the Zhou Dynasty until age ninety, that as an advisor to the Zhou Dynasty until age ninety, that as an advisor to the Zhou Dynasty until age ninety, that as an advisor to the Zhou Dynasty until age ninety, that as an advisor to the Zhou Dynasty until age ninety,

Lao Tzu was especially well-known for his wisdom in Lao Tzu was especially well-known for his wisdom in Lao Tzu was especially well-known for his wisdom in Lao Tzu was especially well-known for his wisdom in

responding to questions about politics and religion. responding to questions about politics and religion. responding to questions about politics and religion. responding to questions about politics and religion.

As a contemporary of Confucius, Lao Tzu disagreed

with many Confucian ideas. Lao Tzu believed Confucius

was arrogant and idealistic. Lao Tzu believed that people

were inherently good, and that there was no need to

overcomplicate life with regulations. In fact, he felt that

excessive involvement of government, religion, and other

institutions would only heighten people’s problems. Lao

Tzu believed that the best way to maintain people’s

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

145

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 145 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

inherent goodness was for organizations and institutions to stay out of the way.

When Lao Tzu retired, many people encouraged him to write down his ideas. This suggestion resulted in the writing of the Tao Te Ching. Ironically, if Lao Tzu were alive today, he would likely be upset that anything he ever said was converted into a formal religious practice.

B A S I C B E L I E F S

The sacred text for Taoism is the Tao Te Ching, which was written in approximately 300 BCE. The writings in the written in approximately 300 BCE. The writings in the written in approximately 300 BCE. The writings in the written in approximately 300 BCE. The writings in the written in approximately 300 BCE. The writings in the Tao Te Ching are attributed to Lao Tzu, though there were are attributed to Lao Tzu, though there were are attributed to Lao Tzu, though there were are attributed to Lao Tzu, though there were are attributed to Lao Tzu, though there were probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. probably many authors who contributed to the collection. The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how The central purpose of the text is to guide its readers how to live in harmony with the universe. to live in harmony with the universe. to live in harmony with the universe. to live in harmony with the universe. to live in harmony with the universe.

Tao (the way) and Wu Wei (inaction) are two central Tao (the way) and Wu Wei (inaction) are two central Tao (the way) and Wu Wei (inaction) are two central Tao (the way) and Wu Wei (inaction) are two central Tao (the way) and Wu Wei (inaction) are two central Tao (the way) and Wu Wei (inaction) are two central Tao (the way) and Wu Wei (inaction) are two central concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be concepts of Taoism. Some people consider Tao to be equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that equivalent to the Christian concept of God, but that understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations understanding is too concrete. No physical manifestations of the divine appear in the Tao Te Ching. A later text called of the divine appear in the Tao Te Ching. A later text called Ching Ching . A later text called . A later text called Zhuang Zi, written by a lesser-known contributor by the , written by a lesser-known contributor by the , written by a lesser-known contributor by the , written by a lesser-known contributor by the same name, addresses ideas like immortality. An even later development in Taoism included personifications of the divine to provide an easier worship focus. These personifications are called the “Three Pure Ones.” Regardless of these later developments, at the heart of Taoism remains the balance of all things.

To many Taoists, the beauty of Tao is in the mystery itself. Tao is the source of all being and nonbeing, the source of all energy in the universe. Tao is impersonal but omnipresent, and it has a movement, a flow with

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

146

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 146 1/4/12 11:19 AM
