which Taoists seek to be in unity. There cannot be male

without female, mountain without valley, or life without

death. It is Tao that provides such balance, and it is the

Taoist objective to be one with the flow, leading to the

understanding of Wu Wei.

Wu Wei, inaction, is the universal basis for Taoist

living. It is important to understand the difference

between inaction and indifference. Wu Wei means that

humans should allow Tao to do what Tao will do. Humans

habitually want power and control, and this causes habitually want power and control, and this causes habitually want power and control, and this causes

people to act in ways that are unnecessary. Nature will people to act in ways that are unnecessary. Nature will people to act in ways that are unnecessary. Nature will people to act in ways that are unnecessary. Nature will people to act in ways that are unnecessary. Nature will

always return to a state of balance; humans must allow always return to a state of balance; humans must allow always return to a state of balance; humans must allow always return to a state of balance; humans must allow always return to a state of balance; humans must allow

that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy that to occur. Therefore, Wu Wei is not about being lazy

and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering. and doing nothing; rather, it is about not interfering.

Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead, Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead, Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead, Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead, Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead, Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead, Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead, Taoism would reject taking spontaneous action; instead,

human action should always include ample time and human action should always include ample time and human action should always include ample time and human action should always include ample time and human action should always include ample time and human action should always include ample time and

consideration.

In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in In addition to stressing peacefulness and balance in

Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This Wu Wei, Taoism also includes ancestor worship. This

stems from the larger Chinese culture in which Taoism stems from the larger Chinese culture in which Taoism stems from the larger Chinese culture in which Taoism stems from the larger Chinese culture in which Taoism

is embedded, as ancestor worship is a key feature of is embedded, as ancestor worship is a key feature of is embedded, as ancestor worship is a key feature of is embedded, as ancestor worship is a key feature of

traditional Chinese religion. Most families have an

ancestor altar at home where family members pray each

day. This shrine typically has incense and a list of the

deceased to be remembered. Historically, responsibility

for the shrine fell to the eldest son.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

Taoists rarely see conflict between following the Tao and

being Buddhist. Thus, many Taoists claim more than

one belief system. Some see themselves as followers of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

147

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 147 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

both Confucianism and Taoism, despite the conflicts between the founders. The idea is that each serves a different purpose. It is even possible to practice Taoism and Confucianism along with Buddhism or Shinto. There are approximately 2.5 million Taoists worldwide, most of whom are in China.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

148

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 148 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Shinto

I N T R O D U C T I O N

The term Shinto means “the way of the kami (deities),”

which comes from the Chinese language even though

Shinto is indigenous to Japan. Shinto does not have a

founder, a sacred text, a universal code of behavior, or

a hierarchal leadership system in the traditional sense.

H I S T O R Y

Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot Shinto tradition dates to prehistoric times. We cannot

trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no trace the founding of Shinto to one person, and there is no

written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know written record recounting Shinto’s beginnings, so we know

very little about the origin of the tradition. However, very little about the origin of the tradition. However, very little about the origin of the tradition. However, very little about the origin of the tradition. However, very little about the origin of the tradition. However, very little about the origin of the tradition. However, very little about the origin of the tradition. However,

there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the there is a Shinto myth that tells of the creation of the

Japanese Islands. There was always existence, and out Japanese Islands. There was always existence, and out Japanese Islands. There was always existence, and out Japanese Islands. There was always existence, and out Japanese Islands. There was always existence, and out Japanese Islands. There was always existence, and out Japanese Islands. There was always existence, and out

of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor of the kami came the world itself. The humanlike godor

kami called Izanagi (“male”) and Izanami (“female”) were kami called Izanagi (“male”) and Izanami (“female”) were kami called Izanagi (“male”) and Izanami (“female”) were kami called Izanagi (“male”) and Izanami (“female”) were kami called Izanagi (“male”) and Izanami (“female”) were kami called Izanagi (“male”) and Izanami (“female”) were

charged to create. The pair pierced a cosmic spear into the charged to create. The pair pierced a cosmic spear into the charged to create. The pair pierced a cosmic spear into the charged to create. The pair pierced a cosmic spear into the

water, which created the first major Japanese land mass water, which created the first major Japanese land mass water, which created the first major Japanese land mass water, which created the first major Japanese land mass

where Izanagi and Izanami lived. Together they created

many kami. The last one born was the heat spirit, whose

intensity burned through Izanami’s uterus and killed

her. She descended into the underworld. Izanagi went

after her, but she positioned herself in the entrance of the

underworld in order to stop him from entering in order

to protect him. Enraged and filled with corruption and

pollution, Izanagi returned to the earth. As he purified

himself, the corruption in his left eye became the sun

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

149

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 149 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

kami and his right eye the moon kami. The pollution he released from his nostrils created the kami of wind and storm.

During the sixth century, Shinto tradition underwent a process of formalization. Prior to this time, Shinto was so deeply embedded in Japanese culture that there was little need for definition. However, this changed when Buddhism spread from China into Japan, creating a need for Shinto practitioners to define themselves against non-Shinto traditions. Because competing traditions played Shinto traditions. Because competing traditions played Shinto traditions. Because competing traditions played a role in this formalization, these other traditions had a a role in this formalization, these other traditions had a a role in this formalization, these other traditions had a a role in this formalization, these other traditions had a a role in this formalization, these other traditions had a lasting influence on Shintoism. Some people believe that lasting influence on Shintoism. Some people believe that lasting influence on Shintoism. Some people believe that lasting influence on Shintoism. Some people believe that lasting influence on Shintoism. Some people believe that Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a Shinto is partly Buddhism and partly Taoism; however, a more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with more accurate statement is that Shinto is compatible with Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to Buddhism and Taoism, allowing Shinto practitioners to assume more than one religious identity. Shinto has no assume more than one religious identity. Shinto has no assume more than one religious identity. Shinto has no assume more than one religious identity. Shinto has no assume more than one religious identity. Shinto has no creed and does not actively seek converts; most people creed and does not actively seek converts; most people creed and does not actively seek converts; most people creed and does not actively seek converts; most people creed and does not actively seek converts; most people creed and does not actively seek converts; most people creed and does not actively seek converts; most people creed and does not actively seek converts; most people are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no are simply born into the religion. In Shinto there is no conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many conflict in practicing more than one religion, so many Japanese people are both Buddhist and Shinto. Japanese people are both Buddhist and Shinto. Japanese people are both Buddhist and Shinto.

The emperor of Japan is a significant leader within The emperor of Japan is a significant leader within The emperor of Japan is a significant leader within The emperor of Japan is a significant leader within Shinto because he serves as the official figurehead of the religion. However, today this is more of a ceremonial role, as the emperor does not make collective decisions or deliver doctrine in the same way that other religious leaders do. In the past, the emperor enjoyed great power among Shinto practitioners in Japan, as the people believed that the emperor himself was divine, and they worshiped him as such. However, after Japan was defeated in World War II, the role of the emperor decreased tremendously. People no longer worship the emperor as a

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

150

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 150 1/4/12 11:19 AM
