deity, and although the emperor is still respected, there is

less of a relationship between the government and Shinto

today.

B E L I E F S

Shinto is a polytheistic religion, as there is a belief in

many kami who are omnipresent throughout the universe.

Kami can take many forms in the natural world such as

waterfalls, mountains, or flowers; kami can be present

in human or animal forms; or they can choose to be in human or animal forms; or they can choose to be in human or animal forms; or they can choose to be

formless. Shrines exist where people can worship the formless. Shrines exist where people can worship the formless. Shrines exist where people can worship the formless. Shrines exist where people can worship the formless. Shrines exist where people can worship the

kami. Shrines are typically near some body of water, kami. Shrines are typically near some body of water, kami. Shrines are typically near some body of water, kami. Shrines are typically near some body of water, kami. Shrines are typically near some body of water,

and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and and most shrines are built in areas that are peaceful and

natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded natural. Shrines built in cities are usually surrounded

by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto by trees. There are no regular services held in Shinto

tradition, so practitioners choose to visit shrines whenever tradition, so practitioners choose to visit shrines whenever tradition, so practitioners choose to visit shrines whenever tradition, so practitioners choose to visit shrines whenever tradition, so practitioners choose to visit shrines whenever tradition, so practitioners choose to visit shrines whenever tradition, so practitioners choose to visit shrines whenever

they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate, they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate, they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate, they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate, they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate, they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate, they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate, they wish. At the shrine, people enter through a torii gate,

often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion. often considered to be the symbol of the Shinto religion.

The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami, The shrine itself is used to get the attention of the kami,

and people use the area around the shrine for worship and people use the area around the shrine for worship and people use the area around the shrine for worship and people use the area around the shrine for worship

as well as the shrine itself. Because of this reverence for as well as the shrine itself. Because of this reverence for as well as the shrine itself. Because of this reverence for as well as the shrine itself. Because of this reverence for

the natural world, Shinto practitioners frequently align

themselves with environmental issues and promote

conservation.

In Shinto, practitioners place great emphasis upon the

idea of purity. Even before visiting a shrine, worshippers

will be sure to bathe and dress in clean clothes. Upon

arrival at the torii gate, they will wash their hands and

feet again. In the Shinto worldview, people believe that

human beings are born good, and over a lifetime humans

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

151

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 151 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

become impure. Therefore, there are many priest-led rituals that focus on purification.

Home shrines called kamidana typically allow practitioners to worship ancestral spirits. Kamidana will often have small torii gates and be visually unadorned. There are no images at these shrines; however, practitioners often write down the names of deceased loved ones and then burn them. The family will leave offerings of flowers or food at the altar and will visit every day; without this daily visit, the kami may become upset. day; without this daily visit, the kami may become upset. day; without this daily visit, the kami may become upset.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners There are approximately 3 million Shinto practitioners in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits in the world, most of whom live in Japan. Shinto permits women to be priests, though there are still significantly women to be priests, though there are still significantly women to be priests, though there are still significantly women to be priests, though there are still significantly women to be priests, though there are still significantly women to be priests, though there are still significantly women to be priests, though there are still significantly women to be priests, though there are still significantly fewer female than male priests. Shinto influenced the fewer female than male priests. Shinto influenced the fewer female than male priests. Shinto influenced the fewer female than male priests. Shinto influenced the fewer female than male priests. Shinto influenced the fewer female than male priests. Shinto influenced the fewer female than male priests. Shinto influenced the beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo beginnings of two religious movements in Japan: Tenrikyo and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the and Omoto. Both have female founders, began in the eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal eithteenth century, and emphasize earthly personal restoration rather than preparation for the afterlife. restoration rather than preparation for the afterlife. restoration rather than preparation for the afterlife. restoration rather than preparation for the afterlife.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

152

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 152 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Shamanism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Shamanism is not a religion. Rather, it is a practice seen

in various indigenous traditions around the world. There

are shamans not only in North and South American

indigenous religions, but also in some African and Asian

religions. For example, both Yoruba and Shinto traditions

include this practice.

H I S T O R Y

Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans Archaeologists have traced the worldwide use of shamans

in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans in tribal religions back to over 25,000 years ago. Shamans

are considered to be intermediaries between the physical are considered to be intermediaries between the physical are considered to be intermediaries between the physical are considered to be intermediaries between the physical are considered to be intermediaries between the physical are considered to be intermediaries between the physical are considered to be intermediaries between the physical

and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have and spiritual worlds. People believe that shamans have

special abilities to communicate with animals and plants, special abilities to communicate with animals and plants, special abilities to communicate with animals and plants, special abilities to communicate with animals and plants, special abilities to communicate with animals and plants, special abilities to communicate with animals and plants, special abilities to communicate with animals and plants,

can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the can control the weather, and share prophesies through the

use of chanting, dancing, and prayers. Shamans are also use of chanting, dancing, and prayers. Shamans are also use of chanting, dancing, and prayers. Shamans are also use of chanting, dancing, and prayers. Shamans are also use of chanting, dancing, and prayers. Shamans are also use of chanting, dancing, and prayers. Shamans are also

able to remove evil spirits from people and communities. able to remove evil spirits from people and communities. able to remove evil spirits from people and communities. able to remove evil spirits from people and communities.

In order to become a shaman, a person must go In order to become a shaman, a person must go In order to become a shaman, a person must go In order to become a shaman, a person must go

through a rigorous process. Most shamans claim to be

called by the spirit world to take on this role and go

through a symbolic spiritual death and rebirth experience.

For some shamans, the role is passed down through many

generations in their families. There is typically a process

of purification that requires intense fasting, isolation, and

spiritual contact for a period of time.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

153

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 153 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

B E L I E F S

A shaman is a central leader in his or her community. Shamans can be either male or female and are often considered to be a combination of counselor, pastor, and physician; this complex role has led some people to identify shamans as “medicine men.” Many shamans treat community illnesses and ailments by using natural remedies like herbs. People often go to shamans because they are looking for a healer to cure emotional, spiritual, or physical problems. Also, a person may visit a shaman if or physical problems. Also, a person may visit a shaman if or physical problems. Also, a person may visit a shaman if or physical problems. Also, a person may visit a shaman if she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to she is having problems conceiving, or if he or she wants to communicate with the spirit of an ancestor. communicate with the spirit of an ancestor. communicate with the spirit of an ancestor. communicate with the spirit of an ancestor. communicate with the spirit of an ancestor. communicate with the spirit of an ancestor. communicate with the spirit of an ancestor.

The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief The shaman’s responsibilities are based on the belief that he or she is in contact with the spirit world through that he or she is in contact with the spirit world through that he or she is in contact with the spirit world through that he or she is in contact with the spirit world through that he or she is in contact with the spirit world through that he or she is in contact with the spirit world through dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will dreams, trances, or visions. Consequently, shamans will sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, sometimes use mind-altering substances like peyote, cannabis, or opium to bring about a state in which cannabis, or opium to bring about a state in which cannabis, or opium to bring about a state in which cannabis, or opium to bring about a state in which cannabis, or opium to bring about a state in which cannabis, or opium to bring about a state in which cannabis, or opium to bring about a state in which such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many such dreams or visions are more likely to occur. Many shamanic rituals focus on divination, which involves shamanic rituals focus on divination, which involves shamanic rituals focus on divination, which involves shamanic rituals focus on divination, which involves shamanic rituals focus on divination, which involves viewing the future or revisiting the past. Sometimes viewing the future or revisiting the past. Sometimes viewing the future or revisiting the past. Sometimes viewing the future or revisiting the past. Sometimes shamans conduct ceremonies to communicate with ancestors or animal spirits on behalf of tribal communities seeking protection or rewards. Shamans have been known to identify themselves with natural elements like mountains or waterfalls, or sometimes with animal spirits. There is a common belief among indigenous religions that spirits inhabit the natural world. Communication with those spirits allows believers to stay connected to the earth.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

154

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 154 1/4/12 11:19 AM
