D E M O G R A P H I C S

It is nearly impossible to determine how many individuals

worldwide practice Shamanism. However, the basic

experiential practice of shamans has become more

well-known to the Western world through the work of

Professor Michael Harner, who has dedicated his life to

the study of shamans. Harner believes that the West has

been stripped of its shamanic or spiritual connection

thanks to years of rejection of native traditions. Harner’s

goal is for all people to understand and accept the goal is for all people to understand and accept the goal is for all people to understand and accept the goal is for all people to understand and accept the

interconnectedness of the spirit world that is all around interconnectedness of the spirit world that is all around interconnectedness of the spirit world that is all around interconnectedness of the spirit world that is all around interconnectedness of the spirit world that is all around interconnectedness of the spirit world that is all around interconnectedness of the spirit world that is all around

them.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

http://www.shamanism.org/index.php http://www.shamanism.org/index.php http://www.shamanism.org/index.php

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

155

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 155 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 156 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Confucianism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Confucianism does not have a hierarchy of leadership,

central creed, or regular form of worship; nor does

Confucianism require belief in any type of deity. As a

result, is often considered to be more of a philosophy than

a religion. However, Confucianism does include an ethical

system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family, system of behavior which emphasizes honoring family,

following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture. following rules, and appreciating the surrounding culture.

Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius. Confucianism takes its name from its founder Confucius.

H I S T O R Y

Confucius was born in China in 551 BCE. At that time, Confucius was born in China in 551 BCE. At that time, Confucius was born in China in 551 BCE. At that time, Confucius was born in China in 551 BCE. At that time, Confucius was born in China in 551 BCE. At that time, Confucius was born in China in 551 BCE. At that time, Confucius was born in China in 551 BCE. At that time,

China was separated into various regions with different China was separated into various regions with different China was separated into various regions with different China was separated into various regions with different China was separated into various regions with different China was separated into various regions with different China was separated into various regions with different China was separated into various regions with different

rulers. Confucius’s father died when he was young, and rulers. Confucius’s father died when he was young, and rulers. Confucius’s father died when he was young, and rulers. Confucius’s father died when he was young, and rulers. Confucius’s father died when he was young, and rulers. Confucius’s father died when he was young, and rulers. Confucius’s father died when he was young, and

his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well his mother raised him in poverty, but Confucius was well

educated. After the death of his mother, he became a educated. After the death of his mother, he became a educated. After the death of his mother, he became a educated. After the death of his mother, he became a educated. After the death of his mother, he became a educated. After the death of his mother, he became a

teacher and later was hired to work for the government, teacher and later was hired to work for the government, teacher and later was hired to work for the government, teacher and later was hired to work for the government,

based upon his wise reputation. During his life, Confucius based upon his wise reputation. During his life, Confucius based upon his wise reputation. During his life, Confucius based upon his wise reputation. During his life, Confucius

also became a husband and father, and then finally he

died in 479 BCE.

During Confucius’s life, he encountered many

conflicts in society, which ultimately led him to value

the importance of social harmony. Confucius believed

that all human beings were capable of good, and that

with some guidance, people could achieve a peaceful

community. Confucianism became a more formal religious

system during the rise and spread of Buddhism in the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

157

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 157 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

first century CE. Buddhism emphasizes the rejection of attachment to the material world, which many Confucians feared would create a disregard for social responsibility. The belief that Buddhism would have a negative impact upon the larger community forced Confucians to organize their beliefs in order to ensure social harmony.

Later on, the scholar Zhu Xi contributed writings that addressed behavior and proper rituals, aiming to popularize Confucianism. For centuries afterward, Confucians had to memorize entire portions of his Confucians had to memorize entire portions of his Confucians had to memorize entire portions of his writings during exams. Zhu Xi’s impact on Confucianism writings during exams. Zhu Xi’s impact on Confucianism writings during exams. Zhu Xi’s impact on Confucianism writings during exams. Zhu Xi’s impact on Confucianism writings during exams. Zhu Xi’s impact on Confucianism was as influential as that of Confucius himself. was as influential as that of Confucius himself. was as influential as that of Confucius himself. was as influential as that of Confucius himself. was as influential as that of Confucius himself.

B E L I E F S

Confucianism is a system which governs how people Confucianism is a system which governs how people Confucianism is a system which governs how people Confucianism is a system which governs how people Confucianism is a system which governs how people Confucianism is a system which governs how people Confucianism is a system which governs how people Confucianism is a system which governs how people interact with one another and the world around them. interact with one another and the world around them. interact with one another and the world around them. interact with one another and the world around them. interact with one another and the world around them. interact with one another and the world around them. interact with one another and the world around them. There are five great relationships which serve as a model There are five great relationships which serve as a model There are five great relationships which serve as a model There are five great relationships which serve as a model There are five great relationships which serve as a model There are five great relationships which serve as a model There are five great relationships which serve as a model There are five great relationships which serve as a model for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues for individual daily behavior, while five great virtues serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian serve as a code to enrich the entire society. Confucian philosophies are embedded in the very fabric of Chinese philosophies are embedded in the very fabric of Chinese philosophies are embedded in the very fabric of Chinese philosophies are embedded in the very fabric of Chinese culture and are considered to be indigenous Chinese culture and are considered to be indigenous Chinese culture and are considered to be indigenous Chinese culture and are considered to be indigenous Chinese ideology.

The five central relationships are father–son, elder brother–younger brother, husband–wife, old–young, ruler–subject. The father–son relationship refers to the parents’ responsibility to instill moral values in a child, and in return the child should be respectful and obedient. The elder brother–younger brother relationship points out the need for the elder sibling to help guide the younger one through life as an extension of the parents. The elder son traditionally inherits all the paternal responsibility.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

158

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 158 1/4/12 11:19 AM
