The husband–wife relationship is based on mutual care,

but the husband still has authority over the wife. He

is expected to be the financial provider and protector,

while she is to be the homemaker. The old–young

relationship (sometimes even thought to be a friend–friend

relationship) is intended to foster loyalty and respect. The

older person helps the younger in personal development,

and the younger cares for the older as he or she ages.

Finally, the ruler–subject relationship is a reflection of

the social order both domestically and within the larger the social order both domestically and within the larger the social order both domestically and within the larger

society. The ruler should protect and care for the subjects, society. The ruler should protect and care for the subjects, society. The ruler should protect and care for the subjects, society. The ruler should protect and care for the subjects, society. The ruler should protect and care for the subjects,

but in return, the subject should be obedient to and but in return, the subject should be obedient to and but in return, the subject should be obedient to and but in return, the subject should be obedient to and but in return, the subject should be obedient to and

supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is supportive of the ruler. Loyalty is a key theme which is

present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships. present in all five of these important relationships.

One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is One of the most important aspects of Confucianism is

a focus on social harmony. Confucians believe that there a focus on social harmony. Confucians believe that there a focus on social harmony. Confucians believe that there a focus on social harmony. Confucians believe that there a focus on social harmony. Confucians believe that there a focus on social harmony. Confucians believe that there

are five virtues that humans should promote, which will are five virtues that humans should promote, which will are five virtues that humans should promote, which will are five virtues that humans should promote, which will are five virtues that humans should promote, which will are five virtues that humans should promote, which will are five virtues that humans should promote, which will are five virtues that humans should promote, which will

lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren lead to social harmony: Ren, Li, Shu, Xiao, and Wen. Ren

is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have is benevolence or kindness. People should always have

compassion and care for one another by exhibiting respect compassion and care for one another by exhibiting respect compassion and care for one another by exhibiting respect compassion and care for one another by exhibiting respect

and politeness toward everyone with whom they interact. and politeness toward everyone with whom they interact. and politeness toward everyone with whom they interact. and politeness toward everyone with whom they interact.

Li refers to proper behavior, which includes always

following the laws of society. Shu would be most akin to

the Golden Rule, meaning that a person should behave

as he or she hopes to be treated in return. Aspects of

Shu are apparent in the principle of Xiao, which refers to

filial piety. Respect for all members of the family, past or

present, is at the heart of Xiao. Not only should children

honor their parents, but children should also care for

their aging parents, and as adults, grown children should

then have their own children who will respect, honor, and

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

159

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 159 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

care for them. Finally, in the virtue of Wen, or culture, Confucius believed that people should take an interest in literature, art, and music. Believing that an appreciation for the arts would lead to more benevolent human interaction, Confucius referred to them as the “arts of peace.” If all people followed these virtues, Confucius believed it would necessarily lead to a harmonious society.

The most well-known of the literature associated with Confucianism is The I Ching (the Book of Changes). The I Ching discusses the ideas of balance in the universe and the changing nature of existence. the changing nature of existence. the changing nature of existence.

D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S

Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed Because the Communist regime in China has outlawed all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine all religious practices, it is almost impossible to determine how many Confucians there are. Additionally, most how many Confucians there are. Additionally, most how many Confucians there are. Additionally, most how many Confucians there are. Additionally, most how many Confucians there are. Additionally, most how many Confucians there are. Additionally, most how many Confucians there are. Additionally, most Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism Confucians also practice other religions such as Buddhism or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many or Taoism alongside Confucianism. Therefore, many Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly Confucians may not identify themselves as strictly practicing Confucianism. practicing Confucianism.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

160

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 160 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Zoroastrianism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

The ancient Persian religion Zoroastrianism is one of

the earliest monotheistic traditions, centered on the

one god Ahura Mazda. Zoroastrians believe in an all-

loving, benevolent god who allows people to have free

will. Humanity, not Ahura Mazda, causes evil to exist by

choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes choosing to follow the evil spirit Ahriman, who opposes

Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the Ahura Mazda. This is how Zoroastrians deal with the

problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple. problem of suffering with which many religions grapple.

Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always Further, Zoroastrians believe that Ahura Mazda always

provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and provides humanity with the opportunity for good and

gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual gives human beings unwavering support in their spiritual

battle against evil. battle against evil. battle against evil. battle against evil. battle against evil. battle against evil.

H I S T O R Y

Zoroastrianism is an ancient religion, as it began almost Zoroastrianism is an ancient religion, as it began almost Zoroastrianism is an ancient religion, as it began almost Zoroastrianism is an ancient religion, as it began almost Zoroastrianism is an ancient religion, as it began almost Zoroastrianism is an ancient religion, as it began almost

3,500 years ago. The founder Zarathustra, or Zoroaster in 3,500 years ago. The founder Zarathustra, or Zoroaster in 3,500 years ago. The founder Zarathustra, or Zoroaster in 3,500 years ago. The founder Zarathustra, or Zoroaster in

Greek, was a revolutionary of his time. In a culture that Greek, was a revolutionary of his time. In a culture that Greek, was a revolutionary of his time. In a culture that Greek, was a revolutionary of his time. In a culture that

was mostly polytheistic, Zarathustra emphatically rejected

polytheism and proclaimed his belief in only one god

named Ahura Mazda, or “Wise Lord.” Zoroastrianism was

radically different from other religions of the time because

the purpose of Zarathustra’s religion was not pleasing the

gods with sacrifices. Instead, Zarathustra believed that the

primary reason for religion was to have a personal ethical

system, which would ultimately situate humanity on the

side of goodness and truth.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

161

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 161 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

The central text for Zoroastrians is the Avesta, likely written by Zarathustra. The Avesta originally contained seventeen gathas (hymns) that praise Ahura Mazda; however, today only fragments of the Avesta still exist. The writings in the Avesta make up what some people consider to be one of the greatest poetic collections in history, indicating that Zarathustra was probably well-educated; scholars believe that he also may have been a priest in the pre-Zoroastrian religion he so strongly criticized. However, there is little evidence of any specific criticized. However, there is little evidence of any specific criticized. However, there is little evidence of any specific educational training, for there are many unknowns about educational training, for there are many unknowns about educational training, for there are many unknowns about educational training, for there are many unknowns about educational training, for there are many unknowns about his life; even the time period of his existence is debated. his life; even the time period of his existence is debated. his life; even the time period of his existence is debated. his life; even the time period of his existence is debated. his life; even the time period of his existence is debated.

Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious Zarathustra lived in what is now Iran. His religious proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers proclamations were so radical that he and his followers were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in were persecuted. As a result, Zarathustra fled to an area in modern-day Afghanistan. In this new land, the king of the modern-day Afghanistan. In this new land, the king of the modern-day Afghanistan. In this new land, the king of the modern-day Afghanistan. In this new land, the king of the modern-day Afghanistan. In this new land, the king of the region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed region converted after Zarathustra miraculously healed the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new the king’s favorite horse. The king’s support gave this new religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish. religion the political protection it needed to flourish.

As Zarathustra grew older, he began to emphasize As Zarathustra grew older, he began to emphasize As Zarathustra grew older, he began to emphasize As Zarathustra grew older, he began to emphasize the importance of marriage and family. In addition, the importance of marriage and family. In addition, the importance of marriage and family. In addition, the importance of marriage and family. In addition, Zarathustra encouraged people to work hard and to appreciate their lives.

B E L I E F S

Zoroastrians believe in one almighty, wise creator being called Ahura Mazda, who is omnipotent, omniscient, and benevolent. Ahura Mazda created the world and humanity, and is the source of love and happiness. Having an absolute, unchanging moral character, Ahura Mazda is the guardian of all people. This is represented in the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

162

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 162 1/4/12 11:19 AM
