Faravahar or Farohar, the symbol of Zoroastrianism.

The birdlike Faravahar has at its center a human figure

representing the human soul within the physical world,

and this human is encircled by a ring that represents the

immortality of the spiritual world. The wings on either

side of the ring are lined with three rows of feathers,

which represent good thoughts, good words, and good

deeds—the three principles by which all Zoroastrians

should try to live. The three rows of feathers on the tail

likewise represent bad thoughts, bad words, and bad likewise represent bad thoughts, bad words, and bad likewise represent bad thoughts, bad words, and bad

deeds, which humanity should always strive to avoid. deeds, which humanity should always strive to avoid. deeds, which humanity should always strive to avoid. deeds, which humanity should always strive to avoid. deeds, which humanity should always strive to avoid.

Finally, the two lines which extend outward in opposite Finally, the two lines which extend outward in opposite Finally, the two lines which extend outward in opposite Finally, the two lines which extend outward in opposite Finally, the two lines which extend outward in opposite

directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing directions at the base of the figure represent the opposing

forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must forces of good and evil, between which humans must

constantly choose. constantly choose.

When Ahura Mazda created humanity, he did not When Ahura Mazda created humanity, he did not When Ahura Mazda created humanity, he did not When Ahura Mazda created humanity, he did not When Ahura Mazda created humanity, he did not When Ahura Mazda created humanity, he did not

limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have limit free will. According to Zoroastrians, humans have

the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this the opportunity to choose between good and evil; this

choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a choice is important because the universe is engaged in a

cosmic battle between good and evil, and humans must cosmic battle between good and evil, and humans must cosmic battle between good and evil, and humans must cosmic battle between good and evil, and humans must

fight on one side or the other. Before creation, there fight on one side or the other. Before creation, there fight on one side or the other. Before creation, there fight on one side or the other. Before creation, there

were twin spirits of good and evil. Spenta Mainya is the

spirit of truth, and Angra Mainyu is the spirit of lie. The

constant conflict between truth and lies manages all of

humanity. This system of good versus evil is dualistic,

meaning two forces are in opposition. While Ahura

Mazda is the benevolent, supreme god, there is also an

evil supernatural being called Ahriman, who functions

very much like Satan in Christianity. Ahriman is called

the “Father of Lies,” and his job is to tempt humanity

away from fighting on behalf of good.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

163

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 163 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Zoroastrians aim to live according to a modest doctrine of humata, hukhta and huveshta. Humata means “good thoughts,” and these good thoughts should lead to hukhta, “good words.” In turn, good words should be put into practice by doing huveshta, “good works.” By unifying one’s thoughts, speech, and actions under Ahura Mazda, Zoroastrians may live in harmony.

Zarathustra believed there were two possible fates for a person in the afterlife. A person either joins Ahura Mazda in pure joy in a heaven-like place, or the person is Mazda in pure joy in a heaven-like place, or the person is Mazda in pure joy in a heaven-like place, or the person is sent into Ahriman’s hell-like pit of fire as a result of bad sent into Ahriman’s hell-like pit of fire as a result of bad sent into Ahriman’s hell-like pit of fire as a result of bad sent into Ahriman’s hell-like pit of fire as a result of bad sent into Ahriman’s hell-like pit of fire as a result of bad behavior. Significantly, Zoroastrians also look for a day behavior. Significantly, Zoroastrians also look for a day behavior. Significantly, Zoroastrians also look for a day behavior. Significantly, Zoroastrians also look for a day behavior. Significantly, Zoroastrians also look for a day of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally of final judgment during which Ahura Mazda will finally conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph conquer Ahriman, and good will ultimately triumph over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and over evil. At this time, the dead will be resurrected, and all those who were faithful will live forever with Ahura all those who were faithful will live forever with Ahura all those who were faithful will live forever with Ahura all those who were faithful will live forever with Ahura all those who were faithful will live forever with Ahura Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise. Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise. Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise. Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise. Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise. Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise. Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise. Mazda in this newly renovated, perfect paradise.

Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than Worship is usually an individual practice rather than being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and being communal, but there are also several rituals and festivals that are celebrated as a community. Zoroastrian festivals that are celebrated as a community. Zoroastrian festivals that are celebrated as a community. Zoroastrian festivals that are celebrated as a community. Zoroastrian places of worship are called Fire Temples because they places of worship are called Fire Temples because they places of worship are called Fire Temples because they places of worship are called Fire Temples because they always contain a sacred fire as a symbol of Ahura Mazda. Many Zoroastrian homes have small fire altars for domestic worship; the sacred flame must always remain burning both at home and in the temple, a practice which stretches back into ancient times.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

There are approximately 200,000 Zoroastrians in the world today. The largest populations are found in Northern India, Pakistan, and Iran. The number of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

164

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 164 1/4/12 11:19 AM
