Zoroastrians has decreased significantly over time. One

reason for this decrease is Zoroastrianism’s refusal to

accept converts into the religion. Additionally, the rise

of Christianity and Islam and their political power over

Zoroastrian regions caused a decline in the number of

Zoroastrians. Nevertheless, Zoroastrians live in countries

all over the world.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

165

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 165 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 166 1/4/12 11:19 AM

Rastafarianism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Colonization of the Caribbean by white Europeans and

their subsequent enslavement of Africans planted the

seed for the religion of Rastafarianism. This religion

focuses upon the desire to restore an African homeland,

specifically the promised land of Ethiopia. As a

monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many monotheistic religion, Rastafarianism draws upon many

influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism. influences in Christianity and Judaism.

H I S T O R Y

In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started In the 1930s, a Jamaican named Marcus Garvey started

the Universal Negro Improvement Association, which the Universal Negro Improvement Association, which the Universal Negro Improvement Association, which the Universal Negro Improvement Association, which the Universal Negro Improvement Association, which the Universal Negro Improvement Association, which the Universal Negro Improvement Association, which

aimed to return all people of African descent to their aimed to return all people of African descent to their aimed to return all people of African descent to their aimed to return all people of African descent to their aimed to return all people of African descent to their aimed to return all people of African descent to their aimed to return all people of African descent to their aimed to return all people of African descent to their

places of origin. Garvey believed that the crowning of the places of origin. Garvey believed that the crowning of the places of origin. Garvey believed that the crowning of the places of origin. Garvey believed that the crowning of the places of origin. Garvey believed that the crowning of the places of origin. Garvey believed that the crowning of the places of origin. Garvey believed that the crowning of the

Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie was the beginning of the

fulfillment of this prophecy; therefore, Garvey considered fulfillment of this prophecy; therefore, Garvey considered fulfillment of this prophecy; therefore, Garvey considered fulfillment of this prophecy; therefore, Garvey considered fulfillment of this prophecy; therefore, Garvey considered fulfillment of this prophecy; therefore, Garvey considered

him to be a messiah. In fact, the word “Rastafarianism” him to be a messiah. In fact, the word “Rastafarianism” him to be a messiah. In fact, the word “Rastafarianism” him to be a messiah. In fact, the word “Rastafarianism”

is based on Selassie’s title and name before becoming is based on Selassie’s title and name before becoming is based on Selassie’s title and name before becoming is based on Selassie’s title and name before becoming

emperor (Ras Tafari).

Race is a significant issue in Rastafarianism. Leonard

Howell, an early leader of the Rastafari movement,

proclaimed six major doctrinal beliefs, two of which were

opposition to the white culture which engendered slavery,

and God’s actions of justice and revenge against this

culture. Howell also promoted the superiority of black

culture in an effort to shed a long history of oppression.

Howell was briefly jailed by the Jamaican government

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

167

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 167 1/4/12 11:19 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

on the charge of sedition, primarily due to his devotion to Selassie. Afterward, the Rastafarian movement intentionally remained without a formal leader.

In 1966, Haile Selassie visited Jamaica, which was a monumental event. Rastas understand this visit to be the beginning of the liberation they seek, giving them hope for an ultimate return to Ethiopia, the promised land.

B E L I E F S

Rastas believe in one true god called Jah, who is within all Rastas believe in one true god called Jah, who is within all Rastas believe in one true god called Jah, who is within all people. Through meditation and experience, Jah bestows people. Through meditation and experience, Jah bestows people. Through meditation and experience, Jah bestows people. Through meditation and experience, Jah bestows people. Through meditation and experience, Jah bestows personal revelations upon those who are faithful. Rastas personal revelations upon those who are faithful. Rastas personal revelations upon those who are faithful. Rastas personal revelations upon those who are faithful. Rastas personal revelations upon those who are faithful. Rastas believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, believe that Africans are descended from the Israelites, and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of and that they were sent into exile because of the color of their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is their skin. According to Rastafarian tradition, Ethiopia is connected to Israel through the son of King Solomon and connected to Israel through the son of King Solomon and connected to Israel through the son of King Solomon and connected to Israel through the son of King Solomon and connected to Israel through the son of King Solomon and connected to Israel through the son of King Solomon and connected to Israel through the son of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered the Queen of Sheba. This is why Ethiopia is considered to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical to be the promised land, and Babylon is the physical representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites representation of hell. This relationship to the Israelites allows the Rastas to believe in a legacy of prophets allows the Rastas to believe in a legacy of prophets allows the Rastas to believe in a legacy of prophets allows the Rastas to believe in a legacy of prophets beginning with Moses. beginning with Moses. beginning with Moses.

Rastas believed that Haile Selassie was Jah in human form—the King Divine, who proclaimed that death would only affect the unrighteous. Rastas also believe in reincarnation, and that one’s same identity will be maintained in subsequent lives.

One important ritual in Rastafarianism is the “reasoning session.” Traditionally practiced only by males, reasoning sessions are opportunities for people to gather and to share their goals with one another. The group will use marijuana as a holy herb that is a source of nutrition,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

168

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 168 1/4/12 11:19 AM
