communicate with the Orisha and receive guidance and

healing.

Santeria

Santeria, “the way of the saints,” is primarily in Cuba,

just ninety miles south of the United States. Santeria has

no specific governing body. Each priest (santero) operates

his own casa de santos, or house of the saints. The casa de

santos is not a formal church or temple, but rather a home

that is used for worship and ritual. There is no central

leadership and no unified doctrine, though santeros do leadership and no unified doctrine, though leadership and no unified doctrine, though leadership and no unified doctrine, though leadership and no unified doctrine, though

consult with high priests, called babalawos. The babalawo is consult with high priests, called consult with high priests, called consult with high priests, called consult with high priests, called babalawos babalawos babalawos

believed to have a direct line of communication with the believed to have a direct line of communication with the believed to have a direct line of communication with the believed to have a direct line of communication with the believed to have a direct line of communication with the believed to have a direct line of communication with the believed to have a direct line of communication with the

Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare. Orisha, while the Orisha communicate with Olodumare.

Each practitioner has a specific Orisha to whom he Each practitioner has a specific Orisha to whom he Each practitioner has a specific Orisha to whom he Each practitioner has a specific Orisha to whom he Each practitioner has a specific Orisha to whom he Each practitioner has a specific Orisha to whom he Each practitioner has a specific Orisha to whom he

or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position or she prays. In Santeria, instead of praying in a position

of reverence, people prefer to pray face-to-face with the of reverence, people prefer to pray face-to-face with the of reverence, people prefer to pray face-to-face with the of reverence, people prefer to pray face-to-face with the of reverence, people prefer to pray face-to-face with the of reverence, people prefer to pray face-to-face with the of reverence, people prefer to pray face-to-face with the

Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint Orisha using images of Catholic saints. For example, Saint

Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is Barbara is used to worship the Chango, whose domain is

the storm. This association stems from Saint Barbara’s the storm. This association stems from Saint Barbara’s the storm. This association stems from Saint Barbara’s the storm. This association stems from Saint Barbara’s

identity as the patron saint of the military, and a popular identity as the patron saint of the military, and a popular identity as the patron saint of the military, and a popular identity as the patron saint of the military, and a popular

story about her involves lightning striking her father when

he tried to kill her. Each Orisha has a specific holiday to

be celebrated and a feast day to be observed. In addition,

each Orisha has specific rituals that are conducted in his

or her honor.

Some critics believe that Santeria hides within the

boundaries of Catholicism, but believers insist that they

are both Catholic and Santeria at the same time, seeing no

conflict between the two because they see many avenues

to reach the same true god. However, papal Catholic

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

173

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 173 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

tradition would disagree and say that Santeria cannot be practiced legitimately alongside Catholicism.

In order to become a follower of Santeria, a person must seek out a santero and then undergo a series of initiation rituals. At the conclusion of the first ritual, the initiate learns the identity of the Orisha to whom he or she will pray, and is also given a necklace that will protect against evil. The main goal of Santeria is to achieve harmony with the spiritual and physical realms.

Santeria has no central written text. Instead, there is ancient Yoruba oral tradition that has been passed down ancient Yoruba oral tradition that has been passed down ancient Yoruba oral tradition that has been passed down ancient Yoruba oral tradition that has been passed down ancient Yoruba oral tradition that has been passed down to the present. This oral collection is called the Corpus of to the present. This oral collection is called the to the present. This oral collection is called the to the present. This oral collection is called the to the present. This oral collection is called the Ifa. Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a . Each individual also has a personal notebook called a liberta that is a gift from his or her padrino, or godfather. that is a gift from his or her that is a gift from his or her padrino that is a gift from his or her padrino that is a gift from his or her that is a gift from his or her padrino, or godfather. that is a gift from his or her padrino that is a gift from his or her padrino , or godfather. The liberta contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, contains handwritten rituals, practices, advice, and incantations for divination. The liberta is different for and incantations for divination. The and incantations for divination. The and incantations for divination. The liberta and incantations for divination. The liberta every person.

Vodou

Vodou means “the mysterious force,” and has similar Vodou means “the mysterious force,” and has similar Vodou means “the mysterious force,” and has similar Vodou means “the mysterious force,” and has similar West African roots to Santeria. The African slaves who West African roots to Santeria. The African slaves who West African roots to Santeria. The African slaves who West African roots to Santeria. The African slaves who were transported to Haiti were baptized by Catholic priests as soon as they arrived at the island. The result was not conversion to devout Catholicism, but rather a move to practice native religion in secret. This secrecy has led to great speculation, causing many misconceptions of Vodou.

Like Santeria, Vodou has a genderless, omnipotent god who is not present in this world. This god is called Bondyé, derived from the French phrase Bon Dieu, literally “Good God.” There are also spirits called the Loa to whom believers pray. The Loa each have unique domains,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

174

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 174 1/4/12 11:20 AM
