including the sea, storm, war, creation, love, and more.

Like Santeria, Vodou’s Loa have connections to Catholic

saints, and these spirits do interact with people on earth.

Additionally, each Loa has specific prayers, dances, and

festivals associated with him or her, and people come

to individual Loa with specific prayers, requests, and

questions.

Vodou ritual is typically practiced in homes of priests

(houngans) or priestesses (mambos). A common focus of

worship is healing, which is a vital aspect of practically all worship is healing, which is a vital aspect of practically all worship is healing, which is a vital aspect of practically all

Vodou ritual. Vodouisants also perform rituals to claim Vodou ritual. Vodouisants also perform rituals to claim Vodou ritual. Vodouisants also perform rituals to claim Vodou ritual. Vodouisants also perform rituals to claim Vodou ritual. Vodouisants also perform rituals to claim

lost ancestor souls, since unclaimed souls in the afterworld lost ancestor souls, since unclaimed souls in the afterworld lost ancestor souls, since unclaimed souls in the afterworld lost ancestor souls, since unclaimed souls in the afterworld lost ancestor souls, since unclaimed souls in the afterworld

can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can can be dangerous for those still living. These souls can

cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come cause unrest, but if they are respected, no harm will come

to the living.

D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S

Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and Yoruba religion is still alive and well in Nigeria, Togo, and

Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas, Benin. Over 60 million people, mostly in the Americas,

practice Vodou. There are also other Orisha traditions practice Vodou. There are also other Orisha traditions practice Vodou. There are also other Orisha traditions practice Vodou. There are also other Orisha traditions

with roots in Yoruba religion, including Candomble in with roots in Yoruba religion, including Candomble in with roots in Yoruba religion, including Candomble in with roots in Yoruba religion, including Candomble in

Brazil and Shango in Trinidad. There are over 100 million

practitioners in Brazil; 5 million people practice Santeria

between Cuba and the United States.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

175

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 175 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 176 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Neopaganism,

Wicca, and Druidism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Neopaganism refers to a group of religions that draws

beliefs and practices from ancient nature-based traditions.

For many people, the term pagan is used derogatorily

to insinuate someone is going against the norm or is to insinuate someone is going against the norm or is

uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from uncivilized. The original meaning of the term comes from

the Latin pagus, which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land , which typically refers to a piece of land

or countryside. Thus, the word paganus referred to those or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word paganus or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word paganus or countryside. Thus, the word or countryside. Thus, the word paganus paganus paganus paganus paganus paganus paganus paganus paganus paganus paganus referred to those

country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and country folk who held onto ancient religious practices and

refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity. refused to convert to Christianity.

Some of the most well-known Neopagan traditions are Some of the most well-known Neopagan traditions are Some of the most well-known Neopagan traditions are Some of the most well-known Neopagan traditions are Some of the most well-known Neopagan traditions are Some of the most well-known Neopagan traditions are Some of the most well-known Neopagan traditions are

Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions Wicca and Druidism, though there are many traditions

which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek, which make up paganism overall. Ancient Roman, Greek,

and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan and Egyptian religions are examples of ancient pagan

traditions. Ancient Chinese traditions that focus on the traditions. Ancient Chinese traditions that focus on the traditions. Ancient Chinese traditions that focus on the traditions. Ancient Chinese traditions that focus on the

earth and spirits have also been categorized as pagan earth and spirits have also been categorized as pagan earth and spirits have also been categorized as pagan earth and spirits have also been categorized as pagan

faiths.

H I S T O R Y

The religious traditions of Neopaganism stretch back into

antiquity, so there is no primary founder or originating

group. Throughout history, these religions have been

persecuted as heretical under Christian and Islamic

rule. However, in recent years, the number of Neopagan

practitioners has been on the rise. Such an increase could

be the result of global concerns about climate change or

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

177

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 177 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

diminishing natural resources, as these ancient traditions promote a spiritual connection to the earth. Regardless, over the last fifty years, groups like Pagan Pride have developed in support of these religious traditions.

B E L I E F S

Wicca

Within the Wiccan religion, there are many different beliefs. Some Wiccans believe there are many gods, while others believe in only one. Some focus on the concept others believe in only one. Some focus on the concept others believe in only one. Some focus on the concept of a dual-gendered deity having both male and female of a dual-gendered deity having both male and female of a dual-gendered deity having both male and female of a dual-gendered deity having both male and female of a dual-gendered deity having both male and female of a dual-gendered deity having both male and female characteristics, whereas others emphasize only the characteristics, whereas others emphasize only the characteristics, whereas others emphasize only the characteristics, whereas others emphasize only the characteristics, whereas others emphasize only the characteristics, whereas others emphasize only the characteristics, whereas others emphasize only the feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship. feminine and therefore engage in goddess worship.

Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There Most holidays center on seasonal changes. There are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which are a total of eight high holy days called Sabbats, which fall upon solstices and equinoxes. On the monthly fall upon solstices and equinoxes. On the monthly fall upon solstices and equinoxes. On the monthly fall upon solstices and equinoxes. On the monthly fall upon solstices and equinoxes. On the monthly fall upon solstices and equinoxes. On the monthly fall upon solstices and equinoxes. On the monthly occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually occurrence of the full moon, called Esbat, there is usually a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the a communal service. The pentacle, or pentagram, is the most well-known Wiccan symbol. Each point represents most well-known Wiccan symbol. Each point represents most well-known Wiccan symbol. Each point represents most well-known Wiccan symbol. Each point represents most well-known Wiccan symbol. Each point represents most well-known Wiccan symbol. Each point represents an element: earth, air, water, fire, and spirit. Spirit is an element: earth, air, water, fire, and spirit. Spirit is an element: earth, air, water, fire, and spirit. Spirit is an element: earth, air, water, fire, and spirit. Spirit is considered the most important element of the natural considered the most important element of the natural considered the most important element of the natural considered the most important element of the natural world. Wiccan practitioners are traditionally called witches, whether male or female, and the practice of Wicca is called witchcraft. There is no central sacred text for Wiccans, but many covens (groups of Wiccans) will collect incantations (spells or prayers used in ceremonies) to pass down from generation to generation. Wiccans believe that they may behave in any way they choose as long as it harms no other person. This ethic is called the Wiccan Rede.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

178

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 178 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Neopaganism, Wicca, and Druidism

Druidism

Druidism is the second largest Neopagan tradition,

with the largest number of practitioners in England.

Druidism began in the eighteenth century, and Druids

suffered great persecution for their beliefs. Druidism’s

connection to ancient nature-based religion is not as

evident as in Wicca, but many Druids do trace their faith

back to the ancient Celts as far as 4,000 BCE. Druids

are mostly polytheistic, claiming approximately thirty

primary deities and several other less significant deities as primary deities and several other less significant deities as primary deities and several other less significant deities as primary deities and several other less significant deities as

their pantheon. Most of these deities are related to nature, their pantheon. Most of these deities are related to nature, their pantheon. Most of these deities are related to nature, their pantheon. Most of these deities are related to nature, their pantheon. Most of these deities are related to nature, their pantheon. Most of these deities are related to nature, their pantheon. Most of these deities are related to nature,

with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important. with the sun god and fire god being the most important.

While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are While many Druids are polytheistic, some Druids are

monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship monotheists, and still others are animists. Druid worship

is traditionally in orchards filled with oak trees, which is traditionally in orchards filled with oak trees, which is traditionally in orchards filled with oak trees, which is traditionally in orchards filled with oak trees, which is traditionally in orchards filled with oak trees, which is traditionally in orchards filled with oak trees, which is traditionally in orchards filled with oak trees, which

is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy is why the term Druid means “oak tree wisdom.” Holy

days, also called Fire Festivals, are associated with season days, also called Fire Festivals, are associated with season days, also called Fire Festivals, are associated with season days, also called Fire Festivals, are associated with season days, also called Fire Festivals, are associated with season days, also called Fire Festivals, are associated with season days, also called Fire Festivals, are associated with season

changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each changes. Druids have four high holy days, with each

falling between solstice and equinox. The Druid belief falling between solstice and equinox. The Druid belief falling between solstice and equinox. The Druid belief falling between solstice and equinox. The Druid belief falling between solstice and equinox. The Druid belief falling between solstice and equinox. The Druid belief

system is very open, and not every Druid practices in the system is very open, and not every Druid practices in the system is very open, and not every Druid practices in the system is very open, and not every Druid practices in the

same way. Druids hold respect for nature and promote same way. Druids hold respect for nature and promote same way. Druids hold respect for nature and promote

peaceful human interaction.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

There is no current worldwide estimate of how many

people are Neopagans. However, Adherents.com claims

that there are approximately one million practitioners as

of the year 2000. That number has most likely grown over

the last eleven years. Because there are so many religions

that may or may not be classified as Neopagan, accurate

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

179

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 179 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

estimates are impossible to attain. The largest number of Wiccan practitioners is in the United States.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

180

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 180 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Native American

Religion

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Though all Native American traditions are not the

same, with each tribe having its own unique beliefs and

practices, there are still some common elements. Native

American religious traditions differ from many other American religious traditions differ from many other

religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their religions because, like most indigenous religions, their

spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as spiritual practices are enmeshed within tribal culture as

a way of life.

H I S T O R Y

Native American tribes felt a great impact on their Native American tribes felt a great impact on their Native American tribes felt a great impact on their Native American tribes felt a great impact on their Native American tribes felt a great impact on their Native American tribes felt a great impact on their Native American tribes felt a great impact on their

way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North way of life during the European colonization of North

and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century. and South America beginning in the fifteenth century.

Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new Tribes suffered and died from the introduction of new

illnesses from which Native Americans had no immunity, illnesses from which Native Americans had no immunity, illnesses from which Native Americans had no immunity, illnesses from which Native Americans had no immunity,

and native peoples lost their lands as European settlers and native peoples lost their lands as European settlers and native peoples lost their lands as European settlers and native peoples lost their lands as European settlers

forced them from their traditional homes. Because tribal

ceremonies often had strong ties to the land, loss of

this land necessitated many changes to the ways that

tribes worshiped. Tribes were decimated as they fought

back against settlers. Christian missionaries either

forced conversion upon Native Americans or encouraged

syncretistic practice, which means that tribes blended

their own spiritual traditions with Christian practices.

In 1887, the United States government passed the Dawes

Act, which outlawed all Native American expressions of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

181

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 181 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

religion, and this policy stayed in place for nearly fifty years. During this time, Native Americans were unable to practice religious ceremonies or wear traditional tribal dress without fear of punishment by authorities. Relationships between Native Americans and the surrounding culture continue to be complicated by this difficult history.

B E L I E F S

Most tribes do not have written scriptures or doctrinal Most tribes do not have written scriptures or doctrinal beliefs; traditions have survived by oral transmission over beliefs; traditions have survived by oral transmission over beliefs; traditions have survived by oral transmission over beliefs; traditions have survived by oral transmission over beliefs; traditions have survived by oral transmission over the course of many years. During the colonial period, the course of many years. During the colonial period, the course of many years. During the colonial period, the course of many years. During the colonial period, the course of many years. During the colonial period, many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition many Native Americans believed that oral tradition was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able was safer because European settlers would not be able to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to to destroy tribal beliefs if they had been committed to memory. Only very recently have some tribes begun to memory. Only very recently have some tribes begun to memory. Only very recently have some tribes begun to memory. Only very recently have some tribes begun to memory. Only very recently have some tribes begun to memory. Only very recently have some tribes begun to memory. Only very recently have some tribes begun to transcribe some of their beliefs in written form for future transcribe some of their beliefs in written form for future transcribe some of their beliefs in written form for future transcribe some of their beliefs in written form for future transcribe some of their beliefs in written form for future transcribe some of their beliefs in written form for future generations.

Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their Tribal religious traditions vary in terms of their development and history. Many Native American tribes development and history. Many Native American tribes development and history. Many Native American tribes development and history. Many Native American tribes believe that their ancestors have always been on the believe that their ancestors have always been on the believe that their ancestors have always been on the believe that their ancestors have always been on the same land for as far back as time can go. Consequently, numerous beliefs and rituals are geographically centralized. Beliefs are focused on the sacredness of the natural world and reverence for ancestors. Many Native American traditions are considered to be pantheistic, meaning that the divine is in all things in the natural world, including mountains, plants, animals, trees, etc. However, some tribes do believe in a divine creator and offer prayers to this deity as the creator god. Some

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

182

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 182 1/4/12 11:20 AM
