A M E R I C A N

R E L I G I O N S

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

189

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 189 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 190 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Mormonism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Mormonism was founded in the United States during

the 1800s. Also known as The Church of Jesus Christ

of Latter-day Saints (LDS), Mormonism has endured

religious persecution, undergone shifts in central

doctrines, and spread globally through the church’s

missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would missionary program. Whereas most Mormons would

claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many claim to be a part of the Christian tradition, many

mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of mainstream Christians would deny this claim because of

Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the Mormon beliefs about the trinity, the afterlife, and the

Book of Mormon. Book of Mormon. Book of Mormon. Book of Mormon. Book of Mormon.

H I S T O R Y

During the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith founded During the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith founded During the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith founded During the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith founded During the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith founded During the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith founded During the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith founded

the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition, the Latter Day Saints movement. According to tradition,

while living in New York, Smith found several gold plates while living in New York, Smith found several gold plates while living in New York, Smith found several gold plates while living in New York, Smith found several gold plates while living in New York, Smith found several gold plates while living in New York, Smith found several gold plates

that contained writings by the prophet Mormon. Smith that contained writings by the prophet Mormon. Smith that contained writings by the prophet Mormon. Smith that contained writings by the prophet Mormon. Smith

claimed that God granted him the ability to translate claimed that God granted him the ability to translate claimed that God granted him the ability to translate claimed that God granted him the ability to translate

and interpret the plates, which he called the Book of

Mormon. Today, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-

day Saints uses this collection of writings alongside the

Old and New Testaments. Mormons consider the Book

of Mormon to be the direct word of God.

Smith began the church in Kirtland, Ohio, where

many people converted and began to establish the

community of believers in the new Zion. Smith believed

that God called him to establish the new promised

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

191

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 191 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

land in the United States, and he oversaw the building of a temple to symbolize the sacred community bond; however, non-Mormons in the area began to disapprove of the expansion. Tensions were so high that these early Latter Day Saints moved to Nauvoo, Missouri.

The Latter Day Saints community built another temple in Missouri, and the community once again gained strength. Joseph Smith announced his candidacy for president of the United States in 1844, but shortly afterward, he and his brother were both assassinated. Shortly before Smith’s assassination, he established a Shortly before Smith’s assassination, he established a Shortly before Smith’s assassination, he established a Shortly before Smith’s assassination, he established a Shortly before Smith’s assassination, he established a governing body of the church called the Quorum. The governing body of the church called the Quorum. The governing body of the church called the Quorum. The governing body of the church called the Quorum. The governing body of the church called the Quorum. The Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Quorum included twelve apostles, one of whom was Brigham Young.

After the assassination of Smith, Brigham After the assassination of Smith, Brigham After the assassination of Smith, Brigham After the assassination of Smith, Brigham After the assassination of Smith, Brigham After the assassination of Smith, Brigham After the assassination of Smith, Brigham After the assassination of Smith, Brigham Young immediately faced opposition from the non-Young immediately faced opposition from the non-Young immediately faced opposition from the non-Young immediately faced opposition from the non-Young immediately faced opposition from the non-Mormon community and believed it was important Mormon community and believed it was important Mormon community and believed it was important Mormon community and believed it was important Mormon community and believed it was important Mormon community and believed it was important Mormon community and believed it was important Mormon community and believed it was important to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated to avoid conflict; therefore, he once again relocated the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young the community, this time to Utah. In Utah, Young established a theocracy, holding authority in both established a theocracy, holding authority in both established a theocracy, holding authority in both established a theocracy, holding authority in both the church and government. Thirty years after the the church and government. Thirty years after the the church and government. Thirty years after the the church and government. Thirty years after the community moved to Utah, the settlers began to build the Tabernacle as a center for Mormon worship. Over time, the community suffered from both internal and external conflict, resulting from controversial issues like the practice of polygamy. In 1890, the federal government seized all of the church’s assets. By this time, Joseph F. Smith was leading the community. Smith went before the United States Congress and publicly opposed the practice of plural marriage, and to this day,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

192

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 192 1/4/12 11:20 AM
