The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints officially

rejects the practice of plural marriage.

B E L I E F S

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-

day Saints view themselves as Protestant Christians.

However, there are several Mormon beliefs that differ

from other Christian denominations.

Mormons believe that the early Christian Church

was corrupt, so they reject both the Nicene Creed and was corrupt, so they reject both the Nicene Creed and was corrupt, so they reject both the Nicene Creed and

traditional concept of the trinity (Father, Son, and Holy traditional concept of the trinity (Father, Son, and Holy traditional concept of the trinity (Father, Son, and Holy traditional concept of the trinity (Father, Son, and Holy traditional concept of the trinity (Father, Son, and Holy

Spirit). Whereas mainstream Christians believe that Spirit). Whereas mainstream Christians believe that Spirit). Whereas mainstream Christians believe that Spirit). Whereas mainstream Christians believe that Spirit). Whereas mainstream Christians believe that

the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence, the trinity is three forms of the same divine essence,

the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its the LDS church believes that each form possesses its

own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father own divinity. Some Mormons believe that the Father

was once in physical form and had sexual relations with was once in physical form and had sexual relations with was once in physical form and had sexual relations with was once in physical form and had sexual relations with was once in physical form and had sexual relations with was once in physical form and had sexual relations with was once in physical form and had sexual relations with

Mary to conceive Jesus. Mary to conceive Jesus. Mary to conceive Jesus.

Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that Though Mormons are unique in their belief that

Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian Jesus was married, they also share the common Christian

belief that Jesus died for the sins of humanity, with belief that Jesus died for the sins of humanity, with belief that Jesus died for the sins of humanity, with belief that Jesus died for the sins of humanity, with

acceptance and atonement resulting in the forgiveness of acceptance and atonement resulting in the forgiveness of acceptance and atonement resulting in the forgiveness of acceptance and atonement resulting in the forgiveness of

sins. The Book of Mormon claims that Jesus came to the

Americas after he was crucified, buried, and resurrected.

In contrast, no other Christian denomination believes

that Jesus came to North and South America to share

the gospel and perform miracles of healing. According to

the Book of Mormon, the people of the Americas lived

in perfect peace for more than 200 years after Jesus

appeared to them.

Mormons believe that all souls have always existed;

thus, they are not created. This is also unique to the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

193

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 193 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

LDS church because most Christians believe that each individual soul is created by God to live only one life. In addition, because Mormons believe that God evolved from human form, they also believe that all Mormons can evolve into gods. For Christians, there is a distinction between humans and God, so there can be no moment of transformation into a divine being. The priesthood, or the community of Mormons, believes that non-Mormons can go to heaven, but they may not become gods.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints considers the Book of Mormon to be the fifth gospel. considers the Book of Mormon to be the fifth gospel. considers the Book of Mormon to be the fifth gospel. considers the Book of Mormon to be the fifth gospel. considers the Book of Mormon to be the fifth gospel. Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name Mormon tradition holds that a prophet by the name of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and of Mormon collected the stories in ancient times and carved them into seven golden plates, which would later carved them into seven golden plates, which would later carved them into seven golden plates, which would later carved them into seven golden plates, which would later carved them into seven golden plates, which would later carved them into seven golden plates, which would later carved them into seven golden plates, which would later carved them into seven golden plates, which would later be found by Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon relays be found by Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon relays be found by Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon relays be found by Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon relays be found by Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon relays be found by Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon relays an account of the ancient people of the Americas up an account of the ancient people of the Americas up an account of the ancient people of the Americas up an account of the ancient people of the Americas up an account of the ancient people of the Americas up an account of the ancient people of the Americas up an account of the ancient people of the Americas up an account of the ancient people of the Americas up through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South through an account of Jesus’s visit to North and South America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man America. The book begins with the story of a man named Lehi, who was told by God to build a boat, take named Lehi, who was told by God to build a boat, take named Lehi, who was told by God to build a boat, take named Lehi, who was told by God to build a boat, take his family, and sail to the Americas. Lehi obeyed, so his his family, and sail to the Americas. Lehi obeyed, so his his family, and sail to the Americas. Lehi obeyed, so his his family, and sail to the Americas. Lehi obeyed, so his family prospered.

Non-Mormons are not allowed to enter the Tabernacle or any other Mormon temple. Mormons consider the presence of a cross in sanctuaries to be idolatrous because they believe this is worship of a symbol in place of god. However, there are other widely used symbols, including the beehive and the seagull. The beehive is important not only because the early Mormons carried bees with them as they relocated to Utah, but also because the beehive symbolizes obedience

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

194

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 194 1/4/12 11:20 AM
