to the word of god. Mormons ideally strive to work

together, as does a hive of bees, with the result being

the sweetness of social harmony. The seagull represents

God’s protection. Years ago, Mormon settlers in Utah

found their crops attacked by locusts, and they feared

they would have nothing to eat once their potential

harvest was consumed. However, a flock of seagulls came

through and devoured the locusts, thereby saving the

crops. Mormons believe that the seagulls were a miracle

sent by God.

A Mormon worship service always includes the A Mormon worship service always includes the A Mormon worship service always includes the A Mormon worship service always includes the A Mormon worship service always includes the

celebration of communion, called the Sacrament, which celebration of communion, called the Sacrament, which celebration of communion, called the Sacrament, which celebration of communion, called the Sacrament, which celebration of communion, called the Sacrament, which

consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to consists of bread and water. Mormons are opposed to

the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other the use of wine or grape juice during the service. Other

traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are traditional Christian sacraments are observed but are

not considered to be doctrinal. Baptism, conducted by not considered to be doctrinal. Baptism, conducted by not considered to be doctrinal. Baptism, conducted by not considered to be doctrinal. Baptism, conducted by not considered to be doctrinal. Baptism, conducted by not considered to be doctrinal. Baptism, conducted by

full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign full immersion, is considered to be an outward sign

of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also of a personal commitment to God, and baptism also

admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism admits a person into the priesthood of believers. Baptism

is never performed before a child’s eighth birthday is never performed before a child’s eighth birthday is never performed before a child’s eighth birthday is never performed before a child’s eighth birthday

because Mormons believe that someone should be able because Mormons believe that someone should be able because Mormons believe that someone should be able because Mormons believe that someone should be able

to understand the commitment he or she is making;

therefore, Mormons do not believe in infant baptism.

Only an adult authority in the priesthood of believers is

allowed to perform baptisms.

Joseph Smith advocated several uniquely Mormon

practices, including plural marriage, sealings, and

baptism of the dead. Joseph Smith approved of

polygamy, believing that this practice would expand

the family of believers. He also believed that multiple

wives could assist one another in household duties,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

195

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 195 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

though plural marriage was later abolished. Regarding marriage in general, Mormons do not believe that God recognizes civil marriages; therefore, a sealing ceremony is performed to ensure that husbands, wives, children, and extended families will remain together in the afterlife. Mormons also believe in baptism of the dead, giving the deceased another chance to gain entry into the kingdom of God. Usually conducted by a member of the priesthood, these baptisms require that another family member serve as the physical representative of the family member serve as the physical representative of the family member serve as the physical representative of the deceased during the ceremony.

Most Mormons also observe the Word of Wisdom, Most Mormons also observe the Word of Wisdom, Most Mormons also observe the Word of Wisdom, Most Mormons also observe the Word of Wisdom, Most Mormons also observe the Word of Wisdom, which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. which Joseph Smith recorded as a revelation from God. The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon The Word of Wisdom contains guidelines for Mormon behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations behavior. For example, there are dietary regulations which encourage eating fruits and grains with only which encourage eating fruits and grains with only which encourage eating fruits and grains with only which encourage eating fruits and grains with only which encourage eating fruits and grains with only modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions modest consumption of meat; there are also prohibitions against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the against tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine. In addition, the Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s Word of Wisdom encourages tithing a tenth of one’s financial worth.

For many years, Mormons believed that dark skin For many years, Mormons believed that dark skin For many years, Mormons believed that dark skin For many years, Mormons believed that dark skin was a physical representation of the legacy of Cain, from the biblical story of Cain and Abel. Since Cain killed Abel, the Mormons believed he was cursed by God. Therefore, dark-skinned people carried this association and were avoided by many Mormons. Only in 1978 were African-Americans permitted to become part of the priesthood of believers.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

196

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 196 1/4/12 11:20 AM
