D E M O G R A P H I C S

Within the United States, The Church of Jesus Christ

of Latter-day Saints is the fourth largest Christian

denomination, reaching almost 5.5 million members.

However, most Mormons do not live in the United

States; only twelve percent live in Utah, with the

remaining eighty-eight percent scattered throughout the

rest of the world.

Globally, the LDS church has made a great impact

through its missionaries. Before young men marry, they through its missionaries. Before young men marry, they through its missionaries. Before young men marry, they through its missionaries. Before young men marry, they

typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their typically go on a two-year mission trip to share their

religious ideals and to help impoverished communities. religious ideals and to help impoverished communities. religious ideals and to help impoverished communities. religious ideals and to help impoverished communities. religious ideals and to help impoverished communities. religious ideals and to help impoverished communities. religious ideals and to help impoverished communities.

This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in This missionary impact is especially pronounced in

Africa and Asia. In Africa, more than 250,000 people Africa and Asia. In Africa, more than 250,000 people Africa and Asia. In Africa, more than 250,000 people Africa and Asia. In Africa, more than 250,000 people Africa and Asia. In Africa, more than 250,000 people Africa and Asia. In Africa, more than 250,000 people

identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1 identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1 identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1 identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1 identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1 identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1 identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1 identify as Mormons, and in Asia, there are over 1

million Mormons. There are more than 14 million million Mormons. There are more than 14 million million Mormons. There are more than 14 million million Mormons. There are more than 14 million million Mormons. There are more than 14 million million Mormons. There are more than 14 million million Mormons. There are more than 14 million million Mormons. There are more than 14 million

Mormons worldwide. Mormons worldwide.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

197

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 197 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 198 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Unitarian

Universalism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Unitarian Universalists consider themselves to be open-

minded and welcoming to all people from all faiths at all

times. However, many Christian denominations do not

accept Unitarian Universalism as a branch of Christianity accept Unitarian Universalism as a branch of Christianity

because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they because they reject the doctrine of the trinity, and they

recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions. recognize sacred traditions from multiple religions.

Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized Consequently, Unitarian Universalism is a marginalized

group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall. group within Christianity overall.

H I S T O R Y

During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth During the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth

century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity century, a group in Romania decided that the trinity

had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group had no scriptural basis. Based upon this belief, the group

established the first Unitarian congregation, growing out established the first Unitarian congregation, growing out established the first Unitarian congregation, growing out established the first Unitarian congregation, growing out

of the Congregationalist movement. Early Unitarians were of the Congregationalist movement. Early Unitarians were of the Congregationalist movement. Early Unitarians were of the Congregationalist movement. Early Unitarians were

persecuted for questioning the ideas of the church, and for

supporting the right of the individual to determine his or

her own understanding of doctrine. In fact, the founder

of Unitarianism in England, a scientist and theologian

named Joseph Priestley, endured such vicious attacks in

England that he eventually fled to the United States.

The very first Universalist Church of America was

founded by Elhanan Winchester in New England in 1871.

However, many similar groups around the United States

developed at the same time. Early Universalists placed a

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

199

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 199 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

heavy emphasis on evangelism. Additionally, because a core Universalist belief is that all human beings deserve dignity and respect, the first Universalists strongly supported social justice issues and spoke out against slavery.

Originally, there were two groups: the Unitarians, who proclaimed the unity of God and rejected Trinitarianism, and Universalists, who believed that all humans are saved. Both groups were on the fringe of more traditional Protestant churches, and in 1961, the two groups merged into one.

Both the Unitarians and the Universalists held open-Both the Unitarians and the Universalists held open-Both the Unitarians and the Universalists held open-Both the Unitarians and the Universalists held open-Both the Unitarians and the Universalists held open-mindedness and liberal philosophies to be important to mindedness and liberal philosophies to be important to mindedness and liberal philosophies to be important to mindedness and liberal philosophies to be important to mindedness and liberal philosophies to be important to their group identities. their group identities. their group identities. their group identities.

B E L I E F S

The central theme that unites all Unitarian Universalists The central theme that unites all Unitarian Universalists The central theme that unites all Unitarian Universalists The central theme that unites all Unitarian Universalists The central theme that unites all Unitarian Universalists The central theme that unites all Unitarian Universalists The central theme that unites all Unitarian Universalists is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable is diversity. They believe that there is no one provable ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives ultimate truth, and that there are multiple perspectives on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal on spirituality and wisdom that contribute to personal development and spiritual growth. Unitarian Universalist development and spiritual growth. Unitarian Universalist development and spiritual growth. Unitarian Universalist development and spiritual growth. Unitarian Universalist worship services include writings from multiple religious worship services include writings from multiple religious worship services include writings from multiple religious worship services include writings from multiple religious traditions. Excerpts are drawn from texts like the Dhammapada, Bhagavad Gita, and the Tao Te Ching. Unitarian belief also incorporates a Judeo-Christian ethical understanding of being kind to one’s neighbor, a humanist belief about the importance of reason, and perspectives on the natural world which are compatible with religious naturalism.

Sunday morning worship services resemble those of Protestant faith traditions. However, there are no official observances of sacraments like baptism, communion, or

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

200

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 200 1/4/12 11:20 AM
