confirmation, and there is no central creed to follow. Most

Unitarians also believe that Jesus was more of a social

activist than the literal Son of God.

Many Unitarians would consider themselves

monotheists in spite of their acceptance of multiple

understandings of the divine. There are seven guiding

principles for Unitarian Universalists:

cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably cess, and acceptance of the differences that inevitably will exist.

vidual’s spiritual quest. vidual’s spiritual quest. vidual’s spiritual quest.

from congregation to government. from congregation to government. from congregation to government. from congregation to government. from congregation to government. from congregation to government. from congregation to government. from congregation to government. from congregation to government.

humans but extending throughout the natural world.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

There are more than 1,000 churches with active

membership, and approximately 250,000 Unitarian

Universalists in the United States. Unitarian Universalists

are fairly new to the religious landscape, which may explain

their lack of a wider global presence; however, Canada and

the U.S. Virgin Islands also report a significant population.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

201

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 201 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 202 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Scientology

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Scientology has encountered quite a bit of controversy

since its founding. Some issues relate to conflicts with

the United States’ Internal Revenue Service. Also, many

skeptics are suspicious of Scientology’s seemingly secretive

auditing practice.

Some people have accused the Church of Scientology Some people have accused the Church of Scientology Some people have accused the Church of Scientology Some people have accused the Church of Scientology

of abuse through auditing. Many people question of abuse through auditing. Many people question of abuse through auditing. Many people question of abuse through auditing. Many people question of abuse through auditing. Many people question of abuse through auditing. Many people question of abuse through auditing. Many people question

Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial Scientology’s status as a religion because of their financial

gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see gain through auditing fees charged to members (see

below). In the early days of Scientology, the church below). In the early days of Scientology, the church below). In the early days of Scientology, the church below). In the early days of Scientology, the church below). In the early days of Scientology, the church below). In the early days of Scientology, the church below). In the early days of Scientology, the church below). In the early days of Scientology, the church

struggled to gain religious organization status within the struggled to gain religious organization status within the struggled to gain religious organization status within the struggled to gain religious organization status within the struggled to gain religious organization status within the struggled to gain religious organization status within the struggled to gain religious organization status within the

United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the United States; therefore, it went to Europe to seek the

same recognition, finally finding initial success in Great same recognition, finally finding initial success in Great same recognition, finally finding initial success in Great same recognition, finally finding initial success in Great same recognition, finally finding initial success in Great same recognition, finally finding initial success in Great same recognition, finally finding initial success in Great

Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in Britain. Additionally, the involvement of celebrities in

Scientology appears to produce suspicion among the larger Scientology appears to produce suspicion among the larger Scientology appears to produce suspicion among the larger Scientology appears to produce suspicion among the larger Scientology appears to produce suspicion among the larger Scientology appears to produce suspicion among the larger

society. Recently, Tom Cruise has been highly criticized society. Recently, Tom Cruise has been highly criticized society. Recently, Tom Cruise has been highly criticized society. Recently, Tom Cruise has been highly criticized

for his role in the Church of Scientology.

H I S T O R Y

The Church of Scientology was established in 1954 by

science fiction author L. Ron Hubbard. His father was

a naval officer, so Hubbard had the rare opportunity to

travel to Asia in 1927. Hubbard was highly influenced

by Eastern religious thought and was also captivated

by the works of Sigmund Freud. Scientologists believe

that these two experiences deeply influenced Hubbard’s

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

203

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 203 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

book Dianetics, which was published in May of 1950 and remained on the New York Times best seller list for twenty-six weeks. Hubbard’s motivation to write Dianetics was a result of his observations while working at an overseas medical facility during World War II. Hubbard noticed that the mental suffering of injured people inhibited their ability to recover and limited the effectiveness of medical interventions. In Dianetics, Hubbard explains his beliefs about human nature. Specifically, he describes how painful experiences of past Specifically, he describes how painful experiences of past Specifically, he describes how painful experiences of past lives are stored in what he calls the “reactive mind,” and lives are stored in what he calls the “reactive mind,” and lives are stored in what he calls the “reactive mind,” and lives are stored in what he calls the “reactive mind,” and lives are stored in what he calls the “reactive mind,” and how these experiences lead to irrational behavior. He how these experiences lead to irrational behavior. He how these experiences lead to irrational behavior. He how these experiences lead to irrational behavior. He how these experiences lead to irrational behavior. He suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage suggests that humans must rationally release the baggage of past lives in order to be happy. of past lives in order to be happy. of past lives in order to be happy. of past lives in order to be happy. of past lives in order to be happy. of past lives in order to be happy. of past lives in order to be happy.

B E L I E F S

The central idea of Scientology is that human beings The central idea of Scientology is that human beings The central idea of Scientology is that human beings The central idea of Scientology is that human beings The central idea of Scientology is that human beings The central idea of Scientology is that human beings The central idea of Scientology is that human beings The central idea of Scientology is that human beings are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material are spiritual souls who are trapped within their material bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue bodies. Souls called thetans are immortal and continue from one material life to another collecting engrams, from one material life to another collecting engrams, from one material life to another collecting engrams, from one material life to another collecting engrams, which are obstructions to the soul imprisoned by physical which are obstructions to the soul imprisoned by physical which are obstructions to the soul imprisoned by physical which are obstructions to the soul imprisoned by physical reality, or MEST (Matter Energy Space Time). These engrams manifest in a person’s life as sadness, doubt, anger, or negative thoughts. A Scientologist’s objective is to confront the engrams and release them, allowing the soul to live in a liberated state. Human beings are born with the potential to think rationally, and this ability is harnessed and applied to the process of removing engrams. Thetans are full of engrams from numerous past lives as well as their current lifetimes.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

204

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 204 1/4/12 11:20 AM
