As the thetan moves toward full liberation from its

engrams, it moves through a series of steps called the

Bridge to Total Freedom, or Bridge, for short. Prior to the

pursuit of the Bridge, a person is called a preclear, and

once the Bridge is completed, the person becomes a clear

or OT (Operating Thetan). The Bridge can be completed

alone with the assistance of reading materials and

specific techniques, but a preclear is strongly encouraged

to have the assistance of a counselor, called an auditor.

The auditor helps a person through the Bridge by asking The auditor helps a person through the Bridge by asking The auditor helps a person through the Bridge by asking

reflection questions and using particular mental imagery reflection questions and using particular mental imagery reflection questions and using particular mental imagery reflection questions and using particular mental imagery reflection questions and using particular mental imagery

to guide the preclear to recognize their engrams, which to guide the preclear to recognize their engrams, which to guide the preclear to recognize their engrams, which to guide the preclear to recognize their engrams, which to guide the preclear to recognize their engrams, which

in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called in turn removes them. An auditor may use a device called

an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find an e-meter, which is an electric machine designed to find

engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan. engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan. engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan. engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan. engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan. engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan. engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan. engrams and help remove them from the preclear’s thetan.

There are fees charged for an auditing session at each There are fees charged for an auditing session at each There are fees charged for an auditing session at each There are fees charged for an auditing session at each There are fees charged for an auditing session at each

stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to stage of the Bridge. A person may exchange services to

the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be the church for auditing sessions, and sessions also can be

conducted in group settings. conducted in group settings. conducted in group settings.

In the Scientologist creed, there is an emphasis on the In the Scientologist creed, there is an emphasis on the In the Scientologist creed, there is an emphasis on the In the Scientologist creed, there is an emphasis on the

concepts of equality, nonviolence, and spiritual sacredness, concepts of equality, nonviolence, and spiritual sacredness, concepts of equality, nonviolence, and spiritual sacredness, concepts of equality, nonviolence, and spiritual sacredness,

declaring that there are innate and unchallengeable rights

that every human possesses. In addition, Scientologists

believe that mental struggle should be addressed

spiritually or religiously—not through exposure to the

secular world. An individual who chooses to become part

of the Church of Scientology would first be asked to enter

a purification stage that would release all toxins from the

body. This would be followed by an introductory course

that explains the basic beliefs of the faith.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

205

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 205 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Scientologists believe that the practice of auditing can be followed alongside other religious traditions. Additionally, many Scientologists celebrate Christmas and Easter, not because of a belief in Jesus Christ, but because these holidays would be considered part of the cultural norm. Scientologists also have their own holidays; for example, March 13 is considered to be a holiday that celebrates the birth of L. Ron Hubbard. Most often worshippers will gather together in meeting rooms, and though most of the religious quest is done independently, though most of the religious quest is done independently, though most of the religious quest is done independently, there are communal services on Sundays. The meeting there are communal services on Sundays. The meeting there are communal services on Sundays. The meeting there are communal services on Sundays. The meeting there are communal services on Sundays. The meeting rooms are usually very modern and have multiple video rooms are usually very modern and have multiple video rooms are usually very modern and have multiple video rooms are usually very modern and have multiple video rooms are usually very modern and have multiple video displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. displays with which members and visitors can interact. During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are During services, readings or video clips from Hubbard are typically shared along with community announcements. typically shared along with community announcements. typically shared along with community announcements. typically shared along with community announcements. typically shared along with community announcements. typically shared along with community announcements. typically shared along with community announcements. typically shared along with community announcements.

D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S

Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located Scientology Centers (often called “churches”) are located worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries. worldwide with members in 165 different countries.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

206

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 206 1/4/12 11:20 AM
