Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

207

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 207 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Amish horse

and carriage in

Lancaster, PA

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 208 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Anabaptist

Traditions

I N T R O D U C T I O N

The commitment to nonviolence is a unifying

characteristic of the Mennonites, Amish, and Quakers

among Christian Protestantism. The United States

government has granted each of these denominations government has granted each of these denominations

religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which religious protection from obligatory wartimes, which

was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members was apparent during the Vietnam draft when members

of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In of these groups were excused from military service. In

Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for Anabaptist traditions, a peaceful way of life allows for

simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living. simple, non-abundant living.

H I S T O R Y / F O U N D E R S H I S T O R Y / F O U N D E R S H I S T O R Y / F O U N D E R S H I S T O R Y / F O U N D E R S H I S T O R Y / F O U N D E R S H I S T O R Y / F O U N D E R S

The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to The Anabaptists were one of the many protest groups to

form during the Christian Reformation, and they share form during the Christian Reformation, and they share form during the Christian Reformation, and they share form during the Christian Reformation, and they share form during the Christian Reformation, and they share form during the Christian Reformation, and they share form during the Christian Reformation, and they share form during the Christian Reformation, and they share

many perspectives with other Protestant denominations, many perspectives with other Protestant denominations, many perspectives with other Protestant denominations, many perspectives with other Protestant denominations,

including the rejection of both transubstantiation and including the rejection of both transubstantiation and including the rejection of both transubstantiation and including the rejection of both transubstantiation and

papal authority. However, Anabaptists have a unique

belief regarding baptism. They believe that baptism should

be performed only during adulthood, when the individual

can understand the complexity of Christian belief, and

that baptism can be performed over and over again.

Whereas most Christian denominations believe in only

one baptism, the Anabaptists believe that humans are

highly fallible and thus are in need of the renewal, rebirth,

and cleansing that baptism provides.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

209

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 209 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

During the Reformation, an Anabaptist group formed in Switzerland under the leadership of Menno Simons, who professed a peaceful, nonviolent church philosophy. This group became known as the Mennonites. Though Mennonites are often thought to be a branch of conservative Christianity, they share many mainstream Christian beliefs.

Within the Mennonite community in 1693, a man named Jakob Ammann felt that the community was straying from its basic traditional beliefs. As a result, he straying from its basic traditional beliefs. As a result, he straying from its basic traditional beliefs. As a result, he began the Amish movement. All Amish are Mennonites, began the Amish movement. All Amish are Mennonites, began the Amish movement. All Amish are Mennonites, began the Amish movement. All Amish are Mennonites, began the Amish movement. All Amish are Mennonites, but not all Mennonites are Amish. Some people but not all Mennonites are Amish. Some people but not all Mennonites are Amish. Some people but not all Mennonites are Amish. Some people but not all Mennonites are Amish. Some people considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading considered the Amish to be too extreme, often leading to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to to persecution. This caused Amish groups to emigrate to other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually other areas, including France, Germany, and eventually to America. Today in the United States, there are Amish to America. Today in the United States, there are Amish to America. Today in the United States, there are Amish to America. Today in the United States, there are Amish to America. Today in the United States, there are Amish to America. Today in the United States, there are Amish communities in twenty-eight states, mostly located in the communities in twenty-eight states, mostly located in the communities in twenty-eight states, mostly located in the communities in twenty-eight states, mostly located in the communities in twenty-eight states, mostly located in the communities in twenty-eight states, mostly located in the communities in twenty-eight states, mostly located in the Midwest.

The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the The Religious Society of Friends (also called the Quaker movement) was founded in England in 1647 by a Quaker movement) was founded in England in 1647 by a Quaker movement) was founded in England in 1647 by a Quaker movement) was founded in England in 1647 by a preacher named George Fox. The Quakers believed deeply preacher named George Fox. The Quakers believed deeply preacher named George Fox. The Quakers believed deeply preacher named George Fox. The Quakers believed deeply in the Christian call to nonviolence and felt that each Christian would personally receive “light” in the form of revelations from God. Thus, in the early days of the movement, Quakers were called the “Children of Light.” Quakers do not have worship leaders because they believe that God will lead them spiritually. Quaker services, called meetings, typically involve a group of believers sitting silently together until someone is inspired by God to speak. Friends also reject the traditional Christian sacraments of communion and baptism, feeling that true

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

210

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 210 1/4/12 11:20 AM
