communion lies in the gathering of believers rather than

in the sharing of wine and bread, and that only the Holy

Spirit can baptize. Later, Quakerism was established in

Pennsylvania with the help of William Penn, who is also

the state founder.

B E L I E F S

Though these groups share the same belief system as the

larger Christian church, there are also some differences

in lifestyle and worship, which separate them from other in lifestyle and worship, which separate them from other in lifestyle and worship, which separate them from other

Christians.

Mennonites believe deeply in the separation of church Mennonites believe deeply in the separation of church Mennonites believe deeply in the separation of church Mennonites believe deeply in the separation of church Mennonites believe deeply in the separation of church

and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They and state advocated by Jesus in the New Testament. They

also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the also believe in adult baptism and in the supremacy of the

New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming New Testament. As Anabaptists, they avoid becoming

too involved in the material world; therefore, they try to too involved in the material world; therefore, they try to too involved in the material world; therefore, they try to too involved in the material world; therefore, they try to too involved in the material world; therefore, they try to too involved in the material world; therefore, they try to too involved in the material world; therefore, they try to

limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the limit their possessions, but they are not as extreme as the

Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with Amish. They also believe in peace and nonviolence with

no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship no exceptions. There are no churches because worship

services are conducted in the home. services are conducted in the home.

The Ordnung (“order”) in the Amish community The Ordnung (“order”) in the Amish community The Ordnung (“order”) in the Amish community The Ordnung (“order”) in the Amish community

outlines the rules for Amish life. For example, the

Ordnung prohibits gambling, wearing jewelry, using

electricity, and owning televisions. The Ordnung also

outlines the kind of clothing a person should wear,

the type of buggy one should drive, and the language

one should speak, which should be German or Swiss.

Though the Amish lead a restricted lifestyle, youth in

Amish communities traditionally undergo a period called

Rumspringa, or “running around.” This is a period of

time during adolescence when the young person goes

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

211

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 211 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

into the modern world and experiences life outside of the traditional community. Ideally, once the youth has experienced non-Amish life, he or she will ultimately choose to reenter the community through baptism, willingly committing to a life of simplicity. The extreme rejection of modernity is difficult, so Rumspringa makes this rejection a voluntary decision rather than an automatic requirement.

Above all, one of the most important Amish commitments is the rejection of Hochmut, which is a commitments is the rejection of Hochmut, which is a commitments is the rejection of Hochmut, which is a type of self-important pride. Hochmut goes hand in hand type of self-important pride. Hochmut goes hand in hand type of self-important pride. Hochmut goes hand in hand type of self-important pride. Hochmut goes hand in hand type of self-important pride. Hochmut goes hand in hand with humility, or Demut. As a demonstration of humility, with humility, or Demut. As a demonstration of humility, with humility, or Demut. As a demonstration of humility, with humility, or Demut. As a demonstration of humility, with humility, or Demut. As a demonstration of humility, Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members Amish people do not pose for photographs. Members of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life of the community who fall for the allure of modern life or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the or who exhibit pride would likely be shunned by the community.

Most Amish only attend formal school provided Most Amish only attend formal school provided Most Amish only attend formal school provided Most Amish only attend formal school provided Most Amish only attend formal school provided Most Amish only attend formal school provided Most Amish only attend formal school provided Most Amish only attend formal school provided by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, by the community until the eighth grade. In 1972, the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was the United States Supreme Court ruled that it was unconstitutional to require compulsory school attendance unconstitutional to require compulsory school attendance unconstitutional to require compulsory school attendance unconstitutional to require compulsory school attendance for the Amish until the age of 16, which is the mainstream for the Amish until the age of 16, which is the mainstream for the Amish until the age of 16, which is the mainstream for the Amish until the age of 16, which is the mainstream American norm. After formal education is completed, Amish youth learn specific trades like farming or carpentry, which are skills that actively contribute to survival in the community.

Because the Amish way of life is completely voluntary, the community’s rejection of traditional education and modern conveniences are ways of actively setting limits for itself. However, there are some reasonable exceptions to the Ordnung, based upon necessity. For example, some people may have telephones, though they would use them

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

212

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 212 1/4/12 11:20 AM
