rarely, or a person may ride in a car to visit a distant

family member or to attend a medical appointment in the

city.

Unlike the Amish, who have many rules governing

the community, Quakers do not have a central doctrine;

therefore, it may seem to outsiders that they have no

specific beliefs at all. However, since there is such an

emphasis upon a personal relationship with God, it is

difficult for a single creed to be applicable to all Friends;

as a result, each person’s specific beliefs are unique. In as a result, each person’s specific beliefs are unique. In as a result, each person’s specific beliefs are unique. In

spite of this fact, there are some unifying features of spite of this fact, there are some unifying features of spite of this fact, there are some unifying features of spite of this fact, there are some unifying features of spite of this fact, there are some unifying features of

Quakerism, like the dedication to nonviolence and the Quakerism, like the dedication to nonviolence and the Quakerism, like the dedication to nonviolence and the Quakerism, like the dedication to nonviolence and the Quakerism, like the dedication to nonviolence and the

focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience. focus on individual religious experience.

D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S

The Mennonites, the Amish, and the Quakers are The Mennonites, the Amish, and the Quakers are The Mennonites, the Amish, and the Quakers are The Mennonites, the Amish, and the Quakers are The Mennonites, the Amish, and the Quakers are The Mennonites, the Amish, and the Quakers are The Mennonites, the Amish, and the Quakers are

primarily located in the United States. However, primarily located in the United States. However, primarily located in the United States. However, primarily located in the United States. However, primarily located in the United States. However, primarily located in the United States. However, primarily located in the United States. However, primarily located in the United States. However,

these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are these groups are present across the globe. There are

approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one approximately 350,000 Quakers worldwide. There are one

million Amish in North America, about 250,000 of whom million Amish in North America, about 250,000 of whom million Amish in North America, about 250,000 of whom million Amish in North America, about 250,000 of whom

are in Pennsylvania. Mennonites exist in small groups are in Pennsylvania. Mennonites exist in small groups are in Pennsylvania. Mennonites exist in small groups are in Pennsylvania. Mennonites exist in small groups

across the world and total about 1.5 million.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

213

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 213 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 214 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Nation of Islam

I N T R O D U C T I O N

The Nation of Islam (NOI) is a separatist religious

sect, founded in the United States in the 1930s, whose

followers are primarily of African-American descent.

While the Nation of Islam has many similarities to

orthodox Islam, such as a belief in one God and the

authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of authority of the prophet Muhammad, the Nation of

Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in Islam also has distinct beliefs that have put them in

conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is conflict with greater Islam. Today, the Nation of Islam is

led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has led by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan and has

nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional nearly 30,000 members, plus thousands more additional

sympathizers.

H I S T O R Y

The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the The Nation of Islam began in Detroit, Michigan under the

leadership of Wallace Ford, now known as Wallace Fard leadership of Wallace Ford, now known as Wallace Fard leadership of Wallace Ford, now known as Wallace Fard leadership of Wallace Ford, now known as Wallace Fard leadership of Wallace Ford, now known as Wallace Fard leadership of Wallace Ford, now known as Wallace Fard

Muhammad. While specific details of his life are sketchy, Muhammad. While specific details of his life are sketchy, Muhammad. While specific details of his life are sketchy, Muhammad. While specific details of his life are sketchy,

Fard believed himself to be the Mahdi, the greatly Fard believed himself to be the Mahdi, the greatly Fard believed himself to be the Mahdi, the greatly Fard believed himself to be the Mahdi, the greatly

anticipated Islamic messiah. Fard’s mission was to educate

African-Americans about the nature of their oppression by

white people. Fard disappeared in 1934, but he appointed

as his successor a messenger named Elijah Poole, later

known as Elijah Muhammad, who led the Nation of Islam

for the next forty years. Elijah Muhammad promoted

the idea that Fard was God on Earth, the final prophet

who was also a manifestation of Allah. This deviates

significantly from traditional Islam in which the prophets

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

215

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 215 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

are believed to be fully human, and in which Muhammad is declared to be the “seal of the prophets,” meaning that no more prophets will come later.

In his book Yakub: The Father of Mankind, Elijah Muhammad wrote that black people were the Original People, and that they had lived in peace until the coming of white people. He went on to write that white people were created 6,000 years ago by a process called “grafting,” which made them weak and their bones brittle. These white people were inferior to the Original People These white people were inferior to the Original People These white people were inferior to the Original People in every way, but were able to trick the black people and in every way, but were able to trick the black people and in every way, but were able to trick the black people and in every way, but were able to trick the black people and in every way, but were able to trick the black people and eventually enslave and oppress them, a condition that eventually enslave and oppress them, a condition that eventually enslave and oppress them, a condition that eventually enslave and oppress them, a condition that eventually enslave and oppress them, a condition that persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed persisted until the present. Elijah Muhammad believed that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, that in the future, this inequality will be corrected, but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot but until then, the plight of African-Americans cannot be solved by integration. Instead, the solution is black be solved by integration. Instead, the solution is black be solved by integration. Instead, the solution is black be solved by integration. Instead, the solution is black be solved by integration. Instead, the solution is black separation from the dominant white culture and religion separation from the dominant white culture and religion separation from the dominant white culture and religion separation from the dominant white culture and religion separation from the dominant white culture and religion separation from the dominant white culture and religion separation from the dominant white culture and religion separation from the dominant white culture and religion along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or along with the creation of an entirely distinct state or territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits territory. In addition, the Nation of Islam prohibits intermarriage between black and white people. Both intermarriage between black and white people. Both intermarriage between black and white people. Both intermarriage between black and white people. Both separatism and endogamy are not widely accepted among separatism and endogamy are not widely accepted among separatism and endogamy are not widely accepted among separatism and endogamy are not widely accepted among orthodox Muslims.

Malcolm Little, more widely known as Malcolm X, was one of the many people who heard Elijah Muhammad’s teachings and converted to the Nation of Islam in the 1950s. Along with Muhammad Ali, X was one of the most famous converts during this period. After discovering NOI beliefs while in prison, Malcolm X became the leader of one of the most important temples in New York; over the next decade, he drew many new followers with his fiery preaching and separatist rhetoric.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

216

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 216 1/4/12 11:20 AM
