He eventually renounced Elijah Muhammad, joining

instead the more traditional Sunni sect of Islam. A

short time later, he was assassinated by Nation of Islam

members.

The current leader, Louis Farrakhan, reformed the

Nation of Islam a few years after the death of Elijah

Muhammad (1897–1975). Muhammad’s son, Warith

Deen Mohammed, had been appointed to lead the

organization at the time of his father’s death. He renamed

the organization World Community of al-Islam in the the organization World Community of al-Islam in the the organization World Community of al-Islam in the

West, and attempted to align the teachings of the group West, and attempted to align the teachings of the group West, and attempted to align the teachings of the group West, and attempted to align the teachings of the group West, and attempted to align the teachings of the group

with traditional Sunni beliefs. In response to these with traditional Sunni beliefs. In response to these with traditional Sunni beliefs. In response to these with traditional Sunni beliefs. In response to these with traditional Sunni beliefs. In response to these

changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah changes, Farrakhan, who had been a close ally of Elijah

Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and Muhammad since the 1950s, left the organization and

founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam. founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam. founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam. founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam. founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam. founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam. founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam. founded a new group bearing the name Nation of Islam.

Since that time, Farrakhan has been the primary leader Since that time, Farrakhan has been the primary leader Since that time, Farrakhan has been the primary leader Since that time, Farrakhan has been the primary leader Since that time, Farrakhan has been the primary leader Since that time, Farrakhan has been the primary leader

and spokesperson of the organization. and spokesperson of the organization. and spokesperson of the organization. and spokesperson of the organization. and spokesperson of the organization. and spokesperson of the organization. and spokesperson of the organization.

Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has Farrakhan’s leadership in the reformed NOI has

been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to been marked by controversy, especially in relation to

other minority communities. The Anti-Defamation other minority communities. The Anti-Defamation other minority communities. The Anti-Defamation other minority communities. The Anti-Defamation

League (CEL), a watchdog organization against anti-League (CEL), a watchdog organization against anti-League (CEL), a watchdog organization against anti-League (CEL), a watchdog organization against anti-

Semitism, has charged Farrakhan with “disseminating [a]

message of hate” for routinely demonizing Jewish people

and blaming them for the historic plight of African-

Americans, especially in relation to economic conditions

in the United States. The CEL maintains a list of some

of Farrakhan’s inflammatory statements. He has also

commented on multiple occasions that the Jewish people

cannot legitimately claim Israel as their homeland, but

instead are “usurpers [and] land grabbers.” Another civil

rights organization, the Southern Poverty Law Center, has

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

217

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 217 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

described Farrakhan as anti-Semitic and homophobic. The majority of the world’s orthodox Muslims do not consider Farrakhan’s discriminatory attitude to be acceptable.

In spite of this controversy, Farrakhan has enjoyed several well-publicized successes during his tenure. The most well known was the 1995 Million Man March, in which he encouraged African-American men to improve themselves and to work on their family relationships in an effort to overcome historic bias and oppression. The actual size of the crowd is unknown, but estimates vary actual size of the crowd is unknown, but estimates vary actual size of the crowd is unknown, but estimates vary between 400,000 and nearly 2 million (the higher number between 400,000 and nearly 2 million (the higher number between 400,000 and nearly 2 million (the higher number between 400,000 and nearly 2 million (the higher number between 400,000 and nearly 2 million (the higher number comes from the NOI website). Even opponents agree that comes from the NOI website). Even opponents agree that comes from the NOI website). Even opponents agree that comes from the NOI website). Even opponents agree that comes from the NOI website). Even opponents agree that the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized the march was a successful, peaceful, and well-organized event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million event. Farrakhan also successfully organized the Million Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening Family March on Washington in 2000 and the reopening of a Chicago flagship mosque as an educational center in of a Chicago flagship mosque as an educational center in of a Chicago flagship mosque as an educational center in of a Chicago flagship mosque as an educational center in of a Chicago flagship mosque as an educational center in 2008.

Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial Farrakhan’s outspoken religious, political, and racial views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly views have made him a controversial but seemingly immovable figurehead until recent years. Repeated immovable figurehead until recent years. Repeated immovable figurehead until recent years. Repeated immovable figurehead until recent years. Repeated bouts of prostate cancer, as well as extensive abdominal bouts of prostate cancer, as well as extensive abdominal bouts of prostate cancer, as well as extensive abdominal bouts of prostate cancer, as well as extensive abdominal surgeries, have led to worries among adherents that his time is short. The identity of his future successor is unclear, as is the future of this sect whose membership has been shrinking since the 1960s.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Anti-Defamation League. “Farrakhan in His Own Words.” http:// www.adl.org/special_reports/farrakhan_own_words2/farrakhan_own _words.asp.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

218

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 218 1/4/12 11:20 AM
