Marsh, Clifton. The Lost-Found Nation of Islam in America. Lanham,

MD: Scarecrow Press, 2000.

Muhammad, Elijah. History of the Nation of Islam. Phoenix: Secretarius

MEMPS Publications, 1996.

Nation of Islam. “Bio Sketch of the Honorable Louis Farrakhan.”

http://www.noi.org/about_the_honorable_louis_farrakhan.shtml.

Southern Poverty Law Center. “Louis Farrakhan.” http://www

.splcenter.org/get-informed/intelligence-files/profiles/louis-farrakhan.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

219

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 219 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 220 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Jehovah’s Witnesses

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Jehovah’s Witnesses draw their name from the Hebrew

name of God YHWH, which many people pronounce

“Jehovah.” The members believe that their purpose is to

be witnesses of God’s kingdom here on earth. Their main

objective is to share the truth of the kingdom with as

many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time. many people as possible before the end of time.

H I S T O R Y

Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism, Jehovah’s Witnesses grew out of Christian Protestantism,

but members do not consider themselves to be but members do not consider themselves to be but members do not consider themselves to be but members do not consider themselves to be but members do not consider themselves to be but members do not consider themselves to be but members do not consider themselves to be but members do not consider themselves to be

Protestants. Charles Taze Russell, the founder of the Protestants. Charles Taze Russell, the founder of the Protestants. Charles Taze Russell, the founder of the Protestants. Charles Taze Russell, the founder of the Protestants. Charles Taze Russell, the founder of the Protestants. Charles Taze Russell, the founder of the Protestants. Charles Taze Russell, the founder of the

Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed Jehovah’s Witness movement, had ideas which differed

from traditional Christian doctrines, and he shared these from traditional Christian doctrines, and he shared these from traditional Christian doctrines, and he shared these from traditional Christian doctrines, and he shared these from traditional Christian doctrines, and he shared these from traditional Christian doctrines, and he shared these from traditional Christian doctrines, and he shared these

ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For ideas with a small independent Bible study group. For

several years, the group met and shared Russell’s beliefs several years, the group met and shared Russell’s beliefs several years, the group met and shared Russell’s beliefs several years, the group met and shared Russell’s beliefs several years, the group met and shared Russell’s beliefs several years, the group met and shared Russell’s beliefs

with others in the same way that Witnesses do today, with others in the same way that Witnesses do today, with others in the same way that Witnesses do today, with others in the same way that Witnesses do today,

going from door to door. In 1879, the first issue of the going from door to door. In 1879, the first issue of the going from door to door. In 1879, the first issue of the going from door to door. In 1879, the first issue of the

Watchtower was published with Russell as the editor-in-

chief. This group was originally called Bible Students

because Russell believed every person should read the

Scriptures and interpret them. Russell continued to write

about his beliefs, including God’s kingdom on earth,

which he believed would develop soon.

After Russell’s death in 1916, there was controversy

surrounding who would become the next head of church.

In spite of this conflict, Joseph Franklin Rutherford

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

221

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 221 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

was elected the next president. He officially changed the name of the church to Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1931. Following the death of Rutherford in 1942, Nathan Knorr became the next president. Knorr officially commissioned the New World Translation of the Bible, which is the translation used by all Jehovah’s Witnesses today. Instead of referring to the text as the Old and New Testaments, Jehovah’s Witnesses refer to them as the Hebrew and Greek scriptures. Some critics claim that the New World Translation is intentionally skewed to support Jehovah’s Translation is intentionally skewed to support Jehovah’s Translation is intentionally skewed to support Jehovah’s Witnesses’ unique beliefs and practices. Witnesses’ unique beliefs and practices. Witnesses’ unique beliefs and practices. Witnesses’ unique beliefs and practices. Witnesses’ unique beliefs and practices.

Since 1970, the church has been run not by a single Since 1970, the church has been run not by a single Since 1970, the church has been run not by a single Since 1970, the church has been run not by a single Since 1970, the church has been run not by a single president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men president, but rather by committee. A group of ten men rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing rotate service in the committee called the Governing Body. No women may serve on the committee. Body. No women may serve on the committee. Body. No women may serve on the committee. Body. No women may serve on the committee. Body. No women may serve on the committee. Body. No women may serve on the committee. Body. No women may serve on the committee. Body. No women may serve on the committee.

B E L I E F S

Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on Jehovah’s Witnesses are best known for their focus on evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door evangelism. Millions of Witnesses travel door to door sharing literature and spreading their understanding sharing literature and spreading their understanding sharing literature and spreading their understanding sharing literature and spreading their understanding of the world. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that the end of the world. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that the end of the world. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that the end of the world. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that the end of time is near, and soon God will reclaim the world to establish God’s kingdom. They believe that God is the sole creator of the world, but currently the world is under the direct rule of Satan. Witnesses do not believe that a physical Jesus Christ will return, but instead that the spirit of Jesus will return. Once the world becomes God’s kingdom after Christ’s return, life will then become ideal.

One difference between Jehovah’s Witnesses and most other Christians is that Jehovah’s Witnesses reject the trinity. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that Jesus was the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

222

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 222 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Jehovah’s Witnesses

submissive, human son of God, not a divine incarnation.

Jesus was used as a sacrifice for humankind but was

assassinated on a stake rather than a cross. Because

Jehovah’s Witnesses do not believe that Jesus was divine,

this means that God did not die for the sins of humanity.

In addition, Witnesses believe that the immortality of the

human soul is not unconditional, but rather resurrection

of the human soul is conditional upon accepting God’s

gift of Jesus for humanity. Then at the end of time, all

souls will be resurrected. Those who accept God will souls will be resurrected. Those who accept God will souls will be resurrected. Those who accept God will

have their souls returned to their physical bodies to live have their souls returned to their physical bodies to live have their souls returned to their physical bodies to live have their souls returned to their physical bodies to live have their souls returned to their physical bodies to live

in paradise here on earth. Those who do not accept Jesus in paradise here on earth. Those who do not accept Jesus in paradise here on earth. Those who do not accept Jesus in paradise here on earth. Those who do not accept Jesus in paradise here on earth. Those who do not accept Jesus

will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not will cease to exist because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not

believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will believe in hell; instead, they believe that those people will

have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000 have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000 have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000 have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000 have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000 have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000 have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000 have simply no afterlife at all. Additionally, only 144,000

will be accepted into heaven to help God rule this earthly will be accepted into heaven to help God rule this earthly will be accepted into heaven to help God rule this earthly will be accepted into heaven to help God rule this earthly will be accepted into heaven to help God rule this earthly will be accepted into heaven to help God rule this earthly

paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth. paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth. paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth. paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth. paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth. paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth. paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth. paradise. Most Witnesses hope to remain on earth.

Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas, Witnesses reject all celebrations including Christmas,

Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical Easter, and birthdays because of their historical

connections with paganism. They also reject traditional connections with paganism. They also reject traditional connections with paganism. They also reject traditional connections with paganism. They also reject traditional

Christian baptism by sprinkling of water. Instead, baptism Christian baptism by sprinkling of water. Instead, baptism Christian baptism by sprinkling of water. Instead, baptism Christian baptism by sprinkling of water. Instead, baptism

is always performed by full immersion, and it symbolizes

the dedication of a person to the faith. Baptism does not

remove any previous sin or provide spiritual cleansing.

Additionally, there is no ordained clergy among Jehovah’s

Witnesses; instead, there are designated elders within each

congregation who take on leadership roles. Witnesses also

abstain from serving in the military, pledging allegiance

to the flag, and receiving blood transfusions, stating

that there are direct biblical scriptures forbidding these

practices. Witnesses believe that no allegiance should be

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

223

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 223 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

promised to any country; rather, this allegiance should only be reserved for the kingdom of God.

Worship takes place during weekly meetings in Kingdom Halls. There is no tithing among Jehovah’s Witnesses. All donations are given voluntarily and often anonymously.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

There are about seven million Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide, and this number is rapidly growing. In the worldwide, and this number is rapidly growing. In the worldwide, and this number is rapidly growing. In the United States, seven percent of the population identify United States, seven percent of the population identify United States, seven percent of the population identify United States, seven percent of the population identify United States, seven percent of the population identify themselves as Jehovah’s Witness, which is the largest of themselves as Jehovah’s Witness, which is the largest of themselves as Jehovah’s Witness, which is the largest of themselves as Jehovah’s Witness, which is the largest of themselves as Jehovah’s Witness, which is the largest of any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, any country. Of those who are raised in the tradition, only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into only thirty-seven percent remain Jehovah’s Witnesses into adulthood.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

224

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 224 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Hare Krishna

I N T R O D U C T I O N

The International Society of Krishna Consciousness

(ISKCON) began in the United States in 1966. Most

know the movement by the name Hare Krishna. The

primary sacred text of ISKCON is the Bhagavad Gita,

which centers around the deity Krishna. The Hare

Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch Krishna movement is derived from a specialized branch

of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between of Hinduism, so there are many shared concepts between

ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on ISKCON and traditional Hinduism (see the chapter on

Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview). Hinduism for an overview).

H I S T O R Y

Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where Abhay Charan De was born in Calcutta, India, where

he graduated from college, started a family, and owned he graduated from college, started a family, and owned he graduated from college, started a family, and owned he graduated from college, started a family, and owned he graduated from college, started a family, and owned he graduated from college, started a family, and owned he graduated from college, started a family, and owned

a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in a small business in the early part of his life. Then in

1950, he chose to leave his family behind and became 1950, he chose to leave his family behind and became 1950, he chose to leave his family behind and became 1950, he chose to leave his family behind and became 1950, he chose to leave his family behind and became 1950, he chose to leave his family behind and became

a renunciant, dedicating himself to writing scriptural a renunciant, dedicating himself to writing scriptural a renunciant, dedicating himself to writing scriptural a renunciant, dedicating himself to writing scriptural

commentary. In 1966, now going by the name Abhay commentary. In 1966, now going by the name Abhay commentary. In 1966, now going by the name Abhay commentary. In 1966, now going by the name Abhay

Charanaravinda Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, he

traveled to New York City as a missionary. Wishing to

spread traditional Indian beliefs to what he perceived as

a spiritually bankrupt Western world, Prabhupada found

a receptive audience among disenfranchised hippies, who

were searching for truth in unconventional ways. Within

this context, Prabhupada founded the International

Society of Krishna Consciousness.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

225

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 225 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

B E L I E F S

Though some beliefs are similar to Hinduism, there are also many differences. Hare Krishnas primarily worship Krishna, and they see him as being the “supreme godhead,” the greatest deity from whom all else emanates. For this reason, Hare Krishnas describe themselves as monotheistic. The name Hare Krishna comes from the common chant: “Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.” Hare literally means “praise,” and Hare Krishnas believe that the act of chanting Krishna’s Hare Krishnas believe that the act of chanting Krishna’s Hare Krishnas believe that the act of chanting Krishna’s Hare Krishnas believe that the act of chanting Krishna’s name actually calls him into physical presence among the name actually calls him into physical presence among the name actually calls him into physical presence among the name actually calls him into physical presence among the name actually calls him into physical presence among the name actually calls him into physical presence among the name actually calls him into physical presence among the name actually calls him into physical presence among the chanters. Therefore, the frequent chanting of Krishna’s chanters. Therefore, the frequent chanting of Krishna’s chanters. Therefore, the frequent chanting of Krishna’s chanters. Therefore, the frequent chanting of Krishna’s chanters. Therefore, the frequent chanting of Krishna’s chanters. Therefore, the frequent chanting of Krishna’s chanters. Therefore, the frequent chanting of Krishna’s name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. name invites him into the world to bless all who hear. Hare Krishnas also may chant the name of Radha, Hare Krishnas also may chant the name of Radha, Hare Krishnas also may chant the name of Radha, Hare Krishnas also may chant the name of Radha, Hare Krishnas also may chant the name of Radha, Hare Krishnas also may chant the name of Radha, Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is Krishna’s wife. Honoring Krishnas’ female counterpart is an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. an affirmation of the interdependence of male and female. Hare Krishnas openly reject social inequalities based on Hare Krishnas openly reject social inequalities based on Hare Krishnas openly reject social inequalities based on Hare Krishnas openly reject social inequalities based on Hare Krishnas openly reject social inequalities based on Hare Krishnas openly reject social inequalities based on Hare Krishnas openly reject social inequalities based on caste, class, and gender. caste, class, and gender.

Perhaps one of the biggest differences between Hindus Perhaps one of the biggest differences between Hindus Perhaps one of the biggest differences between Hindus Perhaps one of the biggest differences between Hindus Perhaps one of the biggest differences between Hindus and Hare Krishnas is their stance on evangelism. For most and Hare Krishnas is their stance on evangelism. For most and Hare Krishnas is their stance on evangelism. For most and Hare Krishnas is their stance on evangelism. For most Hindus, religion is a part of life and culture from birth; Hinduism is something one is born into, not something one chooses. As a result, there is no such thing as conversion to Hinduism, and most Hindus are not seeking new believers. Hare Krishnas, on the other hand, believe strongly in sharing and spreading the spiritual truths of Krishna. Many people are familiar with the presence of Hare Krishnas in public places, passing out literature to passers-by and spreading their beliefs. Hare Krishnas are also known for their charity, frequently opening their

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

226

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 226 1/4/12 11:20 AM
