concept of a church as a gathering of believers is employed.

However, in spite of these religious elements, the author still

claims repeatedly that Vampirism is not a religion at all.

The Vampire Temple, another Vampirist website,

is more explicitly religious but still draws from diverse

religious traditions (www.vampiretemple.com). For

example, the Vampire Creed denies the monotheistic idea

of God in the Abrahamic religions, but also claims, “I [the

individual] am the only God there is.” Another seeming

contradiction is the Vampire Temple’s professed belief in contradiction is the Vampire Temple’s professed belief in contradiction is the Vampire Temple’s professed belief in

rationalism as well as the reality of magic. Vampires using rationalism as well as the reality of magic. Vampires using rationalism as well as the reality of magic. Vampires using rationalism as well as the reality of magic. Vampires using rationalism as well as the reality of magic. Vampires using

this website can implement the basic teachings of the this website can implement the basic teachings of the this website can implement the basic teachings of the this website can implement the basic teachings of the this website can implement the basic teachings of the

creed via The Vampire Bible and its interpretations, called Vampire Vampire Vampire Vampire Bible Bible and its interpretations, called and its interpretations, called and its interpretations, called and its interpretations, called and its interpretations, called and its interpretations, called and its interpretations, called

revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a revelations, by becoming a ritual practitioner known as a

Nightside Vampire. Nightside Vampire.

D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S

Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common; Vampires have a few key rituals or beliefs in common;

they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to they are also diverse, local, independent, and prone to

change. However, this does not mean that these “real” change. However, this does not mean that these “real” change. However, this does not mean that these “real” change. However, this does not mean that these “real”

vampire communities are not religious, but rather that vampire communities are not religious, but rather that vampire communities are not religious, but rather that vampire communities are not religious, but rather that

they are very different types of religion than we might

initially recognize. As such, it is difficult to know exactly

how many people claim Vampirism as their religion.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Glynn, Casey. “Fla. Murder Suspect Claims She’s Part Vampire, Part

Werewolf.” http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-504083_162-20112703

-504083.html (September 28, 2011).

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

237

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 237 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Crewdson, Michael and Margaret Mittlebach. “To Die For: Painting the Town Red, and the Capes and Nails Black.” New York Times (November 24, 2000).

Rose, Lisa. “N.J. Vampire Subculture Thrives on Blood, Rituals, Fangs.” The New Jersey Star-Ledger (October 15, 2009).

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

238

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 238 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Jediism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Jediism is a recent religious movement aligned with

the Jedi principles professed in the Star Wars movies.

Referring to themselves as Jedi apprentices, knights,

and masters, practitioners believe that an omnipresent,

impersonal Force governs the universe. Jedis are able

to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet to connect with one another via websites and internet

discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to discussion, though they also gather for conventions to

connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there connect with other Jedis. In some limited areas, if there

are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another, are enough practitioners in close proximity to one another,

Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct Jedis are able to form physical communities and conduct

rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well. rituals unique to each individual group as well.

H I S T O R Y

While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy, While Jedis generally avoid hierarchy and value autonomy,

several major independent centers of Jedi religion have several major independent centers of Jedi religion have several major independent centers of Jedi religion have several major independent centers of Jedi religion have several major independent centers of Jedi religion have several major independent centers of Jedi religion have

sprouted recently. In Texas, the Temple of the Jedi sprouted recently. In Texas, the Temple of the Jedi sprouted recently. In Texas, the Temple of the Jedi sprouted recently. In Texas, the Temple of the Jedi

Order was founded in 2005 by John Henry Phelan, Order was founded in 2005 by John Henry Phelan, Order was founded in 2005 by John Henry Phelan, Order was founded in 2005 by John Henry Phelan,

called Brother John, and has been at the forefront of

organizing and articulating Jedi beliefs in the United

States. In conjunction with the internet organization

religioustolerance.org, Jedis from this temple developed

a set of key moral principles for their community, as well

as conditions for membership and advancement. In New

Zealand, the Jedi Church has developed and publicized

a similar belief statement, though their standards for

participation are minimal in comparison to the Temple of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

239

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 239 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

the Jedi Order. The Jedi Church web site reads, “It’s easy to join the Jedi church; just look inside yourself, and feel the force.” These two Jedi organizations and others like them use internet message boards to conduct worship and education, and also to connect practitioners with one another. They have also used the internet to organize massive census campaigns over the past ten years.

B E L I E F S

The principles of Jedi Code are by design syncretistic, The principles of Jedi Code are by design syncretistic, The principles of Jedi Code are by design syncretistic, meaning they combine the beliefs and ideas of many meaning they combine the beliefs and ideas of many meaning they combine the beliefs and ideas of many meaning they combine the beliefs and ideas of many meaning they combine the beliefs and ideas of many known religions. Jedis are quick to claim that while their known religions. Jedis are quick to claim that while their known religions. Jedis are quick to claim that while their known religions. Jedis are quick to claim that while their known religions. Jedis are quick to claim that while their religious beliefs mirror the principles of the Star Wars religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the religious beliefs mirror the principles of the movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; movies, they are not simply role playing the movies; instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day instead, practitioners are committed to living day-to-day “in touch with the Living Force flowing through and “in touch with the Living Force flowing through and “in touch with the Living Force flowing through and “in touch with the Living Force flowing through and “in touch with the Living Force flowing through and “in touch with the Living Force flowing through and “in touch with the Living Force flowing through and around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ around” them (http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/ doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force doctrine). Jedis further believe that the power of the Force has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, has been present in the lives of real historical figures, to whom they refer as Jedi masters, including Lao Tzu, to whom they refer as Jedi masters, including Lao Tzu, to whom they refer as Jedi masters, including Lao Tzu, to whom they refer as Jedi masters, including Lao Tzu, Jesus, the Buddha, St. Francis of Assisi, and Gandhi, who Jesus, the Buddha, St. Francis of Assisi, and Gandhi, who Jesus, the Buddha, St. Francis of Assisi, and Gandhi, who Jesus, the Buddha, St. Francis of Assisi, and Gandhi, who shared a common commitment to peace and illumination (see www.templeofthejediorder.org/home/doctrine). A Jedi attempts to learn from these various masters and seeks to live according to the principles of the Jedi Code (http:// www.jediism.org/generic0.html), which is a combination of the beliefs of many established religions like Taoism, Christianity, Buddhism, and Shinto.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

240

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 240 1/4/12 11:20 AM
