D E M O G R A P H I C S

Jedi religion was the source of some controversy during

recent national censuses in England and New Zealand.

In each of these countries, a campaign was conducted

via the internet to encourage citizens to list their religion

as “Jedi” or “Jedi Knight.” In England during the 2001

census, 390,000 residents listed Jediism as their religion.

Likewise in New Zealand, Jediism was listed as the

religion of choice by 53,000 people in the 2001 census,

and a campaign is currently underway for the 2011 census and a campaign is currently underway for the 2011 census and a campaign is currently underway for the 2011 census and a campaign is currently underway for the 2011 census

as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are as well. Advocates at the Jedi Church in New Zealand are

promoting their efforts as a protest in favor of religious promoting their efforts as a protest in favor of religious promoting their efforts as a protest in favor of religious promoting their efforts as a protest in favor of religious promoting their efforts as a protest in favor of religious promoting their efforts as a protest in favor of religious promoting their efforts as a protest in favor of religious

liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country . . . liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country liberty, noting, “Remember that in a free country

you have the freedom to decide what your religion is, you have the freedom to decide what your religion is, you have the freedom to decide what your religion is, you have the freedom to decide what your religion is, you have the freedom to decide what your religion is, you have the freedom to decide what your religion is,

and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty and no one has the right to take away that civil liberty

by categorizing your religion as anything other than the by categorizing your religion as anything other than the by categorizing your religion as anything other than the by categorizing your religion as anything other than the by categorizing your religion as anything other than the by categorizing your religion as anything other than the by categorizing your religion as anything other than the by categorizing your religion as anything other than the

legible answer you provide them” (http://www.jedichurch legible answer you provide them” (http://www.jedichurch legible answer you provide them” (http://www.jedichurch legible answer you provide them” (http://www.jedichurch legible answer you provide them” (http://www.jedichurch legible answer you provide them” (http://www.jedichurch legible answer you provide them” (http://www.jedichurch

.org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious .org/census2011). Part of what makes Jediism and religious

movements like it so intriguing is the concerted effort to movements like it so intriguing is the concerted effort to movements like it so intriguing is the concerted effort to movements like it so intriguing is the concerted effort to movements like it so intriguing is the concerted effort to

use the internet to spread the group’s ideals. use the internet to spread the group’s ideals. use the internet to spread the group’s ideals. use the internet to spread the group’s ideals.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

http://www.jediism.org/

Office of National Statistics. “390,000 Jedi There Are.” http://www

.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/census/census-2001-summary-theme-figures-and

-rankings/390-000-jedis-there-are/jedi.html.

Perrott, Alan. “Jedi Order Lures 53,000 Disciples.” New Zealand Herald

(Aug. 31, 2002).

Temple of the Jedi Order. http://www.templeofthejediorder.org/.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

241

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 241 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 242 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Divining,

Astrology, Tarot

Cards and New Age

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Divination, astrology, and the use of tarot cards all

stem from a common belief in the ability to predict the

future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have future, or fortune telling. These and similar practices have

existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often existed since ancient times, but today they are most often

associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New associated with the religious movement known as New

Age.

H I S T O R Y

The New Age movement likely developed out of the The New Age movement likely developed out of the The New Age movement likely developed out of the The New Age movement likely developed out of the The New Age movement likely developed out of the The New Age movement likely developed out of the The New Age movement likely developed out of the The New Age movement likely developed out of the

nineteenth century Theosophy movement, which refers nineteenth century Theosophy movement, which refers nineteenth century Theosophy movement, which refers nineteenth century Theosophy movement, which refers nineteenth century Theosophy movement, which refers nineteenth century Theosophy movement, which refers nineteenth century Theosophy movement, which refers

to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the to the pursuit of divine wisdom through the union of the

physical and metaphysical worlds. New Age thought was physical and metaphysical worlds. New Age thought was physical and metaphysical worlds. New Age thought was physical and metaphysical worlds. New Age thought was physical and metaphysical worlds. New Age thought was physical and metaphysical worlds. New Age thought was

further influenced by twentieth century psychology and further influenced by twentieth century psychology and further influenced by twentieth century psychology and further influenced by twentieth century psychology and

the West’s rediscovery of Eastern religion and philosophy.

Eventually, New Age went mainstream in the 1970s with

the endorsement of celebrities like Shirley MacLaine,

and then the movement continued to prosper, thanks to

the later success of health gurus like Andrew Weil and

Deepak Chopra. However, the movement has also come

under sharp criticism from members of the scientific

community and other skeptics who believe that astrology,

crystal healing, and other forms of New Age spirituality

are pseudoscience with no evidence of success.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

243

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 243 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

B E L I E F S

The New Age movement takes cues from many world religions, thereby creating a belief system that is less rigid than most. New Age spirituality contains aspects of monotheistic, polytheistic, and nontheistic traditions, including Islam, Buddhism, Taoism, and Neopaganism, while also channeling psychology, physics, and natural healing. New Age practitioners believe strongly in the interconnectedness of mind, body, and spirit, and promote the belief that human beings are on the verge of a massive the belief that human beings are on the verge of a massive the belief that human beings are on the verge of a massive the belief that human beings are on the verge of a massive cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The cultural shift toward total understanding and peace. The name “New Age” comes from the belief that there is the name “New Age” comes from the belief that there is the name “New Age” comes from the belief that there is the name “New Age” comes from the belief that there is the name “New Age” comes from the belief that there is the name “New Age” comes from the belief that there is the name “New Age” comes from the belief that there is the potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— potential within each person to bring this new age— this shift—into being by drawing upon cosmic energies this shift—into being by drawing upon cosmic energies this shift—into being by drawing upon cosmic energies this shift—into being by drawing upon cosmic energies this shift—into being by drawing upon cosmic energies this shift—into being by drawing upon cosmic energies and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in and forces. Therefore, New Age practitioners engage in a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including a wide variety of self-actualization practices, including meditation, holistic healing, and divination practices like meditation, holistic healing, and divination practices like meditation, holistic healing, and divination practices like meditation, holistic healing, and divination practices like meditation, holistic healing, and divination practices like meditation, holistic healing, and divination practices like meditation, holistic healing, and divination practices like tarot card reading and astrology. tarot card reading and astrology. tarot card reading and astrology. tarot card reading and astrology. tarot card reading and astrology.

Divination is the attempt to determine the future, Divination is the attempt to determine the future, Divination is the attempt to determine the future, Divination is the attempt to determine the future, Divination is the attempt to determine the future, often through communication with supernatural forces. often through communication with supernatural forces. often through communication with supernatural forces. often through communication with supernatural forces. New Agers believe that divination is a way of accessing cosmic knowledge for our own betterment and self-realization, thereby moving us closer to the new age. Two common forms of divination are astrology (discerning the future by the stars and planets) and cartomancy (using cards to discern one’s fate). Astrological divination is commonly associated with the horoscope, which is based on the position of the stars and planets at the time of one’s birth. In addition, the use of a tarot deck, a series of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

244

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 244 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Divining, Astrology, Tarot Cards and New Age

78 cards with pictures that represent aspects of a person’s

life or future choices, is an example of cartomancy.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

Recent surveys in the United States indicate that people

who identify their religion as New Age make up a tiny

minority of the population (less than a half percent), but

that many more believe in the ideals or have tried the

practices of this movement. For example, in the United

States, twenty-eight percent of respondents to a Gallup States, twenty-eight percent of respondents to a Gallup States, twenty-eight percent of respondents to a Gallup

poll in 2000 stated that they believed in astrology (see poll in 2000 stated that they believed in astrology (see poll in 2000 stated that they believed in astrology (see poll in 2000 stated that they believed in astrology (see poll in 2000 stated that they believed in astrology (see

Wynn).

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Gardner, Michael. The New Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher. New York: The New Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher

Prometheus Books, 1990. Prometheus Books, 1990.

MacLaine, Shirley. Out on a Limb. New York: Bantam, 1983. Out on a Limb Limb . New York: Bantam, 1983. . New York: Bantam, 1983. . New York: Bantam, 1983. . New York: Bantam, 1983.

Shermer, Michael, ed. The Skeptic’s Guide to Pseudoscience. Santa Shermer, Michael, ed. The Skeptic’s Guide to Pseudoscience. Skeptic’s Guide to Pseudoscience. Pseudoscience. Santa

Barbara: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2002. Barbara: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2002. Barbara: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2002.

Wynn, Charles. “Seen Any Red Pandas Lately?” Journal of College Wynn, Charles. “Seen Any Red Pandas Lately?” Wynn, Charles. “Seen Any Red Pandas Lately?” Journal Journal

Science Teaching 36.5 (2007): 10–11.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

245

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 245 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 246 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Belief in

the Paranormal

and Spirits

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Central to paranormal and spiritual beliefs is an idea

that some aspect of the person—often a spirit or soul—

survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in survives death and continues to be present in some way in

the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the the material world. In this belief system, the spirits of the

deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object, deceased are often connected to a certain place or object,

and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the and these spirits are still able to communicate with the

living.

Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in Belief in the paranormal has gained popularity in

recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is recent years. Fascination with the spiritual realm is

present in numerous popular television shows related present in numerous popular television shows related present in numerous popular television shows related present in numerous popular television shows related present in numerous popular television shows related

to ghosts and hauntings, including Ghost Hunters on the to ghosts and hauntings, including to ghosts and hauntings, including to ghosts and hauntings, including to ghosts and hauntings, including Ghost to ghosts and hauntings, including Ghost Hunters Hunters

SyFy network and Paranormal State on A&E, in which SyFy network and Paranormal State on A&E, in which Paranormal on A&E, in which on A&E, in which on A&E, in which

teams investigate alleged hauntings. Skeptics contend that teams investigate alleged hauntings. Skeptics contend that teams investigate alleged hauntings. Skeptics contend that teams investigate alleged hauntings. Skeptics contend that

shows like these manipulate viewers by means of camera

tricks and pseudoscientific language, and that paranormal

beliefs are unsubstantiated by actual scientific inquiry.

H I S T O R Y A N D B E L I E F S

Belief in spirits, ghosts, and people’s ability to contact

them is not a new phenomenon. Scholars have identified

animism, or the conviction that everything has a spirit,

as one of the earliest religious beliefs of humans. Ghosts

figure prominently in the religious beliefs of many ancient

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

247

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 247 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

cultures, including Egyptian, Greco-Roman, Chinese, Japanese, and Tibetan cultures; efforts were made in these cultures to communicate with and to appease the spirits of those who had died but not entirely departed. In the Bible, King Saul goes to a medium to try to contact Samuel (1 Sam. 28), and there are laws forbidding such practices in the Old Testament, indicating that belief in the paranormal existed in ancient Israel. In Europe and the United States, the Spiritualist Church is a movement in which people attempt to contact the dead movement in which people attempt to contact the dead movement in which people attempt to contact the dead through séances, the interpretation of knocking sounds, through séances, the interpretation of knocking sounds, through séances, the interpretation of knocking sounds, through séances, the interpretation of knocking sounds, through séances, the interpretation of knocking sounds, mediumship, and other means. Though Spiritualism mediumship, and other means. Though Spiritualism mediumship, and other means. Though Spiritualism mediumship, and other means. Though Spiritualism mediumship, and other means. Though Spiritualism reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth reached its height of popularity in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced and early twentieth centuries, it continues to be practiced today.

D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S D E M O G R A P H I C S

In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed In a 2005 Gallup Poll, three in four Americans expressed a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including a belief in some form of paranormal activity, including extrasensory perception, clairvoyance and other forms extrasensory perception, clairvoyance and other forms extrasensory perception, clairvoyance and other forms extrasensory perception, clairvoyance and other forms of mind control or communication, ghosts and haunted of mind control or communication, ghosts and haunted of mind control or communication, ghosts and haunted of mind control or communication, ghosts and haunted houses, and channeling, which is the inhabitation of a living person by a spirit. In this same survey, more than one third of respondents agreed that “houses can be haunted,” and nearly the same number concurred that “the spirits of dead people can come back in certain places.” In a poll conducted by CBS News in 2009, forty-eight percent of Americans stated a belief in ghosts, and more than one in five Americans claimed to have seen a ghost.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

248

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 248 1/4/12 11:20 AM
