F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Alfano, Sean. “Poll: Majority Believe In Ghosts.” CBS News. http://

www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/10/29/opinion/polls/main994766

.shtml.

Moore, David W. “Three in Four Americans Believe in Paranormal.”

Gallup. http://www.gallup.com/poll/16915/three-four-americans

-believe-paranormal.aspx.

Shermer, Michael. Why People Believe in Weird Things: Pseudoscience,

Superstition, and Confusions of Our Time. New York: Henry Holt, 2002.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

249

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 249 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 250 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Demonology

and Angelology

Many religious traditions share a belief in the presence

of spiritual beings who influence earthly human affairs.

Some of these beings are forces for good, representing

order, and some are forces for evil or disorder, and they

often possess humanlike qualities or sentience. These

divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and divine beings are commonly described as angels and

demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different demons, although names vary widely among different

traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons traditions. Popular beliefs involving angels and demons

are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad are often an attempt to answer the question of why bad

things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world. things happen in the world.

W E S T E R N R E L I G I O N S W E S T E R N R E L I G I O N S W E S T E R N R E L I G I O N S W E S T E R N R E L I G I O N S W E S T E R N R E L I G I O N S

Judaism

Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim Angelic beings including cherubim and seraphim

populate much of ancient Jewish scripture. However, these populate much of ancient Jewish scripture. However, these populate much of ancient Jewish scripture. However, these populate much of ancient Jewish scripture. However, these populate much of ancient Jewish scripture. However, these

beings bear little resemblance to the kindly guardian beings bear little resemblance to the kindly guardian beings bear little resemblance to the kindly guardian beings bear little resemblance to the kindly guardian

angels of popular belief. Some biblical angels are fierce;

for example, they have flaming swords (Gen. 3:24) and

lead armies into battle (Ex. 23:23). Others are messengers,

bringing news of impending destruction (Gen. 19:15).

Still others seem more like lawyers; in Job, they are

members of a “court,” including a prosecuting attorney. In

Hebrew, the name for the prosecuting angel is ha-Satan,

or “the Accuser”; though this figure may be a precursor

to the Satan who later appears in the New Testament, in

this context the Accuser is just another member of the

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

251

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 251 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

heavenly court, not a diabolical force. The cherubim and seraphim have multiple sets of wings and can fly (Isa. 6:2, Ezek. 10:3). The closest an angel comes to being a personal guide to humans in the Hebrew Bible occurs when Gabriel becomes an interpreter in Daniel 8.

While angelic beings are common, very little is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible about demons. Though the King James Version includes the translation of several words as “demon” in the Hebrew Bible, a better translation for these words would be “idols” because they translation for these words would be “idols” because they translation for these words would be “idols” because they are actually objects of worship, not beings with spiritual are actually objects of worship, not beings with spiritual are actually objects of worship, not beings with spiritual are actually objects of worship, not beings with spiritual are actually objects of worship, not beings with spiritual powers (see Ps. 106:37). Discussion of spirits do occur in powers (see Ps. 106:37). Discussion of spirits do occur in powers (see Ps. 106:37). Discussion of spirits do occur in powers (see Ps. 106:37). Discussion of spirits do occur in powers (see Ps. 106:37). Discussion of spirits do occur in some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit some places in the Hebrew Bible. For example, the “spirit of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad of jealousy” afflicts people in Numbers 5:14, and a “bad spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these spirit” torments Saul in 1 Samuel 16:14. However, these are not evil forces opposed to God, especially since in are not evil forces opposed to God, especially since in are not evil forces opposed to God, especially since in are not evil forces opposed to God, especially since in are not evil forces opposed to God, especially since in are not evil forces opposed to God, especially since in the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. the second case it is God who actually sends the spirit. Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human Instead, it seems that “spirits” here refer to chaotic human dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings. dispositions, rather than to real spiritual beings.

Christianity Christianity Christianity Christianity

As in the Hebrew Bible, in the Christian New Testament angels are not simply gentle guides. The angel who visits Mary tells her, “Do not be afraid,” indicating that fear is her natural response to this encounter, and a similar admonition is given by the heavenly armies who meet the shepherds in Luke 1:30 and 2:10. The angels of Revelation are exceedingly fierce; they transform water into blood and release thunder and earthquakes, destroying a third of the earth, including humans (Rev. 8). In the same text, the angel Michael fights a war against

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

252

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 252 1/4/12 11:20 AM
