a dragon, which results in the expulsion of other angels

from heaven at the end of time (Revelation 12).

Because their writers were influenced by Greek and

Roman ideas of beings called daimons, early Christian

texts are more populated with malevolent spirits than is

the Hebrew Bible. Jesus often casts out demons, including

those who cause mental illness and physical disability

(Mark 5:1–20; 9:14–28). The evil being called Satan in

Mark and a devil in Matthew and Luke is responsible

for the temptation of Jesus before his public ministry. In for the temptation of Jesus before his public ministry. In for the temptation of Jesus before his public ministry. In

the epistles, demons are understood as forces who might the epistles, demons are understood as forces who might the epistles, demons are understood as forces who might the epistles, demons are understood as forces who might the epistles, demons are understood as forces who might

cause believers to renounce their faith, and in Revelation, cause believers to renounce their faith, and in Revelation, cause believers to renounce their faith, and in Revelation, cause believers to renounce their faith, and in Revelation, cause believers to renounce their faith, and in Revelation,

demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon. demons lead an army at Armageddon.

Islam

In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels In the Qur’an, there are references to many angels

who also appear in the Christian Bible. For example, both who also appear in the Christian Bible. For example, both who also appear in the Christian Bible. For example, both who also appear in the Christian Bible. For example, both who also appear in the Christian Bible. For example, both who also appear in the Christian Bible. For example, both who also appear in the Christian Bible. For example, both

Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael) Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael) Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael) Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael) Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael) Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael) Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael) Jibril (Gabriel in Christian texts) and Mikhail (Michael)

appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside appear in surah 2, where they are portrayed alongside

Allah as second in command against the unbelievers Allah as second in command against the unbelievers Allah as second in command against the unbelievers Allah as second in command against the unbelievers

(2:97–98). Jibril is the most prominent among the angels, (2:97–98). Jibril is the most prominent among the angels, (2:97–98). Jibril is the most prominent among the angels, (2:97–98). Jibril is the most prominent among the angels,

since he is responsible for delivering the revelation of the

Qur’an to Muhammad. As in the Jewish and Christian

scriptures, Islamic angels are messengers (22:75; 35:1),

militaristic (8:9–12), and guard-like (13:11). Generally,

angels are totally obedient to Allah. For Muslims, the

belief in angels is one of the Six Articles of Faith.

In the Qur’an, there are also spirits called jinn, whose

origin in Arabian culture long predates Islam. Unlike

angels, who are subservient to Allah, jinn can exhibit

a wide range of natures and allegiances; sometimes

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

253

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 253 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

they are helpful spirits, and at other times they are disruptive. They are also occasionally “audacious” (27:39) and transgressive (18:50). According to the Qur’an, Allah created the jinn out of fire, with their initial purpose being to serve Allah (15:27; 51:56). Much more malevolent, however, are the shaitans, the foremost of whom is named Iblis. The shaitans are spirits who are responsible for the fall of humanity and who taught them sorcery (2:36, 102). The shaitans, particularly Iblis, are the true enemies of both Allah and humanity, and they are true enemies of both Allah and humanity, and they are true enemies of both Allah and humanity, and they are most responsible for leading believers astray (2:178, 208). most responsible for leading believers astray (2:178, 208). most responsible for leading believers astray (2:178, 208). most responsible for leading believers astray (2:178, 208). most responsible for leading believers astray (2:178, 208). The word shaitan comes from the same origin as the word comes from the same origin as the word comes from the same origin as the word comes from the same origin as the word comes from the same origin as the word Satan in Christianity. in Christianity. in Christianity. in Christianity.

A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S A S I A N A N D I N D I G E N O U S R E L I G I O N S

South Asian religious cosmologies also feature spiritual South Asian religious cosmologies also feature spiritual South Asian religious cosmologies also feature spiritual South Asian religious cosmologies also feature spiritual South Asian religious cosmologies also feature spiritual South Asian religious cosmologies also feature spiritual South Asian religious cosmologies also feature spiritual beings, although their opposition to one another is beings, although their opposition to one another is beings, although their opposition to one another is beings, although their opposition to one another is beings, although their opposition to one another is beings, although their opposition to one another is beings, although their opposition to one another is beings, although their opposition to one another is differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In differently focused than in Western traditions. In Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons Hinduism, for example, the gods (devas) and demons (asuras) are constantly locked in battle, but not necessarily (asuras) are constantly locked in battle, but not necessarily (asuras) are constantly locked in battle, but not necessarily (asuras) are constantly locked in battle, but not necessarily because one is good and the other evil. Rather, the because one is good and the other evil. Rather, the because one is good and the other evil. Rather, the because one is good and the other evil. Rather, the primary difference between the devas and asuras is that the devas ultimately submit to their dharma, or religious duty. In contrast, the asuras are self-absorbed and submit neither to the gods nor to dharma. Without this submission, the world is in danger of spinning into chaos; therefore, the opposition between the devas and asuras is not one between good and evil, but rather between submission and selfishness, and ultimately between order and disorder.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

254

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 254 1/4/12 11:20 AM
