Buddhists also have sacred stories that involve

demons; one of the most famous is the story of

Siddhartha’s meditation under the Bodhi tree, the tree of

enlightenment, when he is assailed by the demon Mara,

the lord of death, as a final temptation before achieving

enlightenment. As in Hinduism, in Buddhism demons

are a force of chaos or disorder instead of moral evil. For

example, demons sometimes interfere with the practices

of holy people trying to improve their karma, as well as

creating restlessness in regular humans. Some demons creating restlessness in regular humans. Some demons creating restlessness in regular humans. Some demons

are actually ghosts, the spirits of the dead who bother the are actually ghosts, the spirits of the dead who bother the are actually ghosts, the spirits of the dead who bother the are actually ghosts, the spirits of the dead who bother the are actually ghosts, the spirits of the dead who bother the

living for food and drink. living for food and drink. living for food and drink.

Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian Demons and evil spirits also play a role in East Asian

religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni religions. For example, in Japanese lore, spirits called Oni

are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong are commonly associated with natural evil, such as strong

winds, bad harvest, or miscarriage more than moral evil. winds, bad harvest, or miscarriage more than moral evil. winds, bad harvest, or miscarriage more than moral evil. winds, bad harvest, or miscarriage more than moral evil. winds, bad harvest, or miscarriage more than moral evil.

Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both Traditional Chinese religion incorporates rituals to both

thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other thwart and appease restless ghosts, demons, and other

evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil evil spirits. In both Chinese and Japanese religion, evil

spirits are forces which can disrupt people’s lives and bring spirits are forces which can disrupt people’s lives and bring spirits are forces which can disrupt people’s lives and bring spirits are forces which can disrupt people’s lives and bring

hardship or disaster if they are unhappy. Again, these hardship or disaster if they are unhappy. Again, these hardship or disaster if they are unhappy. Again, these hardship or disaster if they are unhappy. Again, these

spirits represent chaos, whereas religious ritual is used as a

tool to restore order.

Additionally, many indigenous religions incorporate a

belief in spiritual beings. The general term for this belief

in a spiritual realm is animism, which extends beyond a

simple understanding of angels and demons and includes

a vast number of spirits that populate the world. In

Zimbabwean indigenous religion, Shavi produce both

illness and healing. In many Native American beliefs,

human shamans are guided by nature-spirits and can be

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

255

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 255 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

possessed by them. In New Zealand, the Maori mythology is populated with spirits of light, darkness, cosmos, and chaos. Once more, the spirit world serves as an arena in which guardians of both chaos and order can interact with the human world.

P O P U L A R B E L I E F S

In both Judaism and Christianity, beliefs in angels and demons became more prominent after the closing of each canon. In Judaism, post-biblical literature moves far each canon. In Judaism, post-biblical literature moves far beyond the Hebrew Bible when it comes to describing beyond the Hebrew Bible when it comes to describing beyond the Hebrew Bible when it comes to describing beyond the Hebrew Bible when it comes to describing beyond the Hebrew Bible when it comes to describing the nature and function of demons in the world. For the nature and function of demons in the world. For the nature and function of demons in the world. For the nature and function of demons in the world. For the nature and function of demons in the world. For example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn example, in the Talmud and rabbinic midrash, we learn of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep of the demon Lilith, who is associated with death in sleep and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used and harm to newborns unless proper amulets are used to repel her. In the book of Enoch, which was written to repel her. In the book of Enoch, which was written to repel her. In the book of Enoch, which was written to repel her. In the book of Enoch, which was written to repel her. In the book of Enoch, which was written to repel her. In the book of Enoch, which was written to repel her. In the book of Enoch, which was written under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen under an assumed name, we get descriptions of fallen angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes angels who choose to pursue human women, which causes them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist them to be ejected from heaven for all time. Kabbalist mysticism posits an entire hierarchy of angels and demons mysticism posits an entire hierarchy of angels and demons mysticism posits an entire hierarchy of angels and demons mysticism posits an entire hierarchy of angels and demons who inhabit sephirot, ladders or paths to the divine. who inhabit sephirot, ladders or paths to the divine. who inhabit sephirot, ladders or paths to the divine. who inhabit sephirot, ladders or paths to the divine. Post-biblical Christian tradition similarly expands the roles of angels and demons, perhaps best exemplified by the writings of Dante, who populates heaven, hell, and purgatory with all manner of divine beings in his Divine Comedy. Dante’s writings also likely influenced the Christian concept of Satan’s fall from God, an idea not found in biblical literature.

According to key findings in the Religious Landscape Survey conducted by the Pew Forum, sixty-eight percent of Americans believe that angels and demons are active in

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

256

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 256 1/4/12 11:20 AM
