the world. Belief in angels has been profoundly important

in the New Age movement, which has flourished in the

United States since the 1970s. Many New Age beliefs

draw on Christian and Jewish concepts of an angelic

hierarchy, terminology such as cherubim and seraphim,

and the belief that angels are involved in spiritual battles

on earth. However, New Age angels tend not to be as

fierce as their biblical counterparts but are instead

described as guides, teachers, or contacts with the spirit

realm. Some New Age philosophers also describe these realm. Some New Age philosophers also describe these realm. Some New Age philosophers also describe these

non-human beings as nature-forces, elementals, or spirit non-human beings as nature-forces, elementals, or spirit non-human beings as nature-forces, elementals, or spirit non-human beings as nature-forces, elementals, or spirit non-human beings as nature-forces, elementals, or spirit

guides. Many New Age practitioners believe that these guides. Many New Age practitioners believe that these guides. Many New Age practitioners believe that these guides. Many New Age practitioners believe that these guides. Many New Age practitioners believe that these

spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as spirits can be channeled through a medium, who acts as

the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the the angel’s mouthpiece to communicate guidance to the

seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has seeker. The widespread appeal of such a belief system has

been evident in the massive sales of such works as James been evident in the massive sales of such works as James been evident in the massive sales of such works as James been evident in the massive sales of such works as James been evident in the massive sales of such works as James

Redfield’s Celestine Prophecy and Sylvia Browne’s Book of Celestine Prophecy Prophecy and Sylvia Browne’s and Sylvia Browne’s and Sylvia Browne’s and Sylvia Browne’s and Sylvia Browne’s

Angels .

Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in Demonology and angelology figure prominently in

conservative Christian beliefs as well, as popularized conservative Christian beliefs as well, as popularized conservative Christian beliefs as well, as popularized conservative Christian beliefs as well, as popularized

by the fiction of Frank Peretti and the apologetic work by the fiction of Frank Peretti and the apologetic work by the fiction of Frank Peretti and the apologetic work by the fiction of Frank Peretti and the apologetic work

by Billy Graham titled Angels. These authors tend to

stress the biblical roles of angels, including those of

guard and warrior, while at the same time strengthening

their connection to the world and emphasizing their

participation in day-to-day human affairs. In Catholic

Christian traditions, demons are still believed to interfere

in human life, as indicated by the continued presence

of exorcism training courses for clergy and bishops. For

example, the Catholic News Agency recently reported

on an exorcism training event in Baltimore, Maryland

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

257

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 257 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

(http://www.catholicnewsagency.com/news/over-100 -catholic-clergy-attend-exorcism-training-in-baltimore).

What accounts for the proliferation of popular beliefs in angels and demons, as well as the wide-ranging ancient beliefs behind them? There are many possible answers, but in part, these convictions may be attempts to explain the existence of evil and chaos in the world. In both ancient and modern times, people have striven to answer the existential question, “Why do bad things happen?” The presence of invisible forces, outside of human control The presence of invisible forces, outside of human control The presence of invisible forces, outside of human control but active in human affairs, offers a compelling answer for but active in human affairs, offers a compelling answer for but active in human affairs, offers a compelling answer for but active in human affairs, offers a compelling answer for but active in human affairs, offers a compelling answer for many people.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G Clark, Lynn Schofield. From Angels to Aliens: Teenagers, the Media, and the Clark, Lynn Schofield. From Angels to Aliens: Teenagers, the Media, and the Angels to Aliens: Teenagers, the Media, and the Angels Aliens: Teenagers, the Media, and the Aliens: Teenagers, the Media, and the Aliens: Teenagers, the Media, and the Supernatural. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.

Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Santana, Richard W. and Gregory Erickson. “Demons, Aliens, and Spiritual Warfare: Belief and Reality.” In Religion and Popular Culture: Spiritual Warfare: Belief and Reality.” In Religion Spiritual Warfare: Belief and Reality.” In Spiritual Warfare: Belief and Reality.” In Spiritual Warfare: Belief and Reality.” In Religion and Religion and Rescripting the Sacred. Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. . Richard W. Santana and Gregory Erickson, eds. Jefferson, NC: MacFarland, 2008. Jefferson, NC: MacFarland, 2008. Jefferson, NC: MacFarland, 2008.

Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Survey: Summary of Key Findings.” http://religions.pewforum.org/pdf/ report-religious-landscape-study-key-findings.pdf.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

258

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 258 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Fandom

It might seem odd to encounter the topic of fandom in

a book about religion. Fandom is a product of popular

culture and mass media, whereas religions ought to

transcend that mundane sort of experience. On closer

inspection, however, there is much in common between

fan culture and overt forms of religious expression. This

discussion of fandom in popular culture will attempt to

offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the offer at least a cursory look at the overlap between the

two.

Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of Fandom is the blanket term for any of a number of

communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of communities that obsessively follow some element of

popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows (Buffy popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows ( popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows ( popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows ( popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows ( popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows ( popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows ( popular culture. There are fandoms for TV shows (

the Vampire Slayer, Doctor Who, Star Trek), books (Harry Slayer Slayer Slayer Doctor Who Star , Doctor Who Star Star Star Star Star ), books ( ), books (

Potter , Lord of the Rings), movies (The Big Lebowski, The Rocky the Rings ), movies ( ), movies ( ), movies (The The Lebowski Lebowski Lebowski

Horror Picture Show), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and Show ), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and ), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and ), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and ), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and ), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and ), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and ), music (Elvis, Justin Bieber), and

sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients sports teams. Serious fans are not just passive recipients

of the mass culture they enjoy. Rather, they produce of the mass culture they enjoy. Rather, they produce of the mass culture they enjoy. Rather, they produce of the mass culture they enjoy. Rather, they produce

responses to the objects of their fandom, including responses to the objects of their fandom, including responses to the objects of their fandom, including responses to the objects of their fandom, including

fanzines, fan fiction, games, podcasts, and visual and

performance art. Fans gather together for conventions

and discussion groups, and travel specifically to see sites

mentioned in the series, show, or song. Scholars who

study fan culture have warned against dismissing the

broad and creative realm of fandom as “kooky” or full of

social misfits. Instead, they have emphasized the ways

fan culture carefully examines the media, offers a source

for consumer activism, creates beauty, and provides

alternative communities (see Jenkins).

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

259

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 259 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Both people of faith and people who are seriously engaged in fandom build community in similar ways, trying to give meaning to human experience. When sociologists talk about how religion functions, they mention the importance of shared rituals and activities that promote a feeling of unity. Psychologists discuss the ability of religious practice to ease fear and provide comfort in difficult situations. Additionally, anthropologists identify the importance of religion in the production of art, literature, and material culture. the production of art, literature, and material culture. the production of art, literature, and material culture. Fandoms function for their participants in much the same Fandoms function for their participants in much the same Fandoms function for their participants in much the same Fandoms function for their participants in much the same Fandoms function for their participants in much the same way as religion. For example, in Star Trek fandom, fans see way as religion. For example, in way as religion. For example, in way as religion. For example, in Star Trek Trek themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals themselves as a community not only with shared rituals (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful (conventions, dress, language), but also with a meaningful philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal philosophy and ethical system for living out the universal themes of the show (rationality, exploration, humanism). themes of the show (rationality, exploration, humanism). themes of the show (rationality, exploration, humanism). themes of the show (rationality, exploration, humanism). themes of the show (rationality, exploration, humanism). themes of the show (rationality, exploration, humanism). From this experience of unity, Star Trek fans produce From this experience of unity, From this experience of unity, Star Trek fans produce Star Trek fans produce art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that art, literature, videos, and other forms of expression that display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but display their allegiance not only to the show itself, but also to the values portrayed therein. Taken as a whole, the also to the values portrayed therein. Taken as a whole, the also to the values portrayed therein. Taken as a whole, the also to the values portrayed therein. Taken as a whole, the way Star Trek fandom functions bears a striking similarity Trek Trek fandom functions bears a striking similarity fandom functions bears a striking similarity fandom functions bears a striking similarity to the way religions work in the lives of adherents. Roger Nygard’s documentary Trekkies (1997) illustrates the religious and ethical aspects of Star Trek fan conventions. Star Trek fandom is one of the most widely studied among academics who seek parallels between fan culture and religion. Jediism in Star Wars fandom is another example of a fan culture with profoundly religious overtones.

Besides giving us insight into the ways communities function, understanding how fandom operates in the lives of its participants helps us to recognize the widespread

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

260

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 260 1/4/12 11:20 AM
