B E L I E F S

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

265

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 265 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 266 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Atheism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Atheism is a philosophical position which is based upon

the assertion that no supreme, supernatural beings or

forces exist. Instead, atheists contend that all phenomena

in the universe, including human thought and morality,

are products of nature and have no divine origin. Atheists

also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which also do not believe in the existence of a human soul which

survives death.

H I S T O R Y

Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought; Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought; Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought; Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought; Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought; Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought; Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought; Atheism is not exclusively a modern system of thought;

more broadly, a diversity of traditions questioning the more broadly, a diversity of traditions questioning the more broadly, a diversity of traditions questioning the more broadly, a diversity of traditions questioning the more broadly, a diversity of traditions questioning the more broadly, a diversity of traditions questioning the more broadly, a diversity of traditions questioning the

existence and significance of God has existed throughout existence and significance of God has existed throughout existence and significance of God has existed throughout existence and significance of God has existed throughout existence and significance of God has existed throughout existence and significance of God has existed throughout existence and significance of God has existed throughout existence and significance of God has existed throughout

history. Some Buddhist traditions are nontheistic, history. Some Buddhist traditions are nontheistic, history. Some Buddhist traditions are nontheistic, history. Some Buddhist traditions are nontheistic, history. Some Buddhist traditions are nontheistic, history. Some Buddhist traditions are nontheistic, history. Some Buddhist traditions are nontheistic,

purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to purporting that no divine intervention is needed to

achieve human enlightenment. In ancient Greece, achieve human enlightenment. In ancient Greece, achieve human enlightenment. In ancient Greece, achieve human enlightenment. In ancient Greece, achieve human enlightenment. In ancient Greece, achieve human enlightenment. In ancient Greece,

the sophists and Epicureans frequently challenged the sophists and Epicureans frequently challenged the sophists and Epicureans frequently challenged the sophists and Epicureans frequently challenged

belief in the gods and divine action in the world, as belief in the gods and divine action in the world, as belief in the gods and divine action in the world, as belief in the gods and divine action in the world, as

did the philosopher Socrates. These philosophers did

not completely deny the supernatural as much as they

questioned religious political authority and the value

of worshipping the gods for humanity. At the time of

the Roman Empire, Christians were accused of atheism

for the same reason—failing to accept the gods of the

Empire as deserving worship. Additionally, during the

Renaissance in Europe, a new type of humanism emerged

in which people denied the religious realm as the only

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

267

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 267 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

measure of excellence. However, none of these cases exactly mirror how atheism is defined today. Instead, these earlier understandings were a kind of skepticism and free thought which challenged the status quo. In contrast, modern atheists draw upon these same values but are more adamant in their ultimate denial of God.

B E L I E F S

Modern atheism as a philosophical position has been profoundly influenced by the writings of Karl Marx, profoundly influenced by the writings of Karl Marx, profoundly influenced by the writings of Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, and Friedrich Nietzsche. Each of these Sigmund Freud, and Friedrich Nietzsche. Each of these Sigmund Freud, and Friedrich Nietzsche. Each of these Sigmund Freud, and Friedrich Nietzsche. Each of these Sigmund Freud, and Friedrich Nietzsche. Each of these theorists saw Judeo-Christian religion in particular as a theorists saw Judeo-Christian religion in particular as a theorists saw Judeo-Christian religion in particular as a theorists saw Judeo-Christian religion in particular as a theorists saw Judeo-Christian religion in particular as a human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which human creation, perhaps created out of necessity, which ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion ultimately holds humanity back. Marx believed religion functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to functioned like a drug to keep most people enslaved to the ruling class, Freud called religion an illusion, and the ruling class, Freud called religion an illusion, and the ruling class, Freud called religion an illusion, and the ruling class, Freud called religion an illusion, and the ruling class, Freud called religion an illusion, and the ruling class, Freud called religion an illusion, and the ruling class, Freud called religion an illusion, and Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three Nietzsche famously asserted that God was dead. All three believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were believed that atheism and a focus on the present were necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release necessary to overcome human suffering and to release human potential. Jean-Paul Sartre added his support to human potential. Jean-Paul Sartre added his support to human potential. Jean-Paul Sartre added his support to human potential. Jean-Paul Sartre added his support to the atheistic assertion of human freedom apart from belief the atheistic assertion of human freedom apart from belief the atheistic assertion of human freedom apart from belief the atheistic assertion of human freedom apart from belief in God.

Since 2008, there has been a rise in popular books about atheism, including works by authors like Christopher Hitchens and Richard Dawkins. These authors are often called “new atheists,” and their approach moves beyond philosophy, as they encourage active resistance to religion in all its forms. They are concerned about how throughout history, religion has been used as a force of violence and oppression, and about how religious belief is built on superstition and denies scientific

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

268

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 268 1/4/12 11:20 AM
