realities. Therefore, they assert that religion must be

actively discredited. As a result, human morality will not

be destroyed; rather, abandoning religion should enhance

morality because it will no longer be based upon society’s

false and oppressive belief in God.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

According to a recent Pew Forum survey, almost two

percent of Americans identify themselves as atheists.

Additionally, in the American Religious Identification Additionally, in the American Religious Identification Additionally, in the American Religious Identification

Survey, conducted in 2008, as many as fifteen percent Survey, conducted in 2008, as many as fifteen percent Survey, conducted in 2008, as many as fifteen percent Survey, conducted in 2008, as many as fifteen percent Survey, conducted in 2008, as many as fifteen percent

of Americans identified their religion as “none.” Because of Americans identified their religion as “none.” Because of Americans identified their religion as “none.” Because of Americans identified their religion as “none.” Because of Americans identified their religion as “none.” Because

this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other this category includes atheists, agnostics, and other

unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate unaffiliated persons, the ARIS poll may not give accurate

numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give numbers of atheists specifically. However, it does give

clues about how many Americans claim identities that do clues about how many Americans claim identities that do clues about how many Americans claim identities that do clues about how many Americans claim identities that do clues about how many Americans claim identities that do clues about how many Americans claim identities that do clues about how many Americans claim identities that do

not hinge upon a belief in God. not hinge upon a belief in God. not hinge upon a belief in God. not hinge upon a belief in God. not hinge upon a belief in God.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

ARIS. “American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS 2008).” http:// ARIS. “American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS 2008).” http:// ARIS. “American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS 2008).” http:// ARIS. “American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS 2008).” http://

commons.trincoll.edu/aris/files/2011/08/ARIS_Report_2008.pdf commons.trincoll.edu/aris/files/2011/08/ARIS_Report_2008.pdf commons.trincoll.edu/aris/files/2011/08/ARIS_Report_2008.pdf commons.trincoll.edu/aris/files/2011/08/ARIS_Report_2008.pdf

Dawkins, Richard. The God Delusion. Bantam Press: London, 2006.

Hitchens, Christopher. God Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything.

Hatchette Books: New York, 2007.

Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “Not All Nonbelievers Call

Themselves Atheists.” http://pewforum.org/Not-All-Nonbelievers-Call

-Themselves-Atheists.aspx.

Thrower, James. Western Atheism: A Short Introduction. Prometheus

Books: New York, 1971.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

269

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 269 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 270 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Agnosticism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Agnosticism is a philosophical position in which

proponents are skeptical of the existence of a divine

being, stating that it is impossible to prove using human

reason. “Agnostic” literally means “not knowing” or

“unknowable,” and it is different from atheism, as atheists

explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist. explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist. explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist. explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist. explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist. explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist. explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist. explicitly assert that divine beings do not exist.

H I S T O R Y

Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a Agnostics make no specific claim about the reality of a

supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and supernatural realm or of any deities. In the eighteenth and

nineteenth centuries, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and nineteenth centuries, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and nineteenth centuries, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and nineteenth centuries, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and nineteenth centuries, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and nineteenth centuries, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and nineteenth centuries, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and

Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof Soren Kierkegaard were skeptical of any claims for proof

of the existence of God. However, it was T. H. Huxley of the existence of God. However, it was T. H. Huxley of the existence of God. However, it was T. H. Huxley of the existence of God. However, it was T. H. Huxley of the existence of God. However, it was T. H. Huxley of the existence of God. However, it was T. H. Huxley of the existence of God. However, it was T. H. Huxley

in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because in the 1860s who coined the term “agnostic.” Because

agnosticism is a category of not-knowing rather than a agnosticism is a category of not-knowing rather than a agnosticism is a category of not-knowing rather than a agnosticism is a category of not-knowing rather than a agnosticism is a category of not-knowing rather than a agnosticism is a category of not-knowing rather than a

specific set of beliefs, it is not easily defined. For example, specific set of beliefs, it is not easily defined. For example, specific set of beliefs, it is not easily defined. For example, specific set of beliefs, it is not easily defined. For example,

in 2008, the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey indicated in 2008, the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey indicated in 2008, the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey indicated in 2008, the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey indicated

that fifty-five percent of self-identified agnostics expressed

a belief in God, and seventeen percent suggested they

were “absolutely certain” that God or a universal spirit

exists. In other words, a person may clearly believe in God

but may still be agnostic, not drawing any conclusions

about that God or making connections to any religion in

particular.

Unlike agnosticism, “unaffiliated” as a category of

religious belief does not have any specific history. Instead,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

271

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 271 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

it is a designation employed by polling organizations in response to an increasing dissatisfaction with organized religion. Being unaffiliated is essentially a catch-all category, including atheists, agnostics, and others who currently profess to be unassociated with any established religious tradition.

D E M O G R A P H I C S

In a 2007 Pew Forum Survey, 2.4 percent of Americans describe themselves as agnostic. A much larger percent describe themselves as agnostic. A much larger percent describe themselves as agnostic. A much larger percent of the population (12.1 percent) respond that they are of the population (12.1 percent) respond that they are of the population (12.1 percent) respond that they are of the population (12.1 percent) respond that they are of the population (12.1 percent) respond that they are unaffiliated in either a “secular unaffiliated” (6.3 percent) unaffiliated in either a “secular unaffiliated” (6.3 percent) unaffiliated in either a “secular unaffiliated” (6.3 percent) unaffiliated in either a “secular unaffiliated” (6.3 percent) unaffiliated in either a “secular unaffiliated” (6.3 percent) or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This or “religious unaffiliated” (5.8 percent) category. This category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is category, also described as “nothing in particular,” is the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year the fastest growing group. Eighteen to twenty-nine year olds constitute the largest group of unaffiliated people olds constitute the largest group of unaffiliated people olds constitute the largest group of unaffiliated people olds constitute the largest group of unaffiliated people olds constitute the largest group of unaffiliated people olds constitute the largest group of unaffiliated people olds constitute the largest group of unaffiliated people in the United States, accounting for nearly one in four in the United States, accounting for nearly one in four in the United States, accounting for nearly one in four in the United States, accounting for nearly one in four in the United States, accounting for nearly one in four in the United States, accounting for nearly one in four in the United States, accounting for nearly one in four respondents.

According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious According to the 2008 American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS), approximately 15 percent Identification Survey (ARIS), approximately 15 percent Identification Survey (ARIS), approximately 15 percent Identification Survey (ARIS), approximately 15 percent of Americans categorize their religion as “none,” which of Americans categorize their religion as “none,” which of Americans categorize their religion as “none,” which of Americans categorize their religion as “none,” which includes both agnosticism and atheism. Additionally, 4.3 percent claim that there is “no way to know” if God exists. The “none” category also has the largest gender imbalance, with 60 percent being male.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G

Kosmin, Barry A. and Ariela Keysar. “The American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS 2008).” http://commons.trincoll.edu/aris/ files/2011/08/ARIS_Report_2008.pdf.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

272

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 272 1/4/12 11:20 AM
