Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape

Survey.” http://religions.pewforum.org/pdf/report-religious-landscape

-study-key-findings.pdf.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

273

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 273 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 274 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Postmodernism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Postmodernism is a philosophical system that critiques

the scientific, linguistic, and theoretical certainty of the

rationality and modernism that developed during the

Enlightenment.

Postmodernism traces its origins to the works of

a handful of French philosophers, but has influenced a handful of French philosophers, but has influenced a handful of French philosophers, but has influenced a handful of French philosophers, but has influenced

discussions beyond philosophy including art, history, discussions beyond philosophy including art, history, discussions beyond philosophy including art, history, discussions beyond philosophy including art, history, discussions beyond philosophy including art, history, discussions beyond philosophy including art, history, discussions beyond philosophy including art, history,

literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and literature, political theory, popular culture, religion, and

many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing many more. Postmodernist ideals and ways of knowing

are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key are quite diverse, and sometimes contradictory. The key

ideas of postmodernism have a broad impact on the world ideas of postmodernism have a broad impact on the world ideas of postmodernism have a broad impact on the world ideas of postmodernism have a broad impact on the world ideas of postmodernism have a broad impact on the world ideas of postmodernism have a broad impact on the world ideas of postmodernism have a broad impact on the world

today.

H I S T O R Y

To understand postmodernism, a person must first To understand postmodernism, a person must first To understand postmodernism, a person must first To understand postmodernism, a person must first To understand postmodernism, a person must first To understand postmodernism, a person must first

understand modernism, a term that is understood understand modernism, a term that is understood understand modernism, a term that is understood understand modernism, a term that is understood

differently by different people depending on individual differently by different people depending on individual differently by different people depending on individual differently by different people depending on individual

understandings of history, philosophy, and epistemology.

Modernism arose from Enlightenment rationality. During

and after World War II, modernists saw a European world

in which Western scientific inquiry could produce real

gains in human control over nature and in the ordering of

culture. Having an optimistic belief in human progress,

Modernists assumed that there were universal, real, and

available answers to the questions of human existence,

and that through science and rationality, Truth could

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

275

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 275 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

be uncovered. In terms of human language, modernists believed that our words point to “real” ideas or have universal content; that is, when we talk, our words refer to static objects that have fixed meaning.

Beginning early in the twentieth century, philosophers began to question this unscrutinized faith in progress, truth, and universal meaning. Jean-Francois Lyotard, Jacques Derrida, and Michele Foucault were among the most famous critics of modernism, but it was Lyotard who brought postmodernism to the wider public in his 1979 brought postmodernism to the wider public in his 1979 brought postmodernism to the wider public in his 1979 work The Postmodern Condition. Lyotard’s main critique is of . Lyotard’s main critique is of . Lyotard’s main critique is of . Lyotard’s main critique is of . Lyotard’s main critique is of what he calls metanarratives: all-encompassing, universal what he calls metanarratives: all-encompassing, universal what he calls metanarratives: all-encompassing, universal what he calls metanarratives: all-encompassing, universal what he calls metanarratives: all-encompassing, universal ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. ideas that appear to be true for all people everywhere. Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by Big ideas like progress or truth are actually attempts by the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, the powers-that-be to legitimize their own perspectives, according to Lyotard. The poor, oppressed, and devalued according to Lyotard. The poor, oppressed, and devalued according to Lyotard. The poor, oppressed, and devalued according to Lyotard. The poor, oppressed, and devalued according to Lyotard. The poor, oppressed, and devalued in society get to neither create nor participate in these in society get to neither create nor participate in these in society get to neither create nor participate in these in society get to neither create nor participate in these in society get to neither create nor participate in these in society get to neither create nor participate in these in society get to neither create nor participate in these in society get to neither create nor participate in these interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to interpretations of events, but they are still expected to view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the view them as somehow true. Lyotard (1984) uses the example of Auschwitz; in the Holocaust, progress and example of Auschwitz; in the Holocaust, progress and example of Auschwitz; in the Holocaust, progress and example of Auschwitz; in the Holocaust, progress and science were invoked by the Nazis to legitimize the science were invoked by the Nazis to legitimize the science were invoked by the Nazis to legitimize the science were invoked by the Nazis to legitimize the extermination of entire peoples. In a post-Auschwitz world, then, we must approach this same type of language with skepticism, both in the present day and throughout history.

B E L I E F S

The postmodernist opposition to modernist thought helps to define postmodernist beliefs. To appropriately critique modernist metanarratives, postmodernists sometimes employ a method known as deconstruction, made

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

276

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 276 1/4/12 11:20 AM
