famous by Jacques Derrida in his work Of Grammatology.

Derrida contended that our words—the words that

modernists believed accurately described reality and

mediated truth—are actually fraught with a diversity of

competing meanings. Some of these meanings are given

preferential status, while others are marginalized. This

is the way metanarratives appear natural or universal—

by giving authority to one meaning over another until

that meaning appears to be true. By approaching with

suspicion the authority structures of our language, we suspicion the authority structures of our language, we suspicion the authority structures of our language, we

can dismantle their power and see instead that meaning can dismantle their power and see instead that meaning can dismantle their power and see instead that meaning can dismantle their power and see instead that meaning can dismantle their power and see instead that meaning

is a changeable, unsubstantiated, and ultimately is a changeable, unsubstantiated, and ultimately is a changeable, unsubstantiated, and ultimately is a changeable, unsubstantiated, and ultimately is a changeable, unsubstantiated, and ultimately

unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and unstable product of culture, rather than a complete and

stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the stable whole. For example, a postmodernist critic of the

Bible might question how the language of dominion in Bible might question how the language of dominion in Bible might question how the language of dominion in Bible might question how the language of dominion in Bible might question how the language of dominion in Bible might question how the language of dominion in Bible might question how the language of dominion in Bible might question how the language of dominion in

Genesis might legitimate a world in which humans see Genesis might legitimate a world in which humans see Genesis might legitimate a world in which humans see Genesis might legitimate a world in which humans see Genesis might legitimate a world in which humans see

themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that themselves as forces opposed to nature, a relationship that

privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the privileges humans. Recognizing this hierarchy allows the

postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth postmodernist to see this relationship between the earth

and humans as only one possibility among many, rather and humans as only one possibility among many, rather and humans as only one possibility among many, rather and humans as only one possibility among many, rather

than as the natural, obvious, or true way of viewing the than as the natural, obvious, or true way of viewing the than as the natural, obvious, or true way of viewing the than as the natural, obvious, or true way of viewing the

world.

If all of this seems confusing, in some sense that

confusion is among the aims of postmodernism.

Postmodernist theorists want people to see the world

as more complex than modernists believed it to be. In

postmodernism, there is no universal truth, no scientific

certainty, and no progress toward an ultimate utopian

goal; instead, there is complexity in the competing

meanings of words and ideas, and structures that must

be resisted lest they become forces of oppression. To do

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

277

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 277 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

so, people must always be suspicious of language, linear thinking, and claims of truth, and this may be where postmodernism has had its greatest impact on present-day society. In the popular postmodern world, people talk about individual truth, and are suspicious of claims to ultimate truth. Reading hypertext online often replaces reading linear history in a book. Furthermore, people use images and symbols in diverse ways, usually without trying to connect them to an original meaning. Think about Lady Gaga singing about Judas as her lover in the about Lady Gaga singing about Judas as her lover in the about Lady Gaga singing about Judas as her lover in the song Judas, for example. All of these ways of thinking and , for example. All of these ways of thinking and , for example. All of these ways of thinking and , for example. All of these ways of thinking and , for example. All of these ways of thinking and being are part of the postmodernist impact on people’s being are part of the postmodernist impact on people’s being are part of the postmodernist impact on people’s being are part of the postmodernist impact on people’s being are part of the postmodernist impact on people’s lives.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G Butler, Christopher. Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction. (Oxford: Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction Oxford University Press, 2003). Oxford University Press, 2003). Oxford University Press, 2003). Oxford University Press, 2003).

Lyotard, Jean-Francois. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Lyotard, Jean-Francois. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge Condition: A Report on Knowledge Condition: A Report on Knowledge Condition: A Report on Knowledge Condition: A Report on Knowledge (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984). (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984). (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984). (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984). (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984).

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

278

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 278 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Secular Humanism

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Secular Humanism is a twentieth-century, nonreligious

philosophy that looks to science and sensory experience

to determine human understanding and morality. It

denounces any religious worldview, including the existence

of a divine being—God or otherwise—and the reality of

the supernatural.

H I S T O R Y

Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position Humanism, defined broadly, is a philosophical position

that values human ways of understanding, especially that values human ways of understanding, especially that values human ways of understanding, especially that values human ways of understanding, especially that values human ways of understanding, especially that values human ways of understanding, especially that values human ways of understanding, especially that values human ways of understanding, especially

when it comes to determining truth. Humanists tend when it comes to determining truth. Humanists tend when it comes to determining truth. Humanists tend when it comes to determining truth. Humanists tend when it comes to determining truth. Humanists tend when it comes to determining truth. Humanists tend when it comes to determining truth. Humanists tend

to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural to appeal to reason, scientific inquiry, and/or natural

consequences in establishing morality and goodness. consequences in establishing morality and goodness. consequences in establishing morality and goodness. consequences in establishing morality and goodness. consequences in establishing morality and goodness. consequences in establishing morality and goodness. consequences in establishing morality and goodness.

The humanist tradition has roots in ancient Greek The humanist tradition has roots in ancient Greek The humanist tradition has roots in ancient Greek The humanist tradition has roots in ancient Greek The humanist tradition has roots in ancient Greek The humanist tradition has roots in ancient Greek The humanist tradition has roots in ancient Greek

thought, particularly its emphasis on rationality and thought, particularly its emphasis on rationality and thought, particularly its emphasis on rationality and thought, particularly its emphasis on rationality and thought, particularly its emphasis on rationality and thought, particularly its emphasis on rationality and

inquisitiveness. Humanist principles were significant in inquisitiveness. Humanist principles were significant in inquisitiveness. Humanist principles were significant in inquisitiveness. Humanist principles were significant in

Renaissance and Reformation Europe, since both periods Renaissance and Reformation Europe, since both periods Renaissance and Reformation Europe, since both periods Renaissance and Reformation Europe, since both periods

stressed the role of the individual in distinguishing truth

from untruth rather than relying on church teachings.

The humanist tradition also draws upon the skepticism

and democratic principles of the eighteenth century

Enlightenment. Therefore, by definition the humanist

tradition is not exclusively secular, but rather humanism

is simply a philosophical position that affirms the

importance of human faculties in determining truth

and decency. Secular Humanism grew out of this larger

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

279

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 279 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

humanist movement, and became a unique phenomenon with the publication of the Humanist Manifesto in 1933 and the subsequent Secular Humanist Declaration in 1980.

B E L I E F S

Secular Humanists do not affirm the existence of any god or transcendent realm. However, Secular Humanism is not simply atheism. Atheism is a denial of the existence of any god, whereas Secular Humanism expands beyond simple denial and offers a positive system of values. Paul Kurtz, denial and offers a positive system of values. Paul Kurtz, denial and offers a positive system of values. Paul Kurtz, one of the most famous advocates of Secular Humanism, one of the most famous advocates of Secular Humanism, one of the most famous advocates of Secular Humanism, one of the most famous advocates of Secular Humanism, one of the most famous advocates of Secular Humanism, stated, “The main thrust of humanism is not to simply stated, “The main thrust of humanism is not to simply stated, “The main thrust of humanism is not to simply stated, “The main thrust of humanism is not to simply stated, “The main thrust of humanism is not to simply espouse the negative, what we do not believe in, but what espouse the negative, what we do espouse the negative, what we do not espouse the negative, what we do espouse the negative, what we do espouse the negative, what we do espouse the negative, what we do not believe in, but what believe in, but what we do. I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. . I am a secular humanist because I am not religious. I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but I draw my inspiration not from religion or spirituality, but from science, ethics, philosophy, and the arts” (2008). In from science, ethics, philosophy, and the arts” (2008). In from science, ethics, philosophy, and the arts” (2008). In from science, ethics, philosophy, and the arts” (2008). In from science, ethics, philosophy, and the arts” (2008). In from science, ethics, philosophy, and the arts” (2008). In from science, ethics, philosophy, and the arts” (2008). In other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of other words, Secular Humanists seek the separation of the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free the religious from civic matters, the endorsement of free thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility thinking, and the affirmation of human responsibility in both creating and solving world problems, rather than in both creating and solving world problems, rather than in both creating and solving world problems, rather than in both creating and solving world problems, rather than blaming sin and hoping for divine salvation (see the blaming sin and hoping for divine salvation (see the blaming sin and hoping for divine salvation (see the blaming sin and hoping for divine salvation (see the “Affirmations” page at www.secularhumanism.org).

Some people might challenge Secular Humanism’s being defined as a “religion” because it lacks any sense of a supernatural realm and does not seek transcendent sources for morality; therefore, better terminology for this movement might be “philosophy” or “worldview.” However, Secular Humanism was classified as a nontheistic religion in the Supreme Court opinion Torcaso v. Watkins in 1961. Creationists who oppose Secular Humanism’s commitment to evolution have also described

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

280

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 280 1/4/12 11:20 AM
