to take this approach. Additionally, Pat Robertson’s

Christian Coalition and the anti-abortion group

Operation Rescue exerted enormous influence in 1990s

politics, finding particularly strong allies within

the Republican Party.

The modern political wing of Christian

fundamentalism has been influential in establishing

a political platform that opposes same-sex marriage,

abortion, and contraception-based sex education.

From these shared concerns, the originally Protestant From these shared concerns, the originally Protestant From these shared concerns, the originally Protestant

movement has drawn a strong Catholic element. Modern movement has drawn a strong Catholic element. Modern movement has drawn a strong Catholic element. Modern movement has drawn a strong Catholic element. Modern movement has drawn a strong Catholic element. Modern

fundamentalists have also challenged scientific consensus fundamentalists have also challenged scientific consensus fundamentalists have also challenged scientific consensus fundamentalists have also challenged scientific consensus fundamentalists have also challenged scientific consensus

about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of about climate change and opposed the teaching of

evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in evolution as a means for understanding human origins in

biology courses. biology courses.

In 2008, the Pew Forum on Religion and Public In 2008, the Pew Forum on Religion and Public In 2008, the Pew Forum on Religion and Public In 2008, the Pew Forum on Religion and Public In 2008, the Pew Forum on Religion and Public

Life researched Christians belief and found that while Life researched Christians belief and found that while Life researched Christians belief and found that while Life researched Christians belief and found that while Life researched Christians belief and found that while Life researched Christians belief and found that while

only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church only one percent of Christians identify their church

membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality, membership as explicitly fundamentalist, in reality,

fundamentalist principles are much more widespread. For fundamentalist principles are much more widespread. For fundamentalist principles are much more widespread. For fundamentalist principles are much more widespread. For

example, twenty-two percent of mainline (not evangelical example, twenty-two percent of mainline (not evangelical example, twenty-two percent of mainline (not evangelical example, twenty-two percent of mainline (not evangelical

or fundamentalist) Christians believed that the Bible

is “the Word of God, to be taken literally word for

word.” Comparatively, twenty-nine percent of mainline

Christians completely disagreed that evolution best

explains human origins (http://religions.pewforum.org/pdf/

report-religious-landscape-study-full.pdf).

O T H E R F O R M S O F F U N D A M E N T A L I S M

Other religious traditions have similar movements

characterized by religious conservatism, textual literalism,

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

287

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 287 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

and a rejection of modernity. Both scholars and the media refer to these groups as fundamentalists.

Islamic Fundamentalism

Islamic fundamentalism refers to Muslims who take the Qur’an (the holy scripture of Islam) and in some cases the Sunnah (the teachings and actions of Muhammad) literally, and who seek the establishment of Muslim states in an effort to best follow the demands of the Qur’an. The Iranian Revolution of 1979 was one of the most famous political expressions of Islamic fundamentalism. famous political expressions of Islamic fundamentalism. famous political expressions of Islamic fundamentalism. famous political expressions of Islamic fundamentalism. famous political expressions of Islamic fundamentalism. In this revolution, the Shah of Iran was replaced by the In this revolution, the Shah of Iran was replaced by the In this revolution, the Shah of Iran was replaced by the In this revolution, the Shah of Iran was replaced by the In this revolution, the Shah of Iran was replaced by the In this revolution, the Shah of Iran was replaced by the In this revolution, the Shah of Iran was replaced by the Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish Ayatollah Khomeini, a religious revolutionary, to establish a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. a theocracy, which is an explicitly religious government. Iran continues to be an Islamic republic and maintains Iran continues to be an Islamic republic and maintains Iran continues to be an Islamic republic and maintains Iran continues to be an Islamic republic and maintains Iran continues to be an Islamic republic and maintains Iran continues to be an Islamic republic and maintains Iran continues to be an Islamic republic and maintains strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. strict enforcement of the religious law called the Sharia. Other Islamic fundamentalist groups include the Wahhabi Other Islamic fundamentalist groups include the Wahhabi Other Islamic fundamentalist groups include the Wahhabi Other Islamic fundamentalist groups include the Wahhabi Other Islamic fundamentalist groups include the Wahhabi Other Islamic fundamentalist groups include the Wahhabi Other Islamic fundamentalist groups include the Wahhabi of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan. of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan. of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan. of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan. of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan. of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan. of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan. of Saudi Arabia and the Taliban of Afghanistan.

Jewish Fundamentalism Jewish Fundamentalism Jewish Fundamentalism Jewish Fundamentalism

Jewish fundamentalism also has both religious and Jewish fundamentalism also has both religious and Jewish fundamentalism also has both religious and Jewish fundamentalism also has both religious and political elements. Among the religious fundamentalists are the Haredim, also called Ultra-Orthodox Jews, who view both the written and oral Torah as God-given and absolutely authoritative in all matters of life. As such, strict observance of the Sabbath and kosher law are required. Dress is also conservative, and men and women worship separately to maintain community perceptions of modesty and propriety. Among Jewish political fundamentalists are those who want to hasten the messianic kingdom in Israel by occupying parts of

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

288

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 288 1/4/12 11:20 AM
