the Holy Land given to Palestinians after World War II.

Sometimes these Jews are called Zionists. One example of

a political Zionist group is the Gush Emunim, established

on the principles, “The Land of Israel, for the People of

Israel, under the Torah of Israel.” However, Zionism is not

always a fundamentalist movement, so these terms should

not be equated.

Hindu Fundamentalism

Fundamentalist sects also appear among Hindus in

India. However, these movements focus less upon religious India. However, these movements focus less upon religious India. However, these movements focus less upon religious India. However, these movements focus less upon religious India. However, these movements focus less upon religious

conservatism and more upon political goals. For example, conservatism and more upon political goals. For example, conservatism and more upon political goals. For example, conservatism and more upon political goals. For example, conservatism and more upon political goals. For example, conservatism and more upon political goals. For example, conservatism and more upon political goals. For example,

proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad proponents of the Hindutva and Vishva Hindu Parashad

movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and movements seek to establish India as a Hindu nation, and

their focus is to promote religious nationalism. Whereas their focus is to promote religious nationalism. Whereas their focus is to promote religious nationalism. Whereas their focus is to promote religious nationalism. Whereas their focus is to promote religious nationalism. Whereas their focus is to promote religious nationalism. Whereas their focus is to promote religious nationalism. Whereas

fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often fundamentalists in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam often

find themselves in conflict with non-fundamentalists find themselves in conflict with non-fundamentalists find themselves in conflict with non-fundamentalists find themselves in conflict with non-fundamentalists find themselves in conflict with non-fundamentalists find themselves in conflict with non-fundamentalists find themselves in conflict with non-fundamentalists

in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to in their own traditions, Hindu fundamentalists tend to

promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in promote pan-Hindu solidarity. As a result, conflict in

Hindu fundamentalism is more likely to be directed at Hindu fundamentalism is more likely to be directed at Hindu fundamentalism is more likely to be directed at Hindu fundamentalism is more likely to be directed at

non-Hindus. non-Hindus. non-Hindus.

Fundamentalism in Public Life

Karen Armstrong, author of twelve books on

comparative religion, has noted that one of the overriding

emotions driving modern fundamentalism is a fear of

change. Fundamentalists, whether religious or political,

see societal changes as a threat to the traditional values

and beliefs they hold dear, so they actively resist these

changes. Sometimes this resistance is in the form of

strict doctrinal controls, like the values expressed in

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

289

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 289 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

The Fundamentals or the strict enforcement of Sharia law. At other times resistance takes the form of political protest, as in the Moral Majority or the Iranian Revolution. A common thread, however, is a concern about a shifting society, a belief in the importance of maintaining traditional religious principles, and a commitment to live these principles in both religious and political spheres. All of these factors have contributed to the rise of fundamentalism in America and around the world.

F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G F O R F U R T H E R R E A D I N G Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Abadi, Jacob. “Religious Zionism and Israeli Politics: Gush Emunim Revisited.” Pages 67–90 in Religious Fundamentalism in Developing Revisited.” Pages 67–90 in Revisited.” Pages 67–90 in Religious Fundamentalism in Religious Religious Fundamentalism in Fundamentalism Fundamentalism Fundamentalism Fundamentalism Countries. Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: . Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: . Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: . Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: . Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: . Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: . Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: . Santosh Saha and Thomas Karr, eds. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2001. Greenwood Press, 2001.

Armstrong, Karen. The Battle for God: A History of Fundamentalism. The Battle for God: A History of Fundamentalism. for God: A History of Fundamentalism. for God: A History of Fundamentalism. God: A History of Fundamentalism. God: A History of Fundamentalism. God: A History of Fundamentalism. New York: Random House, 2000. New York: Random House, 2000. New York: Random House, 2000.

Marty, Martin. Fundamentalisms Observed. Chicago: University of Fundamentalisms Observed Observed . Chicago: University of . Chicago: University of . Chicago: University of . Chicago: University of . Chicago: University of . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. “U.S. Religious Landscape Survey.” http://religions.pewforum.org/.

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

290

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 290 1/4/12 11:20 AM

Religious Violence

I N T R O D U C T I O N

According to scholar Mark Juergensmeyer, in 1980,

“scarcely a single religious organization” was listed on

the U.S. State Department’s terrorism watch list. Twenty

years later, over half of the organizations on the watch

list were religiously affiliated. What accounts for the rise

of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in of religious violence? Has this tendency always existed in

religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious religions? Are religions violent by nature, or is religious

violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret violence the result of isolated persons who misinterpret

their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full their religions? This short chapter cannot address the full

complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it complexity of the topic of religious violence; however, it

may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion. may provide some starting points for further discussion.

Violence is evident in many religions, including Violence is evident in many religions, including Violence is evident in many religions, including Violence is evident in many religions, including Violence is evident in many religions, including Violence is evident in many religions, including Violence is evident in many religions, including Violence is evident in many religions, including

Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism.

Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most Though many people may associate violence most

powerfully with the Abrahamic religions, other religions powerfully with the Abrahamic religions, other religions powerfully with the Abrahamic religions, other religions powerfully with the Abrahamic religions, other religions powerfully with the Abrahamic religions, other religions powerfully with the Abrahamic religions, other religions

are also not immune to religious justification for violent are also not immune to religious justification for violent are also not immune to religious justification for violent are also not immune to religious justification for violent

acts—even religions like Buddhism, which espouses

the principle of ahimsa (nonviolence), and Hinduism,

which people often associate with nonviolence and

vegetarianism. In addition, smaller new religious

movements have demonstrated that they, too, may have

the potential for violence.

V I O L E N C E I N A B R A H A M I C R E L I G I O N S

Jewish scriptures are sometimes used to justify violence;

in fact, some parts of the Hebrew Bible offer quite graphic

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

291

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 291 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

portrayals of hatred, murder, and war. When the Israelites take the land of Canaan, they are commanded to “utterly destroy” the inhabitants of the land (Deut.7:2). When the promised land is threatened, Israelite judges kill opposing armies in response (Judg. 3; 15). When the land is overthrown by the Babylonians, the exiled Israelites express hope that the Babylonian babies will have their heads smashed by rocks (Ps. 137). Then when they finally return, Esther and Mordecai are praised for plotting the death of Haman and his sons, an event which is celebrated to this day during Purim. Violence is not only celebrated to this day during Purim. Violence is not only celebrated to this day during Purim. Violence is not only celebrated to this day during Purim. Violence is not only celebrated to this day during Purim. Violence is not only related to national strife either; interpersonal violence related to national strife either; interpersonal violence related to national strife either; interpersonal violence related to national strife either; interpersonal violence related to national strife either; interpersonal violence happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children happens between spouses (Lev. 19), parents and children (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious (Judg. 11:37–39), and siblings (Gen. 4), all with religious motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), motivations. God, too, is described as a warrior (Ex. 15:3), and even as an abusive husband (Ezek. 16). and even as an abusive husband (Ezek. 16). and even as an abusive husband (Ezek. 16). and even as an abusive husband (Ezek. 16). and even as an abusive husband (Ezek. 16).

In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have In post-biblical Judaism, the Jewish people have been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, been involved in violent religious conflicts with pagans, Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused Christians, and Muslims. Jews under Roman rule refused to submit to what they considered idolatry, and they to submit to what they considered idolatry, and they to submit to what they considered idolatry, and they to submit to what they considered idolatry, and they responded with violent rebellions like the Bar Kochba responded with violent rebellions like the Bar Kochba responded with violent rebellions like the Bar Kochba responded with violent rebellions like the Bar Kochba revolt. Elliott Horowitz has argued persuasively that in Judaism throughout history, responding to conflict with violent behavior has been justified by means of the Purim tale in which Jews kill their oppressors. Recently, Jewish groups have justified attacks on Palestinians by claiming rights to the land of Israel. For example, during the massacre at the Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron, twenty-nine Muslims were killed and more than one hundred wounded by a Brooklyn doctor who believed only Jewish people had a rightful claim to the Holy Land (http://www

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

292

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 292 1/4/12 11:20 AM
