.independent.co.uk/news/world/hebron-massacre-brooklyn

-doctor-with-a-prescription-for-hatred-1396680.html).

In Christianity, New Testament authors also often

employ violent imagery. Jesus claims in the Gospel of

Matthew that he came “not to bring peace, but a sword”

(10:36), and to set members of families against each other

for the sake of the faith. The unfaithful will “suffer the

punishment of eternal destruction” by flaming angels,

according to the writer of 2 Thessalonians. Additionally,

in the book of Revelation, humanity is pressed into a in the book of Revelation, humanity is pressed into a in the book of Revelation, humanity is pressed into a

winepress, and blood flows as “high as a horse’s bridle, winepress, and blood flows as “high as a horse’s bridle, winepress, and blood flows as “high as a horse’s bridle, winepress, and blood flows as “high as a horse’s bridle, winepress, and blood flows as “high as a horse’s bridle,

for a distance of about two hundred miles” on the Day of for a distance of about two hundred miles” on the Day of for a distance of about two hundred miles” on the Day of for a distance of about two hundred miles” on the Day of for a distance of about two hundred miles” on the Day of

Judgment (14:20). Judgment (14:20). Judgment (14:20). Judgment (14:20).

Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes Images like these informed Christian attitudes

throughout following centuries, and were often invoked throughout following centuries, and were often invoked throughout following centuries, and were often invoked throughout following centuries, and were often invoked throughout following centuries, and were often invoked throughout following centuries, and were often invoked throughout following centuries, and were often invoked throughout following centuries, and were often invoked

to justify acts of violence against others, particularly to justify acts of violence against others, particularly to justify acts of violence against others, particularly to justify acts of violence against others, particularly to justify acts of violence against others, particularly

non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which non-Christians. John Collins has noted the way in which

Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the Christians used the Bible to support the Crusades, the

Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native Puritan revolt in England, the mistreatment of Native

Americans in the United States, and many apocalyptic Americans in the United States, and many apocalyptic Americans in the United States, and many apocalyptic Americans in the United States, and many apocalyptic

movements in Europe and America. Slave owners movements in Europe and America. Slave owners movements in Europe and America. Slave owners movements in Europe and America. Slave owners

in pre-Civil War America regularly justified their

violence toward slaves with quotes from the epistles,

stating, “Slaves submit to your masters” (1 Peter 2:18).

Furthermore, misinterpretation of who is to blame for

the crucifixion has resulted in rampant anti-Semitism,

including justification for the Holocaust. Today, Christian

extremist groups continue to justify their violence as

faithfulness to God and to the Bible. For example, the

anti-abortion beliefs of Presbyterian minister Paul Hill

led him to murder a women’s health doctor named John

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

293

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 293 1/4/12 11:20 AM

All You Want to Know But Didn’t Think You Could Ask

Britton in 1994. In 2010, members of the Hutaree militia group of Michigan were arrested for devising a plot to kill police officers in an effort to bring about the Apocalypse.

As in Jewish and Christian scriptures, violent imagery also appears in the Qur’an. For example, in surah 5, a warning is given to “those who wage war against Allah and his people . . . that they should be murdered or crucified, or their hands and their feet should be cut off” (5:33). In surah 9, believers are encouraged to “slay the idolaters wherever you find them,” and in surah 33, the idolaters wherever you find them,” and in surah 33, the idolaters wherever you find them,” and in surah 33, hypocrites and agitators are warned that “wherever they hypocrites and agitators are warned that “wherever they hypocrites and agitators are warned that “wherever they hypocrites and agitators are warned that “wherever they hypocrites and agitators are warned that “wherever they are found, they shall be seized and murdered” (33:61). are found, they shall be seized and murdered” (33:61). are found, they shall be seized and murdered” (33:61). are found, they shall be seized and murdered” (33:61). are found, they shall be seized and murdered” (33:61). However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those However, the often quoted text promising virgins to those who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at who martyr themselves is not actually about martyrs at all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful all, but is instead a vision of paradise for all the faithful (56:10–38). In spite of this fact, some extremists have still (56:10–38). In spite of this fact, some extremists have still (56:10–38). In spite of this fact, some extremists have still (56:10–38). In spite of this fact, some extremists have still (56:10–38). In spite of this fact, some extremists have still (56:10–38). In spite of this fact, some extremists have still used this text to encourage terrorism. used this text to encourage terrorism. used this text to encourage terrorism. used this text to encourage terrorism. used this text to encourage terrorism. used this text to encourage terrorism. used this text to encourage terrorism.

In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic In modern times, acts of terrorism by Islamic extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in extremist groups have received significant attention in both scholarship and the media. In 1972, Palestinian both scholarship and the media. In 1972, Palestinian both scholarship and the media. In 1972, Palestinian both scholarship and the media. In 1972, Palestinian extremists kidnapped and killed Israeli athletes at the extremists kidnapped and killed Israeli athletes at the extremists kidnapped and killed Israeli athletes at the extremists kidnapped and killed Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games. Then in 1979, Iranian students who supported the Shi’ite Ayatollah seized the United States Embassy and took 66 hostages, resulting in a standoff that lasted 444 days. Additionally, more than 240 Marines were killed in Beirut, Lebanon in 1983, an attack carried out by the radical Shi’ite group Hezbollah. Then under the auspices of reestablishing a Muslim state, the terrorist group al-Qaeda has perpetrated attacks in Kenya, Tanzania, Somalia, and Yemen; they are also purported to be behind the attack on the U.S.S. Cole in 2000

Courtesy Copy | NOT FOR RESALE OR DISTRIBUTION

294

00-01_All You Want To Know.indd 294 1/4/12 11:20 AM
