Spencer J. Palmer, Mormons and Muslims: Spiritual Foundations and Modern Manifestations ( 1983)

5

Comments on Common Ground

Spencer J. Palmer

Today I have been thinking about my first visit to Saudi Arabia. It was in 1954. One evening at dusk, a rapidly moving caravan of brightly painted Chevrolet cars came to a sudden stop at the side of a lonely road in the desert. A dozen young Arabs, dressed in the customary kafia, unrolled their prayer rugs, faced Mecca, then prostrated themselves in prayer. It was a quiet, orderly, and respectful exercise. And it seemed for a moment that all nature had paused, sharing that meaningful act of devotion. I was deeply touched.

Then last year, I was privileged to be on holy ground in Jerusalem, between the Mosque of Omar and the al-Aksa Mosque, on Friday at noon. I had been invited to attend this special day of prayer where hundreds of men and boys faced al-Aksa Mosque, while a like number of women and girls faced the Mosque of Omar, to acknowledge the presence of Almighty God. My spirit was quickened; I was stirred by feelings of appreciation and love.

Now we are here at BYU to explore relationships between Mormonism and Islam. I cannot help but approach our meetings with positive and appreciative feelings, drawn by the belief that these two great faiths have much in common. Of course, I realize there are important differences, but I feel certain that many who are assembled here will be impressed by common ground.

The idea that resemblances between Mormonism and Islam deserve careful comparative study is not new. Numerous books and articles have been printed on the subject, but not always with a constructive purpose in mind. Edward Meyer, the great German scholar, was more positive than most:

Of the many new religious movements originating in our time, Mormonism very early awakened my interest, especially because of its surprising and close resemblances to the historical development of Islam.

Without the least exaggeration, we may designate the Mormons as the Mohammedans of the New World according to their origins and their manner of thinking. There is hardly a historical parallel which is so instructive as this one; and through comparative analysis both receive so much light that a scientific study of the one through the other is indispensable. [^1]

At the outset I want to say that although analogies in world religions can rather easily be drawn, we must be cautious in doing so. And we must be careful in our interpretations and conclusions. It is easy to oversimplify. Especially, we must resist the human tendency to force the faith and practice of others into ideological compartments or stereotypes familiar only to ourselves——or to compare the "best" within our religious traditions with what is least appealing in others. Now having said this, let me suggest a few rather obvious parallels between Mormonism and Islam.

I have just referred to the books of Abraham and Moses, two important texts not found in the Christian Bible but included in the scriptures of the Mormon people, having been translated from ancient papyrus by Joseph Smith. The Qur'an quotes from the book of Abraham and the book of Moses in Suras 53 and 87, although there is no explanation in the text as to exactly what these books are. [^3]

Muslim-Mormon comparisons are wide-ranging. The investigation of the subject by Mormons has just begun. I want to say frankly that this symposium is not a naive or misguided effort to establish sameness of some kind between Mormonism and Islam. That would be foolhardy. That would ignore obvious differences, such as the Mormon acceptance of Jesus as someone much more than a prophet, which Muslims would generally deny. But still, our meetings here mark a significant and meaningful milestone, a first effort by representatives of these two religious groups to join in a common endeavor to seek understanding.

We of the Religious Studies Center are grateful to have others on our campus, whether Mormon, Muslim, or belonging to neither group. We are impressed by the large and enthusiastic number of people in attendance today. For me, this is not only a positive sign of Mormon interest in the people of Islam but in reaching out to all peoples, nations, and religious communities heretofore largely neglected by us. All this bodes well for religious studies at Brigham Young University, and perhaps also for the direction of the Church which is its primary motivating force.

NOTES

Spencer J. Palmer is director of world religions in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University and is the associate director of BYU's David M. Kennedy Center for International and Area Studies. Professor Palmer graduated from Eastern Arizona Junior College, received his B.A. from Brigham Young University, and his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of California at Berkeley in East Asian studies and history. His research and publications include numerous books and articles on history and comparative religion, as well as on Mormon subjects. His latest study deals with the cult of Confucius in East Asian countries.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Neither of them is merely a creedal faith. Rather, they represent ways of life. To belong to either community requires an almost total commitment in customs, values, and life-style. For both, religion is more than a recitation of creed or articles of faith; it includes prohibitions against the drinking of alcohol or the use of drugs; a commitment to fasting and prayer; modesty in dress; the payment of alms and tithing; emphasis on the family, obedience to parents; concern for the elderly and the poor; and many other social concerns. Eduard Meyer, The Origin and History of the Mormons: With Reflections on the Beginnings of Islam and Christianity (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1961), translated from the original German by Heinz F. Rahde and Eugene Seaich, pp. 1, 44.
[^3] Closely tied to this belief in the omnipotence of a living God is the common belief in the physical resurrection of the dead. In a day when religious people in the world are increasingly skeptical about such things, Mormons and Muslims hold tenaciously to this belief, which originally may have appeared strange to some of the people of Mecca when it was first revealed to them. Muhammad argued that if a perfectly formed person can be created from a clot of blood, God can then also perform other miracles, such as restoring the dead and calling them to accountability for their acts. In quotations from the Qur'an, I have relied on the translations and commentary of A. Yusef Ali, The Holy Quran (New York: Hafner Publishing Company, 1946), vols. I and II, and N. J. Dawood, The Koran (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1970).
