Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Introduction

The Atonement Is Not Just for Sinners

After his return from the wilderness of temptation, Jesus read to a Sabbath congregation in Nazareth a passage from Isaiah 61 that stated a central theme of his ministry: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised." (Luke 4:18; emphasis added.) In the Old Testament's continuation of this prophecy, Isaiah adds, "To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. . . ." (Isaiah 61:3; emphasis added.) After he had read to them, Jesus said to his audience, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Luke 4:21.)

By thus referring so broadly to the bruised and brokenhearted, the Savior pointed toward his eventual Atonement as the healing power not only for sin but also for carelessness, inadequacy, and the entire range of mortal bitterness. The Atonement is not just for sinners.

I believe there is in the Church today a compelling need for us to teach and understand the Atonement more fully than we do. Our need arises both from the erroneous perceptions of outsiders about our teachings and from our own sometimes narrow view about the reach of the Atonement in our lives.

For example, in its September 1, 1980, issue, Newsweek magazine carried a story entitled "What Mormons Believe." This article began by noting that "of all the religious sects to emerge out of nineteenth-century America" only the LDS Church "has developed into a major world-wide faith—and it is now gaining members at a rapid rate." The article then summarized some fundamental doctrines of the Church, noting in general that "their family values are mainstream America, but their theology is a radical conception of God—and Mrs. God."

Newsweek summarized our understanding of the Atonement in these words: "According to Mormon tradition, not only did Adam's fall make procreation possible, it also established the conditions for human freedom and moral choice. Unlike orthodox Christians, Mormons believe that men are born free of sin and earn their way to godhood by the proper exercise of free will, rather than through the grace of Jesus Christ. Thus Jesus' suffering and death in the Mormon view were brotherly acts of compassion, but they do not atone for the sins of others. For this reason, Mormons do not include the cross in their iconography nor do they place much emphasis on Easter." [^1]

When I read this statement, I was appalled that a writer as sophisticated as Newsweek's religion editor would miss the point of our core doctrine. I applauded when someone later wrote a published letter expressing dismay that this writer would have "spent as much time as he did among the Mormons" in preparation for that story, only to "come away with the conclusion that Mormons don't believe that the Atonement of Christ is efficacious for personal sins." [^2]

But then came the Newsweek writer's provocative reply to this letter: "It seems that [the letter's author] doesn't understand the distinction between a book review and a magazine article. I did read several books of Mormon scripture and theology before writing the article. My intent, however, was not to review books but rather to report how representative members of the LDS Church describe and interpret their own traditions. . . . The point is to determine what doctrines of a church are genuinely infused into the lifeblood of its adherents." [^3]

I remain deeply troubled that Newsweek's readers across the country were left with a serious misimpression about the central teachings of the restored gospel. At the same time, the magazine writer's observation about Church members' actual understanding of the Atonement rings just true enough to leave me equally troubled about the level of our own doctrinal literacy. It is disturbing that some Latter-day Saints might convey incorrect ideas to members of other faiths; but in some ways it concerns me even more that this limited understanding might deny those same Latter-day Saints the reassurance and guidance they may desperately need at pivotal moments in their personal lives.

We should note, by the way, the irony of the accusation that the restored gospel doesn't take the Atonement seriously, given the enormous depth of the Book of Mormon's teachings on the Atonement compared with those of the New Testament. For example, as Elder Boyd K. Packer noted in his April 1988 conference talk on the Atonement, "Did you know that the word atonement appears only once in the English New Testament?" (That reference is in Romans 5:11.) "Atonement, of all words! It was not an unknown word, for it had been used much in the Old Testament in connection with the law of Moses." In the Book of Mormon, by contrast, "the word atone in form and tense appears fifty-five times." [^4] And beyond word usage, the Book of Mormon contains without question the most profound theological treatment of the Atonement found in any book now available on any shelf anywhere in the world.

Despite this remarkable truth about the Book of Mormon, we Latter-day Saints are, for the most part, only superficially acquainted with our own doctrines of grace, mercy, justice, and the Atonement. As an indication of our reluctance to consider the principle of grace, one researcher found only one serious article on grace in the periodicals published by the Church in the twenty-three years from 1961 through 1983. [^5]

Perhaps some reasons exist for our reluctance to stress the doctrine of grace. The prophet Nephi wrote, "For we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Nephi 25:23; emphasis added.) Our natural inclination to think in categorical "either/or" terms makes us worry that a constant public emphasis on grace will lead some Church members to ignore the crucial "all we can do" in that two-part process. They might then accept—or appear to accept—what Elder Bruce R. McConkie once called the "second great heresy" of modern Christianity: "the doctrine that we are saved by grace alone, without works; . . . that we may be born again simply by confessing the Lord Jesus with our lips while we continue to live in our sins." [^6]

Many Christians do take the idea of repentance seriously, but an overemphasis on grace can encourage the prevailing Christian view that we will be saved by grace no matter what we may do. Perhaps Nephi had this attitude in mind in describing those living in our time who would say, "If it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Nephi 28:8.) At the extreme, this doctrine denies free will altogether, accepting the Calvinistic notion that God will "elect" those to be saved without regard to their conduct or even their preference.

In addition to the risk of this doctrinal error, there is a more practical logic to our fear that emphasizing God's side of the equation may justify our tendency not to do all we should. I was surprised on one occasion to hear a senior General Authority tell me something in a private conversation that allowed for greater flexibility on a particular issue than I had expected to hear. I told him how valuable I thought it would be if more members of the Church could hear his counsel, because what is said across the desk can so nicely clarify what is said over the pulpit. He replied that private counsel can be adapted to the attitudes and understanding of the person being counseled. If that same counsel were given publicly to an audience that included individuals of insufficient background or commitment, it might appear to give license to those whose needs require not more flexibility, but less.

For example, the person most in need of understanding the Savior's mercy is probably one who has worked himself to exhaustion in a sincere effort to repent, but who still believes his estrangement from God is permanent and hopeless. By contrast, some people come before a bishop feeling that the repentance process requires them to do little more than casually acknowledge the truth of an accusation. An increasing number of younger Church members even seem to believe they are entitled to "a few free ones" as they sow their wild oats and walk constantly along the edge of transgression. Constant emphasis on the availability of forgiveness can be counterproductive for those in these latter categories, suggesting—wrongly—to them that they can "live it up" now and repent easily later without harmful consequences.

Moreover, emphasizing God's mercy may lead some to believe they are entitled to divine protection against all of life's natural adversities. There is already enough theological difficulty for those who believe that their activity in the Church should somehow protect them from tragedy and sorrow. Our understanding of the Atonement is hardly a shield against sorrow; rather, it is a rich source of strength to deal productively with the disappointments and heartbreaks that form the deliberate fabric of mortal life. The gospel was given us to heal our pain, not to prevent it.

Having noted these reasons for caution, however, I sense that an increasing number of deeply committed Church members are weighed down beyond the breaking point with discouragement about their personal lives. When we habitually understate the meaning of the Atonement, we take more serious risks than simply leaving one another without comforting reassurances—for some may simply drop out of the race, worn out and beaten down with the harsh and untrue belief that they are just not celestial material.

The Savior himself was not concerned that he would give aid and comfort to backsliders or that he would seem to be soft on sin. Said he, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. . . . For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.) He spoke these words of comfort in the overall context of his demanding teachings about the strait and narrow way and the need to develop a love so pure that it would extinguish not only hatred, but lust and anger. He said his yoke is easy, but he asked for all our hearts.

His words do not describe an event or even simply an attitude, but a process; not the answer to a yes or no question, but an essay, written in the winding trail of our experience. Along that trail, he is not only aware of our limitations, he will also in due course compensate for them, "after all we can do." That, in addition to forgiveness for sin, is a crucial part of the Good News of the gospel, part of the Victory, part of the Atonement. For such a purpose each of us needs to take the Atonement more fully into the deep parts of our consciousness, even if there are some good reasons not to stress the role of grace excessively.

I wish now to summarize the elements of doctrine that apply the holy Atonement and its enabling grace to our lives. In this way I hope to illustrate how fully each of us needs the Lord's power and how earnestly he seeks to turn our mourning to joy, our blindness to sight, and our ashes to beauty.

When I think of the Savior all alone that night in Gethsemane, a solitary light shining in the vast darkness of cosmic evil, I think of the millions of people for whom he alone paid the full ransom. Then I recall Elder Neal A. Maxwell's phrase about "the awful arithmetic of the Atonement." The wonder of that event is clearly beyond our comprehension. As Elder Packer said, "How the Atonement was wrought, we do not know. No mortal watched as evil turned away and hid in shame before the light of that pure being." [^7]

The first and most familiar elements of the Atonement relate to the transgression of Adam and Eve and to our personal sins. Because of the Fall, Adam and his children became subject to death, sin, and other characteristics of mortality that separated them from God. To allow mankind again to be "at one" with God, the eternal law of justice required compensation for these consequences of the Fall. The eternal law of mercy allowed the Savior to make that compensation fully through the great "at-one-ment," [^8] relieving Adam and his children of their unbearable burdens.

Somehow, through his sinless life, his genetic nature as the Only Begotten of the Father, and his willingness to drink the bitter cup of justice, the Lord Jesus Christ was able to atone unconditionally for the original sin of Adam and Eve and for the physical death, and to atone conditionally for the personal sins of all mankind.

The unconditional parts of the Atonement, those that assure our resurrection from physical death and that pay for Adam's transgression, require no further action on our part. They are the free gifts of unmerited divine grace. The conditional part, however, requires our repentance—part of "all we can do"—as the condition of applying mercy to our personal sins. We have been told that if we do not repent, we must suffer even as the Savior did to satisfy the demands of justice. (See D&C 19:15-17.)

I once wondered if those who refuse to repent but who then satisfy the law of justice by paying for their own sins are then worthy to enter the celestial kingdom. The answer is no. The entrance requirements for celestial life are simply higher than merely satisfying the law of justice. For that reason, paying for our sins will not bear the same fruit as repenting of our sins. Justice is a law of balance and order and it must be satisfied, either through our payment or his. But if we decline the Savior's invitation to let him carry our sins, and then satisfy justice by ourselves, we will not yet have experienced the complete rehabilitation that can occur through a combination of divine assistance and genuine repentance. Working together, those forces have the power permanently to change our hearts and our lives, preparing us for celestial life.

By analogy, the criminals who fill our prisons are not necessarily "rehabilitated" when they pay their debt to society by serving a fixed number of years. The payment of that debt may satisfy our sense of retribution, but only a positive process of character change can rehabilitate a lawbreaker.

The doctrines of mercy and repentance are rehabilitative, not retributive, in nature. The Savior asks for our repentance not merely to compensate him for paying our debt to justice, but also as a way of inducing us to undergo the process of development that will make our nature divine, giving us the capacity to live the celestial law. The "natural man" will remain an enemy to God forever—even after paying for his own sins—unless he also "becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child." (Mosiah 3:19.)

As King Benjamin here suggests, the Atonement does more than pay for our sins. It is also the agent through which we develop a saintly nature. When the Savior accepts our repentance and blesses us with his mercy, he restores our spiritual balance from a negative position to a neutral position. This complete process requires active faith, changes in our lives, and baptism or the meaningful renewal of baptismal covenants. But when we have taken these sometimes arduous steps, we are then only ready to enter the "strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:17-18.)

Now we must consider an additional realm in becoming a saint through the Atonement—the process by which we move from the messy slate of sin through the clean slate of forgiveness to the beautifully full slate of a divine nature. There are many blessings of the Atonement in addition to the more familiar blessings of resurrection, the removal of original sin, and the forgiveness of our personal sins.

Let us consider first the general question of whether divine grace does more than compensate for sin as we normally think of it. As we consider this question, we will find that the blessings available to us are both closer and richer than we might have imagined.

The dictionary in the 1979 LDS edition of the King James Bible, under the heading "Grace," suggests that grace is needed not only because of our sins, but also because of our weaknesses and shortcomings: "It is through the grace of the Lord Jesus, made possible by his atoning sacrifice, that . . . individuals, through faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ and repentance of their sins, receive strength and assistance to do good works. . . . This grace is an enabling power . . . [that is needed] in consequence of the fall of Adam and also because of man's weaknesses and shortcomings. However, grace cannot suffice without total effort on the part of the recipient."

Three of the most central figures in all of scripture—Adam, Eve, and Christ himself—illustrate the point that grace is needed to overcome limitations other than sin. These illustrations also suggest two significant ways in which divine grace can bless and help us, in addition to its compensation for our sins. Let us call these two categories tasting the bitter and attaining divine perfection.

Consider first the experience of Adam and Eve and the concept of tasting the bitter in order to prize the good. As best I can tell, the transgression in the Garden of Eden was not really a wrongful act of "sin," according to the meaning we usually give the term sin. For one thing, despite their obvious agency to choose, Adam and Eve were in a state of "innocence" in the Garden, not knowing good and evil as they did after the Fall. (See 2 Nephi 2:23.) Moreover, while their choice violated the command against partaking of the fruit, that choice was necessary to enable their obedience to the command to have children. Thus, what we call their "transgression" was a painful but correct, even eternally glorious, choice. For, as Eve later discovered, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:11.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe once wrote that such statements by Adam and Eve "were not the words of sinners or of repentant sinners." Rather, the commandment not to eat the forbidden fruit was "a warning, . . . as if to say, if you do this thing, you will bring upon yourself a certain punishment; but do it if you choose." For this reason, "the choice they made raises Adam and Eve to pre-eminence among all who have come on earth." And "The 'Fall' and the consequent redeeming act of Jesus became the most glorious events in the history of mankind." [^9]

Thus, the first time the Atonement applied to any human act, it applied to compensate for the harmful consequences of a choice that was more like a close judgment call than it was a true sin. Like Adam and Eve, though obviously on a smaller scale, we make many judgment-call choices that lead to pain or trouble—either for ourselves or for other people. Some of our judgments are wise, and some are not so wise. Think of accidents caused by carelessness, such as dozing at the wheel. They can have devastating effects, as tragic as deliberate violence. Think of unkind words and forgotten promises between spouses or among family members. Such incidents are never admirable, but not all of them are the result of conscious sin. Still, some of life's uglier consequences may flow from them.

Think also of the tragedy of what we might call a pure accident. I know of a man who ended the life of a college student at an intersection when the brakes on the man's pickup truck failed through no fault of his own. He returned to the scene of the accident alone, night after night, weeping and pleading with God to help him know what he could possibly do to make up for this terrible loss of life. "I can never forgive myself," he lamented. He felt heartrending guilt, but in what he had done he found neither true sin nor real relief.

We might think of the degree of our personal fault for the bad things that happen in our lives as a continuum ranging from sin to adversity, with the degree of our fault dropping from high at one end of the spectrum to zero at the other. At the "sin" end of the continuum, we bear grave responsibility for our deliberately wrongful actions and the suffering they cause. We bring the bitter fruits of sin fully upon ourselves. But at the other end of the spectrum, marked by "adversity," we may bear no responsibility at all. The bitterness of adversity may come to us, as it did to the man who owned the pickup and as it did to Job, regardless of our actual, conscious fault. Job's friends simply assumed that all bitterness is the result of fault or sin, so they insisted that Job's obedience would restore his prosperity. Job's wife believed his afflictions must be the result of God's weakness. But Job's own true perspective introduced a new thought to the Hebrew mind: We can experience trouble not only because of transgression but because it is a natural, even essential, part of life. [^10]

Between the poles of sin and adversity along this fault-level continuum are such intermediate points as unwise choices and hasty judgments, in which it is often unclear just how much personal fault we bear for the bitter fruits we may taste or cause others to taste. Bitterness may taste the same, whatever its source, and it can destroy our peace, break our hearts, and separate us from God. We often—indeed usually—lack the power to compensate for all of the harmful effects of such bitter events. Could it be that the great "at-one-ment" of Christ could put back together the broken parts and give beauty to the ashes of experience such as this?

I am led to believe that it could, because tasting the bitter, in all its forms and with all the variety of its motivation, is so central to the mortal experience as to be a deliberate part of the great plan of life. The Lord taught Adam that his children would grow up in this lone and dreary world with sin conceiving in their hearts. But this consequence of the Fall was not a terrible mistake at all—on the contrary, it is the dimension that gives mortality its profound meaning. As the Lord said to Adam, "They taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good." (Moses 6:55; emphasis added.) Similarly, in modern revelation the Lord said, "And it must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." (D&C 29:39.) Or, as he said to Joseph Smith when he was overcome with bitter darkness that was also not the result of his wrongdoing, "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 122:7.)

The Lord taught Adam that the Atonement was given to him and to his children to heal the effects of tasting this bitterness—perhaps all of it. (See Moses 6:55-62.) The Savior extends this infinite power not just to bless any person who happens to have a need, or even just to answer prayers, but to fulfill the holy covenant arising from his deeply personal bond with those "few humble followers of Christ" (2 Nephi 28:14) whom he has ransomed with his blood. It is not just the Creation, and not just our being part of the Father's spirit family, that creates this sacred relationship between the Lord and his followers; it is the Atonement. Indeed, "mercy cometh because of the atonement." (Alma 42:23.) And it is "by virtue of the blood which I have spilt" that he pleads "before the Father" the cause of those who follow him. (D&C 38:4.) This healing power cleanses our spirits, upon condition of our repentance, when our souls are soiled with sin. It can also compensate for the effects of our sins upon others, when we are unable to make further restitution. The Atonement overcame the physical death and other effects of the Fall. It just might be that it also has power to sweeten the bitterness arising elsewhere in our lives—again, after all we can do ourselves to make compensation to the extent of our ability and our responsibility.

As Jacob taught the Nephites, "For behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam." (2 Nephi 9:21.) Of this statement Elder Maxwell wrote, "Since not all human sorrow and pain is connected to sin, the full intensiveness of the Atonement involved bearing our pains, infirmities, and sicknesses, as well as our sins." [^11]

I have not attempted here to be definitive in marking the outer boundaries of the idea that the Atonement can heal us from the harmful consequences of our choices and experiences that do not result from deliberate wrongdoing. Surely at some point there are limits to that healing role; otherwise, the concept of Atonement could become trivialized and lose its essentially religious meaning. For instance, I would not suggest that this grand concept applies to every minor irritation or inconvenience of daily life, ranging from disappointments in the weather to unhappiness over a grade in school.

A sensible test for determining whether the Atonement applies might be the simple question of whether the experience in fact separates or estranges us from God. To make us "at-one" with God is, after all, the doctrine's purpose. Using that test, even the weather could be a source of serious religious estrangement for a farmer who loses everything to a flood or a drought; and a grade in school could be similarly critical if the grade flunks a student from an educational program he believes he was directed to enter in answer to his serious personal prayer.

Whatever may be the outer limits of the Atonement's reach, the essential point is that it reaches beyond conscious sin. We see the classic application of Atonement doctrine in the case of one who understands the difference between good and evil, yet consciously chooses evil in an act of rebellion against God. Such a person must return to God in earnest repentance to claim the blessing of atoning mercy. But many people sin in utter ignorance of how wrong their conduct is: "For there are many yet on the earth . . . who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men . . . and who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it." (D&C 123:12.)

King Benjamin taught that the Atonement applies fully to ignorant transgression as well as to deliberate transgression, even though the degree of wrongful motive varies so widely between these two categories that they hardly seem sinful in the same sense: "His blood atoneth for the sins of those . . . who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned. But wo, wo unto him who knoweth that he rebelleth against God! For salvation cometh to none such except it be through repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ." (Mosiah 3:11-12. See also 3 Nephi 6:18.)

This comparison suggests that the scriptures may use the term sin with different meanings in different contexts. For a further example of sin's various meanings, we have already seen that Adam and Eve's original sin was not a classic sin in the sense of an evil, knowing rebellion against God. Moreover, the ancient languages from which the Bible was translated used many terms with a variety of meanings that were all translated as sin in English language translations.

For instance, Bible scholars have established that our Old Testament uses the English word sin to translate Hebrew phrases that should more precisely have been interpreted as "missing the right point," or as describing "those who had lost their way" or those who "even with the best intentions were in difficulty." [^12] Similarly, our Old Testament at times uses sin to describe what in Hebrew could be either willful "rebellion" or unintentional "error" that is "misguided but not unconditionally negligent or culpable." [^13] Indeed, using terms we might call "sin" in English, some original Old Testament writers actually ascribe man's shortcomings to "the terrifying and tormenting" thought that "man cannot attain to God by his own striving because God withholds from him the ability to do so." [^14]

Seeing Job taste mortality's bitterness, then, is only the beginning of his story. Whether one believes this bitterness came from Job's transgression, from God's withholding adequate ability from Job, from Satan's overpowering influence, or from God's love for Job, the bitterness estranged him from God. Whatever the causes or his personal motives, Job needed and found the healing blessing of "at-one-ment."

In addition, "the Christian view of sin" cannot be found in the classical Greek language. In the Greek conception, "guilt" and "sin" cover "everything from crime to harmless faults," not only "moral actions but also intellectual and artistic failings." [^15] In Greek literature, guilt and suffering frequently flowed from man's ignorance, some of which was believed to be inherent in the mortal condition and some of which could be overcome with education. Yet, "for the Greeks . . . to become guilty and to suffer in consequence is simply to come to a deeper understanding of the world." [^16]

It is by no means clear that the Atonement would apply to all these usages of the word sin, but it applies to many of them, especially when the effects of the choice or conduct are the same as the effects of evil-based sin—harm to ourselves or others and estrangement from God. In any case, the Atonement clearly applies to more acts than intentional rebellion. If it were concerned only with deliberately evil motives and intentions, it would not apply to those who "died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned." That "his blood atoneth" for these "sins" suggests that the Atonement's reach includes unintentional but harmful acts and consequences of many kinds. (See Mosiah 3:11.)

A higher degree of personal repentance is evidently required of "him who knoweth that he rebelleth against God" than would be required of one who violates divine law without such conscious fault, even though the Atonement applies in both cases. (See Mosiah 3:12.) It appears that the degree of repentance required may vary with the degree of conscious wrongdoing involved, because the repentance portion of Atonement doctrine is primarily concerned with changing a sinful heart. But the healing and compensating portions of the doctrine reach to include the effects of actions that were not necessarily motivated by knowing rebellion.

Having considered the application of grace to "tasting the bitter" in this broad sense, let us now consider the role of grace in our quest to attain divine perfection. Here we will see that the Lord's grace, unlocked by the Atonement, can perfect our imperfections: "By his grace ye may be perfect in Christ." (Moroni 10:32.) While much of the perfection process involves a cleansing from the contamination of sin and bitterness, there is an additional, affirmative dimension through which we acquire a Christlike nature, becoming perfect even as the Father and Son are perfect.

As an introductory illustration, consider the life and experience of the Savior himself, because his own development was marked by his receipt of the Father's grace. His experience shows us also that being free from sin is not quite the same as attaining divine perfection. Jesus lived without sin or blemish, which qualified him in that aspect to perform the Atonement for all mankind. Yet he also tasted of the bitterness of mortality in order to grow and develop: "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Hebrews 5:8-9; emphasis added.)

The Savior's personal experience is clarified by the witness of John, as contained in modern revelation. Note the role of the Father's grace in his development, which he in turn extends to his followers: "And I, John, saw that [Christ] received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace . . . until he received a fulness." (D&C 93:12-13.) Now Christ himself speaks to us: "I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness. For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace." (D&C 93:19-20; emphasis added.)

When the laws of justice and mercy are satisfied by the Atonement and by our repentance, we are, in effect, free from sin. But just as the sinless Christ was "made perfect" through interaction with his Father's grace, so we must then move beyond the remission of sins to the perfection of a divine nature by a process involving grace.

Not long before he passed away, Elder Bruce R. McConkie visited Ricks College to deliver a devotional talk. As we drove together toward the campus from the airport, I asked Elder McConkie if he thought the concepts of grace and the Lord's Atonement had anything to do with the affirmative process of perfecting our nature—apart from the connection of those concepts with forgiveness of sin.

He said that is what the scriptures teach. Turning to the Doctrine and Covenants, he read aloud from Joseph Smith's description of those in the celestial kingdom: "These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." (D&C 76:69; emphasis added.) In the same section we read this echo of the ninety-third section: "They are they . . . who have received of [the Father's] fulness." (D&C 76:56; emphasis added.) I thought about these ideas when Elder McConkie told the Ricks students later that day that the Atonement compensates for all the effects of the Fall and makes possible our inheritance of God's quality of life—eternal life.

At the very end of the Book of Mormon, Moroni describes this perfecting grace in a final, stirring invitation to his readers: "Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ . . . And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father." (Moroni 10:32-33.)

We know very little about this process of sanctification, but it is clear that we do not achieve perfection solely through our own efforts. Knowing just that much is enough to give us a new perspective. Because so many of us feel overwhelmed with the scriptural injunction to be perfect, the idea that divine grace is the final source of our perfection may seem too good to be true. That is how Christ's grace appears to those carrying the burden of truly serious sins. Honest people who carry the burden of being called "saints" may feel the same way, as they stumble daily through the discouraging debris of their obvious imperfections. But the gospel has good news not only for the serious transgressor, but for all who long to be better than they are. We truly become saints "through the atonement of Christ, the Lord," which, after all we can do, has power to help us become "as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love." (Mosiah 3:19; emphasis added.)

The Atonement in some way, apparently through the Holy Ghost, makes possible the infusion of spiritual endowments that actually change and purify our nature, moving us toward that state of holiness or completeness we call eternal life or Godlike life. At that ultimate stage we will exhibit divine characteristics not just because we think we should but because that is the way we are.

The bestowal of the gift of charity is the clearest illustration of this process, as King Benjamin's phrase, "full of love," suggests. This love, the very "love which [the Lord] hast had for the children of men" (Ether 12:34), is not developed entirely by one's own power, even though our faithfulness is a necessary qualification to receive it. Rather, as Mormon so eloquently tells us in Moroni 7, charity is "bestowed upon" the "true followers" of Christ. Its source, like all other blessings of the Atonement, is the grace of God. Said Moroni, who was much preoccupied with this theme, "I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity." (Ether 12:36.)

The purpose of the endowment of charity is not only to cause an unselfish motivation for charitable acts toward other people, although that is a most valuable result. The ultimate additional purpose is to make Christ's followers like him: "He hath bestowed [this love] upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him." (Moroni 7:48; emphasis added.)

In his dream, Lehi felt the stirrings of true charity when he partook of the tree of life, which filled his soul with great joy and made him "desirous that [his] family should partake of it." (1 Nephi 8:12.) By eating the fruit of the tree of eternal life, Lehi tasted not only forgiveness, but also the nature of Christ. Charity is just one of the Savior's attributes, though it is central to his holy nature. And charity is only part of the total blessing. In its fulness, this "gift" of grace is eternal life—being fully like God—"the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7.) The term "at-one-ment" thus seems to mean not only being with God, but being like God.

Another divine endowment in this process is hope, which blesses us with the state of mind we need to deal with the gap between where we are and where we seek to be. It is the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who fills us with this hope as the remission of our sins makes us lowly of heart and meek enough to receive him. (See Moroni 8:25-26.) I believe this endowment can literally fill our minds in a pure and permanent form with the kind of encouragement and confidence we might find in talking with a close friend who gives us perspective about a difficult problem. We go away from such a conversation with confidence that there is light at the end of our dark tunnels and somehow everything will be all right. That kind of hope can be literally life-sustaining when it is given us by the Savior, for the light at the end of life's darkest tunnels is the Light and the Life of the world.

Such a promise throws a wonderful lifeline to the increasing number of religious people who feel discouragement, stress, low self-esteem, and even depression. The Savior desires to save us from our inadequacies as well as our sins. Inadequacy is not the same as being sinful—we have far more control over the choice to sin than we may have over our innate capacity. We sometimes say that the Lord will not save us in our sins, but from them. However, it is quite possible that he will save us in our inadequacies as well as from them. A sense of falling short or falling down is not only natural but essential to the mortal experience. Still, after all we can do, the Atonement can fill that which is empty, straighten our bent parts, and make strong that which is weak.

The Savior's victory can compensate not only for our sins but also for our inadequacies; not only for our deliberate mistakes but also for our sins committed in ignorance, our errors of judgment, and our unavoidable imperfections. Our ultimate aspiration is more than being forgiven of sin—we seek to become holy, endowed affirmatively with Christlike attributes, at one with him, like him. Divine grace is the only source that can finally fulfill that aspiration, after all we can do.

I grieve for those who, in their admirable and sometimes blindly dogged sense of personal responsibility, believe that, in the quest for eternal life, the Atonement is there only to help big-time sinners, and that they, as everyday Mormons who just have to try harder, must "make it" on their own. The truth is not that we must make it on our own, but that he will make us his own.

Despite how little we know or can explain about these perfecting blessings of the Atonement, one other observation seems to hold true here as it does in applying the Atonement to the concept of sin. The scriptures suggest that the heresy of salvation by grace alone also applies to the personal developmental process. Thus, we will not be blessed with hope and charity and eternal life only for the asking. Rather, we must do the very best we can—even if that may not seem terribly impressive compared to a standard of flawless perfection. The important thing is that we can qualify, despite failures, bad judgments, wrong turns, and limited strength.

A few scriptural phrases can be pieced together that suggest the characteristics of those who are worthy of the sanctifying gifts. These phrases tell us more about attitude and commitment than they do about scoring points or never making mistakes. Consider just a brief sampling: "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart." (Moroni 7:48; emphasis added.) Be "true followers of . . . Jesus Christ." (Moroni 7:48; emphasis added.) "Because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which . . . filleth with hope and perfect love." (Moroni 8:26; emphasis added.) See that ye "bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love." (Alma 38:12; emphasis added.) "If ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind, and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you." (Moroni 10:32; emphasis added.)

Rather than setting another discouragingly high standard, these invitations sound more like doing the best we can in the circumstances of our own lives. We need not apologize for the typical untidiness of those circumstances. It is their very lone and dreary nature that allows them to shape us as they do. It was never intended that we should partake of the tree of life and thereby gain full access to perfecting grace before we have stumbled and groped and learned all we can from the disappointments and surprises of this vale of tears. I suppose that is why the Lord guarded the way to the tree of life after Adam and Eve had partaken of the first tree: They needed the time and space and shaping purpose of mortality. (See Alma 42:3-5.) They needed to taste the bitter in order to "prize"—to appreciate, to understand, to grasp the meaning of—"the good." (See Moses 6:55.) Perhaps the essence of that good is the gift of eternal life, which we can only comprehend after we do all we can do. Until we are prepared in what may look like very imperfect ways to receive them, we are not ready for the gifts that perfect our nature.

In his dream of the tree of life, Lehi found himself in a dark and dreary wasteland and saw others surrounded by a great mist of darkness. The pathway home from this darkness was the way to the tree of life—the same tree, I suppose, as the one from which Adam and Eve were barred until they too had walked the trail where Lehi wandered. The path was marked by the iron rod, the word of God. Holding fast to this rod in the mists of darkness, we, as did Lehi, grope and move our way homeward. As we do, we are likely to find that the cold rod of iron will begin to feel in our hands as the warm, firm, loving hand of one who is literally pulling us along the way. He gives us strength enough to rescue us, warmth enough to tell us that home is not far away; and we summon our deepest resources to reciprocate with our own renewed energy until we are again "at one" in the arms of the Lord through the power of his great "at-one-ment."

Sometimes we talk about how important it is to be on the Lord's side. Perhaps we should talk more about how important it is that the Lord is on our side.

Sometimes we say that no other success can compensate for our failures in the home. And while it is true that no other success of ours can fully compensate, there is a success that compensates for all our failures, after all we can do in good faith. That success is the Atonement of Jesus Christ. By its power, we may arise from the ashes of life filled with incomprehensible beauty and joy.

According to an ancient legend, the Phoenix was a large and beautiful bird that lived hundreds, perhaps thousands, of years, then burned itself on a funeral pyre of its own making. A new Phoenix would rise from these very ashes with renewed youth and beauty, carry the remains of its father to the altar of the sun god, then return to soar for the rest of its life about the earth, the only bird of its kind. The long life of the Phoenix and its dramatic rebirth from its father's ashes made it a symbol in the ancient world of both immortality and spiritual rebirth.

Each of us will taste the bitter ashes of life, from sin and neglect to sorrow and disappointment. But the Atonement of Christ can lift us up in beauty, not only from our own ashes but also from the ashes of him who fathers the rebirth of our spirits. We then soar toward the sun on the wings of a sure promise of immortality and eternal life. Thus may we be lifted up, not only at the end of life but in each day of our lives.

"Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth . . . giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isaiah 40:28-29, 31; emphasis added.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] T. S. Eliot, Four Quartets (London: The Folio Society, 1968), page 55.
[^2] William Shakespeare, MacBeth, Act V, Scene V.
[^3] Section III of the Prologue draws upon Moses 4; Alma 32; Alma 1; Nephi 11; 2 Nephi 9; 2 Nephi 25; 3 Nephi 9; Hebrews 2; Hebrews 5; Isaiah 53; and John 17. See also James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1949), page 669.
[^4] 4. Boyd K. Packer, "Atonement, Agency, Accountability,'' Ensign, May 1988, pages 69-70.
[^5] 5. Daniel H. Ludlow, "The Relationship between Grace and Works,'' Supplement: A Symposium on the New Testament (Church Educational System, 1984), page 29. The one article on grace was Gerald N. Lund, "Salvation, By Grace or By Works?'' Ensign, April 1981, page 16. Since 1983, the Church periodicals have published at least two other articles on the subject of grace: Elder Gene R. Cook, "Christmas Is a Time for Rejoicing in the Grace of the Lord,'' New Era, December 1988, page 4; and Colin B. Douglas, "What I've Learned about Grace Since Coming Down from the Sycamore Tree,'' Ensign, April 1989, page 12.
[^6] 6. Bruce R. McConkie, "What Think Ye of Salvation by Grace?'' BYU 1983-84 Fireside and Devotional Speeches, page 44.
[^7] 7. Ensign, May 1988, page 69.
[^8] 8. Hugh Nibley has said that "people are usually surprised to learn that atonement, an accepted theological term, is neither from a Greek nor a Latin word, but is good old English and really does mean, when we write it out, at-one-ment, denoting both a state of being one with another and the process by which that end is achieved.'' From "The Atonement,'' a talk given in Salt Lake City, November 10, 1988.
[^9] 9. John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, 3 vols. in 1, arranged by G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), page 193.
[^10] 10. These references to Job are cited and developed more fully in chapter six.
[^11] 11. Neal A. Maxwell, Not My Will, But Thine (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), page 51.
[^12] 12. G. Kittel, Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, vol. 1 (Grand Rapids: Eerdsmans, 1964), page 271. I am indebted to Jack Welch at Brigham Young University for calling my attention to this material.
[^13] 13. Ibid., pages 273-74.
[^14] 14. Ibid.
[^15] 15. Ibid., pages 296, 297.
[^16] 16. Ibid., pages 290-300.
