Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Prologue

I. About this Book

This book applies the doctrines of the Atonement to some common elements of human experience. Thus it is more a practical book than a doctrinal one.

Still, I believe with Oliver Wendell Holmes that nothing is more practical than a good theory. The "good theory" in this case is the majestic doctrine that, as explained in the third article of faith, "through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel." No idea is more philosophically profound than the idea of the Atonement; yet no idea is more intensely practical. This idea is so practical that it is a matter of life and death, in every sense of both terms. But it is also an idea that applies to all of mortal experience between life and death, especially the common but often wrenching life experiences that seem to separate us from God. For anyone who seeks meaning and purpose in life, nothing would be more practical than a sound understanding of this good theory.

The following chapters proceed from the doctrinal framework sketched in the Introduction and will develop many of the themes introduced there. That framework views the Atonement in broad terms, terms that are rich and packed with many unexplored implications. I make no claim to having fully researched and developed the theological issues this framework raises. I am acquainted enough with scholarly methods to have some idea about the scope and the rigor required to complete such a project, and I believe it is a project worth doing. But I have not done it here; that is a book for someone else on another day.

Some day I hope that others will write more about the Atonement theology of the restored gospel, if only to lead readers to the primary sources of that theology in the scriptures. Students of the Christian scriptures in all faiths cry out to grasp the grand secrets of the Atonement, which can unlock the further mysteries of man's nature and life's purpose. If only they could know what truths lie buried before their eyes in the plain and precious language of the Book of Mormon. These truths are in some sense inaccessible to those whose tools of language and discourse are limited to the terms of art embodied in the academic and jargon-laden discipline of contemporary Christian theology. Great revelations—literally—await those who will let the Book of Mormon speak for itself about its central message, Christ's Atonement, "according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God." (1 Nephi 13:29.)

This book is intentionally modest in scope and conversational in tone. The doctrines of the Atonement are always relevant to these chapters but are not always on center stage. At times the Atonement acts here only as a backdrop, a source of quiet but sure perspective.

I write here to adults and young adults in the Church as a general audience. Many of my illustrations refer to the experience of college-age young people, but that is only because all of us naturally draw upon our own experience. My experience over the past twenty years has been primarily among the students and faculty at Brigham Young University and Ricks College. But these people are, I find, a cross section of the larger Church membership, and in that sense their experience reflects the common experiences of most Church members.

My viewpoint in these pages is not the panoramic vision of an authorized spokesman; rather, mine is the view from the trenches, where each of us seeks to connect our worn threads of life's tapestry with the vast, overall design. I love the characteristic of Church membership that lets us all speak to one another in a shared conversation that reflects our common search to know how we should live as Latter-day Saints—not always because we are sure we have the answers, but because we share a bond of brotherhood with those for whom the questions mean so much.

Just a word about titles and metaphors. The Broken Heart has a double meaning: first, the breaking of Christ's heart at the moment of his death on the cross, when he voluntarily gave up his life in the final act of the Atonement's drama; second, the broken heart and contrite spirit the Savior asks each of us to place before him on the altar of sacrifice. Through the breaking of his heart and ours in these two interactive senses, the full blessings of the Atonement are realized in our individual lives.

I thought once about a different title for the book, perhaps "After All We Can Do," from Nephi's memorable statement that "it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Nephi 25:23.) Much of the book does focus on "all we can do" as well as on the way the Savior lifts us up "after" we do all we can. But the potent symbolism of the broken heart, his and ours, has a special appeal, pointing toward the blessings of the Atonement in a way that binds our hearts to his. The present title also carries echoes of a companion volume, The Believing Heart, which deals with the process of faith that prepares us to receive the Atonement.

Following the introduction and the prologue, the book's chapters are organized around two additional symbols: first, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; and second, the tree of life. These two trees have a definite and powerful meaning in the teachings of the temple and the scriptures regarding the Fall, the Atonement, and our return to God's presence. They also link our personal experience with the experience of Adam and Eve in ways that illuminate the connections between the Atonement and our own journey through mortality.

II. The Light in the Darkness

Thirty-four years after the birth of Christ, a great and terrible storm arose in the lands of the Nephite people. Never before had such a storm swept over those lands. The whole earth shook over vast spaces. Entire cities caught fire, collapsed into the sea, and were buried under upheaved mountains. The face of all the land was torn apart and deformed. Many of the people lost their lives; those who were spared wailed in grief.

After the awful storm, a thick and frightening vapor of darkness covered the land. So black was the darkness that the surviving inhabitants could make no light at all with candles or fire, and the sun and stars hid their light for three days behind this suffocating veil of darkness. The people wept and howled and mourned.

Suddenly a voice pierced the dreadful darkness.

The people trembled in terror, and they strained their ears in the thick black night, desperate to grasp the words of the voice. They listened fervently, and they heard:

"I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away. . . . And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (3 Nephi 9:18-20.)

It was the voice of Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified would come into the world. He had drunk the bitter cup that the Father gave him. His heart was broken, and his Atonement was now complete. The light of heaven thus pierced the darkness of the world.

He asked the people who wandered in the dark night to offer unto him the personal sacrifice of a broken heart. And when they came unto him in this manner, he gave them light in the darkness of their lives.

III. The Two Trees

We shall not cease from exploration And the end of all our exploring Will be to arrive where we started And know the place for the first time. [^1]

Life is a school, a place for us to learn and grow. Our Teacher and Headmaster has placed us on the earth in a risk-filled environment called mortality. Here we may learn what we must know and become what we must be, not only to live with him someday, but to be like him.

To learn these profound lessons of life, we must undergo many experiences that subject us to the sorrow and contamination of a lone and dreary world. These experiences may include sin, but they also include undeserved pain, disappointment, and adversity. Every one of us will taste some bitter mixture of these forces. We must taste a measure of the bitter in order to prize the sweet.

But how, then, can we overcome the ill effects and consequences of this necessary contamination? The blessed news of the gospel is that the Atonement of Jesus Christ can purify us from all uncleanness and sweeten all the bitterness we taste. The Atonement not only pays for our sins, it heals our wounds—the self-inflicted ones and those inflicted from sources beyond our control. The Atonement also completes the process of our learning by perfecting our nature and making us whole. In this way, Christ's Atonement makes us as he is. It is the ultimate source of our forgiveness, our perfection, and our peace of mind.

In the beginning, the Lord God taught this vision of life's nature and purpose to Adam and Eve. To symbolize these teachings, he placed two trees in the Garden of Eden: the tree of knowledge and the tree of life. The fruit of the first tree seemed desirable, but it became bitter as it led to the knowledge of good and evil. The second tree was sweet, and it led to a fulness of Godlike life. We, like Adam and Eve, taste the bitter fruit of the first tree that we may know to prize the sweet fruit of the second tree.

The tree of knowledge (learning through mortal, sometimes bitter, experience) and the tree of life (the Father's sweet bestowal of forgiveness and a divine character) are both necessary for us to find fulfillment and meaning. Neither tree—neither force—is sufficient unless completed by the other.

The mortal learning experience, represented by the tree of knowledge, is so necessary that God placed cherubim and a flaming sword to guard the way of the tree of life until Adam and Eve completed, and we, their posterity, complete this preparatory schooling. Our tutorial is the gospel, a schoolmaster that brings us to Christ. But he cannot fully receive us and give us the gift of celestial life—partaking of God's very nature—until we have learned by our own experience to distinguish good from evil. In multiplied sorrow we must bring forth children. We must walk the earth through sharp thorns and poison thistles. The ground is cursed for our sakes. By the sweat of our faces must we eat bread until we return to the ground from whence we were taken.

This treacherous path led Adam and Eve through the valley of death and pain. It weighed them down with the toil of earthly experience, until they knelt before God in the depths of humility. Through faithful obedience and sacrifice, they learned, they repented, and they reached out to God through the veil of mortality with all the energy of their hearts.

Thus the tree of knowledge symbolizes the entire process by which Adam and Eve—and we—learn through the dreary loneliness of earthly experience. Partaking of the forbidden fruit was only the beginning of that process.

Over time Adam and Eve endured faithfully, until one day they began to grasp the joy of their redemption. This was the day when the Savior began to lift them up in reverent humility. By then their hearts were broken and their spirits contrite in two ways: first, their sorrow for their sins, and second, their courageous response to the natural adversity of the lone and dreary world. Then at last the Good Shepherd placed them on his shoulder and carried them homeward to the fruits of his love through the power of his precious Atonement, cleansed and perfected from the ill effects of all mortal bitterness.

Our Savior's sanctifying power is represented by the tree of life. Without that power, there is no life, only death and timeless despair. Had they never partaken of this second tree, Adam and Eve would have wandered in their quest for knowledge into a path of endless misery. This result would have fulfilled what Satan intended when he tempted them in the garden to seek knowledge without obedience, for he seeks that all might be miserable like unto himself.

Adam and Eve began the lifelong process of seeking after the fruit of the tree of life when, once their eyes were opened, they refused to worship Satan and chose, rather, to plant the seed of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. They then nourished their small seedling with much care, so that it would not wither in the scorching heat of opposition. When finally, after great patience and diligence, they plucked and tasted the fruit of the tree of life, it was sweet above all that is sweet and pure above all that is pure; for it represents the pure love of God, the most desirable of all things, made possible through the infinite Atonement of him who died of a broken heart.

He, too, knew of toil, and sweat, and sorrow, for Man of Sorrows was his name. In the days of his flesh, he prayed with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death. He was despised and rejected of men. He was acquainted with grief and bruised for our iniquities. Having himself suffered temptation, he can succor those who are tempted. For his followers, the sweetest moment of his life was when he drank the bitter cup.

To lay claim to the Savior's sacrifice, we, like Adam and Eve, must also obey and sacrifice. We must bring an offering that in some way approximates his own suffering—the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

The Savior's completion of his Atonement changed the nature of the law of sacrifice in a way that requires that our hearts be broken. Formerly, the Old Testament's law of sacrifice required literal animal sacrifices and burnt offerings. But after the Atonement fulfilled the law of Moses, Jesus explained to the Nephites that they should do away with animal sacrifices. Henceforth, he taught that whoever would come unto him with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, he would baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost.

Elder James E. Talmage believed that the physiological cause of Christ's death was, literally, a broken heart. This element in our Lord's sacrifice suggests two differences between animal sacrifices and the sacrifice of a broken heart. First is the difference between offering one of our possessions, such as an animal, and offering our own hearts. Second, one who offers an unblemished animal, the firstling of a flock, acts in similitude of the Father's sacrifice of his unblemished, firstborn Son. By contrast, one who offers his own broken heart acts in similitude of the Son's terribly personal sacrifice of himself. Thus, the figurative breaking of our own hearts, represented by our repentance and our faithful endurance of the mortal crucible—our own taste of a bitter cup—is a self-sacrifice that mirrors the Savior's own self-sacrifice. He is the Father's, and we are his. The Father is in him, and he is in us. Perhaps in this sense only those whose own sacrificial attitude resembles his, even if only slightly, are prepared to be endowed with his grace.

In this sacrificial spirit, the righteous saints who belong to the Holy One of Israel are those who have endured the crosses of the world and despised the shame of it. These are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God and whose joy shall be full forever.

All of us, like Adam and Eve, must leave God's presence in the quest for knowledge and growth through personal experience. Our exploration will not cease until we return to his presence, prepared at last to grasp, to comprehend—to receive with full understanding of life's meaning—the endowment of a Godlike nature. This sacred gift, the greatest of all the gifts of God, transcends infinitely the limits of man's own power. Knowledge without obedience leads not to a final understanding of life's meaning, but to "sound and fury, signifying nothing." [^2] On the other hand, knowledge constrained by obedience to God and then fulfilled by the grace of God leads to meaning, sanctification, and eternal joy.

Nephi taught the relationship between man's experience and God's mercy in a single phrase—it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. Guided by this perspective, the chapters in "Part I: The Tree of Knowledge" explore some basic characteristics of mortality and the human experience. This exploration will suggest how, through doing "all we can do" in the lone and dreary world, we partake of the tree of knowledge.

The chapters in "Part II: The Tree of Life" then consider the nature and role of the Lord's healing and perfecting grace, which the mortal experience prepares us to receive. In its fully flowered form, the tree of life gives us both light and life, culminating our eternal quest for knowledge, fulfillment, and understanding; for it is the tree of the life and the light of the world. [^3]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] T. S. Eliot, Four Quartets (London: The Folio Society, 1968), page 55.
[^2] William Shakespeare, MacBeth, Act V, Scene V.
[^3] Section III of the Prologue draws upon Moses 4; Alma 32; Alma 1; Nephi 11; 2 Nephi 9; 2 Nephi 25; 3 Nephi 9; Hebrews 2; Hebrews 5; Isaiah 53; and John 17. See also James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1949), page 669.
