Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Part I

THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter One

The Life Cycle of Adam and Eve

The experience of Adam and Eve is an ideal prototype for our own mortal experience. Their story is our story. The complete cycle of their fall from innocence and their ultimate return to God typifies a general human pattern for personal growth that can lead ultimately to deep personal meaning. This perspective will suggest the broad view of "all we can do" along the pathway toward a divine nature.

The lost sheep metaphor derives originally from the Savior's parable: "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing." (Luke 15:4-5.) Ordinarily, when we think of lost sheep, we think of those who become "lost" through deliberate unfaithfulness to God. In our hymn, "Dear to the Heart of the Shepherd," we sing not only of the Shepherd's concern for his sheep, but also of the need for "undershepherds" to help reclaim lost sheep to "the fold," usually meaning activity in the Church. So when we sing, "Out in the desert they wander, hungry and helpless and cold; off to the rescue he hastens," we are normally thinking of those who aren't in church.

I once heard a child tell the parable of the lost sheep in a way that stirred fresh thoughts about who the lost sheep is. A little girl so tiny that we could barely see the top of her ponytails over the pulpit told the story in a sacrament meeting. Her mother knelt by her side and coached her gently as she talked. She said, "There was once a shepherd who had a hundred sheep, He loved his sheep, so he counted them every day. One day he counted: ' . . . ninety-seven, ninety-eight, ninety-nine.' A little sheep was lost. The shepherd went to find him. The little sheep was far off in the rocks and bushes. He was frightened and lonely. The shepherd called, 'Little she-eep . . . ?' The little sheep heard him and was glad. He said, 'Baa-aa.' The shepherd came and found the little sheep. He picked him up and carried him on his shoulder back to his mommy. Then he counted again: ' . . . ninety-eight, ninety-nine, one hundred.' All the sheep were safely home."

As I listened, it dawned on me: I am the little lost sheep. Others I know and love—including many who attend church—are the little lost sheep. There are so many times when we feel lost. We can feel lost even if we have not "left the fold" in the sense of leaving the Church or violating major commandments.

Adam and Eve must at times have felt like lost sheep. They were originally in God's presence, then left him through an act we sometimes call a sin, but which might also be called an act of independence. They were cast out of their garden of innocence into the lone and dreary world. "Out in the desert they wandered, hungry and helpless and cold." They began to suffer pain as a consequence of their independent action. In humility and childlike faith they called upon God for help. They offered sacrifices as instructed by an angel, even though they had no idea why they should. Through the symbol of sacrifice they were then taught about the Savior and were shown how they could return to God's presence through his Atonement. They rejoiced in the miraculous possibility that he might one day carry them home again into the presence of their father.

What did Adam and Eve know after they returned to God's presence that they hadn't known when they were originally with him in the Garden? What can we know after our own return to God that we didn't know in our premortal life? The scriptures explain that God expected and desired that Adam and Eve's children would have the same kinds of mortal experiences as their first parents had, which suggests that the redemption of Adam and Eve was not just a convenient way to erase the effect of an unfortunate error. Rather, it was an intentional element in a course of instruction designed by God himself for their preparation, if they freely chose to accept it. Without that course of instruction, they could not have developed the capacity to live a meaningful celestial life. So it is with our experience as their children: Mortality is not mere estrangement from God—it is the crucible through which the possibility of truly meaningful life becomes real.

The mortal life cycle of Adam and Eve might be portrayed as the archetype for our own lives. [^1] (See chart, page 40.)

In our premortal state we live in "unity with God," the father of our spirits. Through birth into mortality, we begin to experience some distance from him, for we are now subject to death, sin, and a sense of time. Our "acts of independence" may involve sins of deliberate disobedience inspired by Satan, but they also include errors of judgment or choices that do not involve clear-cut, good-versus-evil alternatives. Thus, the "rejection" and "bitterness" we feel reflect the natural consequences of our choices, as well as the guilt feelings that follow sinful action.

The "humility," "reconciliation," and other steps that moved Adam and Eve on around the cycle to eventual reunification with God do not automatically follow for their children. Not all of us learn from the pain caused by our acts of independence. Some leave the path of the natural cycle whenever they feel the approach of psychic pain, straying off course to avoid the discomfort of dealing with unpleasant realities. Others condemn themselves so mercilessly that they become immobilized or even drop out at the bottom of the cycle.

But those who respond as Adam and Eve did will learn and grow, moving "after all they can do" through each step in the cycle until they take the outstretched hand of the Atoning One. Thus they cast Satan's influence from their lives and gain both insight and strength as the Savior leads them toward the joy and enlightenment of being reunited with God. The Lord's saving intervention in this cycle is symbolized by the angel who came to Adam to teach him about the Atonement and to explain why he should offer sacrifices. The angel came only after Adam had demonstrated his humble desire to be true and faithful. This pattern is echoed in Abraham's discovery of a ram in the thicket, as discussed toward the end of chapter two.

When we, like Adam and Eve, voluntarily submit to the repentance, humility, and hopeful striving required to begin the homeward turn at the bottom of the cycle (symbolized by a broken heart and a contrite spirit), we will qualify for the full measure of the Savior's atoning power: "Behold he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered." (2 Nephi 2:7.)

The Atonement adds three crucial elements to our journey that we could not add by ourselves. First, through the law of mercy and on condition of our repentance, the Atonement allows the Savior to pay for our sins committed along the way, thereby satisfying the law of justice and ensuring our personal forgiveness. Without that cleansing power, we could not return to unity with God, because no unclean thing can enter his presence.

Second, subject to our doing "all we can do," the Atonement compensates for the harmful consequences of all our acts of independence, both the consequences we may suffer and the consequences other people suffer through our actions. For example, the resurrection made possible by the Atonement compensates for the physical death all of us will suffer because of Adam and Eve's decisions in the Garden of Eden. This compensation is available not only to redress the effects of sin but also to redress the effects of bitterness resulting from judgment call choices and undeserved adversity.

Third, the Atonement somehow releases the forces of grace, through which the Savior empowers and endows us with strength, capacity, hope, and other spiritual gifts we may need, both to continue our journey and to reenter God's presence endowed with the requisite attributes.

This developmental cycle portrays human experience at both general and particular levels. As with Adam and Eve, the totality of our experiences can add up to a general pattern of development—the sum of many parts from many years building together toward overall progression. In addition, a large number of specific experiences and developmental stages fit the same cyclical pattern. Indeed, these shorter-range trips around the cycle vividly illustrate the cycle's natural reflection of life. In this "micro" sense, the pattern is more a recurring episode cycle than a single life cycle, but I will use the term life cycle for simplicity in referring to both levels of the pattern.

Consider first the example of a baby. For nine months prior to his or her birth, the baby is in literal unity with the mother. But from the moment of birth, the infant child begins a slow but inevitable movement toward independence. At first, he is unaware of his separate existence. He assumes not that he is part of his mother, but that his mother is part of him. His own infant consciousness is for him not only the center of the universe, but all of it. As he begins the mortal journey, he will sense increasingly the difference between his own identity and that of his mother. Ultimately, understanding the reality of his separate status will give significance to his life as he learns of his relationship first to his mother and then to the rest of the universe. In this first mortal experience of self-discovery are the seeds of the idea that the larger life cycle can return us to God's presence with an understanding of who we are, who God is, and what our lives mean. This understanding is impossible without the experiences that teach us, sometimes painfully, about our own agency and independence. Paradoxically, it is only in discovering our independence from God that we understand our utter dependence on him.

The baby's early movements toward independence can lead to dissonance and frustration as the warm and constant nurturing of unity with his mother is increasingly interrupted. Before long, however, the baby will make the exciting discovery that he is capable of independent action, which introduces both a new sense of power and a new source of frustration. Many of his acts of independence will lead not to the delights of doing as one pleases but to the unhappy surprises of pleasing to do things that bring about disaster—from spilling the milk and touching the stove to eating the dirt and tipping over the tricycle. We call a toddler's life the "terrible twos" primarily because he is suddenly mobile enough to get into things, yet inexperienced enough to keep from getting into all the wrong things. It is a harrowing period for everyone in the family, both for the babies who keep falling and for those who keep trying to catch them before they hit the floor. The toddler reasonably believes his power to walk should take him anywhere, but when every drawer or door will not open, or when those that do open cause his parents to shout at him or grab him, he learns quickly about the pain and alienation that can follow acts of independence.

In trying to help their toddler cope successfully with his growing pains, parents may be tempted to resort to extreme alternatives. One enticing possibility is to confine the child to his bedroom (or even the bed alone) until he is old enough to handle his mobility with less risk of harm. There are times when "old enough" for this purpose seems to be age twenty-five or thirty. But, of course, a child cannot learn at all without some experience, so most parents dismiss the total confinement option as unrealistic.

At the other extreme is the temptation to just let the child run free, accompanied by a strong supporting cast of family members who protect him from danger or place desirable objects in his path, whichever way he turns. If he heads for the street in front of the house, someone stops the traffic. If he heads for the drawer containing mommy's makeup or the family cookie supply, someone else quickly replaces the contents with toddler toys. That way, any drawer the child opens contains only pleasant surprises. There would be no tightropes without safety nets. The toddler's environment is thus moved around as if on casters, making his every choice a safe one. This kind of protective permissiveness is motivated by a desire to spare the child pain and frustration. But it, too, is dismissed by most parents, for a child cannot learn in a risk-free environment. Without learning firsthand about natural consequences, a child is never able to live in the natural world. He would remain in a state of innocent helplessness and dependence, having been spared all forms of disappointment.

So most parents lovingly measure out increasing freedom to their toddlers, keeping a watchful eye on them and praying that the inevitable accidents are not terribly serious. Then, when the crash-and-burn moments come along, parents try to help the child learn from his experiences. Successful learning even at this age moves naturally around the life cycle, as parents try to help their children move from bitterness to reconciliation with just enough sense of pain and responsibility that the experience is a real one—but without so much trauma that the child is unwilling to take another step, or unwilling to feel the humility needed to allow a hopeful striving. The more a child experiences the completeness of moving entirely around the cycle, the better he is able to accept successive encounters with natural consequences.

But after a few years, just when we think the child has learned some sense of responsibility and caution, he becomes a teenager. One of the main differences between age two and age sixteen is the size of the risk involved. Because adolescents are bigger and range farther, there is more danger. In other respects the two stages share the basic similarity of a sense of autonomy and power that are frequently unrealistic. It is typical of the adolescent mind to believe he is invincible to the point of being immortal. His inability to anticipate future implications makes him terribly vulnerable to harm from high-risk activities that offer immediate thrills. Automobile insurance rates are higher for teenage drivers for the simple statistical reason that they have far more accidents. They lack the judgmental capacity to evaluate the risk of potential harm, so they drive carelessly.

Research on the problem of cigarette smoking bears out this judgmental limitation in the adolescent perspective. Adults have increasingly responded to warnings about the health risks of smoking. But solemn and persuasive evidence about sharply higher rates of lung cancer among smokers has had a negligible effect among the teenage audience. It is difficult for young people to comprehend the nature of cancer when they lack experience with terminal illnesses. On the other hand, attempts to persuade teens that cigarette smoking is not "cool" have been more successful.

The same kinds of findings appear in research on the use of contraceptives by adolescents. In recent years, contraceptives have become widely available to teenagers because some government planners have believed that increased contraception is the best method to reduce the high American rate of adolescent pregnancies. Some recent research now shows, however, that increased distribution of contraceptives may actually be accompanied by increases in adolescent pregnancy rates. This result may well follow from, among other factors, the inability of most adolescents to plan or to anticipate the future well enough to put contraceptives systematically to their intended use, especially in the emotionally charged and value-laden areas of life associated with sexuality. Even if their sexual activity were appropriate, which of course it is not, many teenagers have enough trouble thinking ahead to the next meal or the next day, let alone thinking about consequences nine months into the future.

The story of Icarus in Greek mythology illustrates the carefree and curious attitude toward risk-taking that is so characteristic of the typical adolescent. Icarus and his father, Daedalus, attempted to escape from the island of Crete on homemade wings of wax and feathers. Icarus was thrilled with the excitement of flying for the first time in his life—not unlike the sixteen-year-old taking his first spin at the wheel of a powerful automobile. He wanted to fly higher and higher, but his father cautioned him that if he flew too close to the sun, the heat would melt the wax in his wings and destroy them. Icarus wanted to know how high was too high, for he wanted to fly as close to the edge of disaster as he could get without hurting himself. Not heeding his father, Icarus finally soared higher and higher until the sun did melt the wax in his wings, and he plunged tragically to his death in the sea below. The dilemma for Daedalus, as for other parents, is knowing how to help a child have enough experience to learn from it without allowing, as the saying goes, so much rope that he hangs himself.

I try to keep a clear perspective about the continual experiences my teenage children seem to have with Adam and Eve's life cycle. They need freedom enough to make minor errors so they can learn from their mistakes and discover the connections between decisions and consequences. But they also need protection against the life-threatening hazards of being near-adults in the physical sense while remaining near-children in the developmental sense. A seasoned father once told me, regarding the foibles of adolescent life, that there is a difference between sin and foolishness. His point was that the immature and foolish things teenagers do are not all necessarily sinful. Sometimes they need to experience feelings of foolishness in order to develop an internal sense of proportion strong enough to guide their future decision-making. Such are the experiences that become truly internalized.

The prodigal son—perhaps an adolescent himself—finally found understanding and insight through his foolishness. After he had "wasted his substance with riotous living," he found himself at the bottom of the life cycle, where "he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him." Then, "when be came to himself," he finally understood that life at his father's home, which he once perceived as inadequate, represented "enough and to spare." He literally ran the rest of the way around the life cycle, with feelings of unworthiness but with a desire to return home, to a life and to parents he had learned to appreciate—both in the sense of being grateful and in the sense of comprehending, in part, the kind of life his parents had taught him to live. (Luke 15:11-32.)

It is sometimes possible to learn such lessons by watching the foolishness of others. There is always considerable risk that those who will only learn through their own errors will never return, because there is no assurance that they will learn what is there to be learned. But the point for our common experience with the adolescent stage is the same: Some acts of independence at this time of life are natural and can be the source of significant insight, if only a child's movement around the cycle is complete.

As with the parents of toddlers, the parents of adolescents wonder constantly if they should be more strict or less strict. Either extreme seems to offer a simpler approach—lock them for ten years in their rooms, occasionally slipping a little food under the door; or just turn them loose, shouting after them as they leave the house something like, "You're accountable now for your own sins!" But these years, like the toddler years, are crucial learning years; and for that fundamental purpose, neither extreme discipline nor extreme permissiveness alone will suffice. There must be a combination, weighted this way or that depending on the needs and responsiveness of the individual child, and depending most of all on the disciplinary framework most likely to encourage the process of internalizing the natural principles of life.

Cultural historian Christopher Lasch observed the following about contemporary American family life:

The best argument for the indispensability of the family is that children grow up best under conditions of intense emotional involvement with their parents. Without struggling with the ambivalent emotions aroused by the union of love and discipline in his parents, the child never masters his inner rage or his fear of authority. It is for this reason that children need parents, not professional nurses or counselors . [^2]

Understanding this process of growth is critical to understanding "how the cultural heritage is acquired and internalized by each generation." A child who moves successfully through this application of the life cycle will learn to deal with his father figure (who symbolizes natural laws and, eventually, God) so he can ultimately take a place next to his father (God), rather than making the child feel that he must eliminate or reject his father (God). Thus a child's growth processes, when discipline and love are appropriately blended by parents, help him "to internalize moral standards in the form of a conscience." Without such an experience, the child never does grow up. "Psychologically he remains in important ways a child, surrounded by authorities with whom he does not identify and whose authority he does not regard as legitimate." [^3]

In the life pattern represented in the experience of Adam and Eve, God was the source of both love and discipline. This uniting of love and discipline created a paradox, as did commandments which seemed to urge both their dependence on him and yet their independence from him. In this sense, the relationship of children to their parents is much like our relationship to our Father in Heaven. Our understanding of the desirable process by which children finally untie themselves from parental apron strings, while simultaneously growing in love and appreciation for their parents, helps us understand how God might view us—gently (sometimes not so gently) nourishing both our independence from and our dependence on him.

If children learn the naturalness of Adam and Eve's life cycle from the turmoil of adolescence, they will be better prepared to face their next experiences with the same familiar pattern, such as are found in love and marriage. It is common during and following the adolescent years to develop a great fondness for a person of the opposite sex, only to sense no similar response from the other person. At that point, there may be enough discouragement to bring on what someone has called the "dark night of the soul" at the bottom of the life cycle diagram. Those who hold out their hearts in love only to have them bruised and rejected may feel they will never again allow themselves to fall in love. But the mentally healthy person who perceives the naturalness of the experience will summon the courage to climb back up the cycle toward greater reconciliation with the opposite sex in general. This person will learn lessons for the future from the experience, both about himself and about the way relationships develop. Others will have a harder time, wrongly equating rejection by one person with rejection by everyone. Instead of learning from the experience, some will develop bitter feelings or lose their self-confidence, as potential movements around the cycle do not materialize into productive opportunities.

The universality of the life cycle is also found in marriage. When two people come together from unique backgrounds, there will inevitably be times of misunderstanding or differences in perspective. Such times may suddenly create a sense of distance between partners who have in fact been moving closer together. The difference between a successful and an unsuccessful marriage is not in whether there are such times of tension, but in whether and how the tensions are resolved.

In today's society, an increasing number of people seem to assume that happiness and fulfillment are threatened by relationships and commitments that tie them down. As a result, many who experience marital differences elect to leave the scene of the conflict by either literally or figuratively divorcing themselves from the person they view as the source of their frustrations. Many of these in time will marry another person, only to find another set of conflicts and frustrations. Then they will again leave what they believe is the source of the conflict, the relationship, somehow believing they are entitled to live without the inconvenience and stress of dealing with points of view different from their own. Often their cry will be, "I'm entitled to a little happiness." If so, they do not realize that happiness is found through the maturing of a relationship based on commitment and self-sacrifice, not by running away from the demanding experiences that give meaning to a relationship.

Those who in this sense veer away from the demanding course of the life cycle at the first sign of pain or bitterness may never experience the humility, the soul-searching, the sensitive reaching out, and the reconciliation that come in finally understanding things from the perspective of another person, or in subordinating one's own needs to those of another. By missing these natural, though at times painful, steps, common to those who live in the enduring bonds of honest marital love, they deprive themselves of the experiences necessary to fully discover love and joy.

On the other hand, those who remain committed enough that leaving is not an alternative are likely to make remarkable discoveries about their spouses and about themselves. Significantly, these discoveries may have profound effects upon their own personal maturation and development. In this way, the overall life cycle of a good marriage, made up of multiple experiences moving through all the levels of developmental growth suggested by the life cycle of Adam and Eve, will usually bear the sweet and mellow fruit of mature personal character.

By using such commonplace examples as children and marriage, I have hoped to suggest the universal nature of the life cycle. In addition to, or perhaps as the composite effect of, these smaller-scale developmental experiences, our lives in a more general sense may resemble the Adamic pattern. We will have our times of feeling cast out of our gardens of closeness to God into the lone and dreary world. But there we also learn to distinguish good from evil by our own experience. There we encounter the thorns and weeds among which life's precious fruits are found. Without some knowledge of thorns, the very preciousness of the fruit would be lost on us.

We also earn our bread in the sweat of our faces; and in suffering we bring forth children, with some of us facing similar tragic losses in our children's lives as Adam and Eve experienced when they "lost" both Abel and Cain. And we, too, will sense the joy of our redemption, as did Eve, when the Good Shepherd who cared for her also carries us home on his shoulder. The story of Adam and Eve is our story.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985 edition). See "Lecture Sixth.''
[^2] See the Prologue.
[^3] Ibid.
