Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Two

Entering the Life Cycle

When we talk of the Atonement and our need for the Savior's help, we often assume that we enter Adam and Eve's life cycle primarily—even exclusively—by acts of sin. Frequently the same assumption is made about the entry of Adam himself into the cycle. In fact, however, we, like Adam and Eve, may enter the cycle in a variety of ways. That is why the term acts of independence is a more broadly descriptive phrase than sin as the first step in the cycle. That is also why I have used examples from everyday human experience with babies, adolescents, and marriage to demonstrate that the acts that launch us along this path are not always "sinful." Once we understand that many of life's natural experiences lead us along sorrowful paths, we will be less likely to assume that only willful sinners may feel pain and estrangement from God. We are also less likely to be surprised when we discover that even the straight and narrow path—the path we ought to be treading—is not a trouble-free high road, for it is the same path trod by Adam and Eve.

Consider three different ways of entering the life cycle: sin, errors of judgment, and adversity.

The first and most obvious act of independence from God is deliberate sin. Those who sow the seeds of sin will reap, and often force others to reap, the consequences of their defiant acts. There is a kind of harmonic ecology in the laws of nature which, when violated, reflects an ecological disturbance. With some sins, the consequences can be devastating and immediate, such as with acts of violence against other people or physical abuse to one's own body. With other sins, such as with certain forms of immorality, the negative results may manifest themselves more slowly. Often, the less tangible transgressions will more completely canker the soul, perhaps because they have longer to spread their internally destructive force before their corrosion surfaces enough that it must be faced.

The story of Alma the Younger provides a striking illustration of both the internal effects of sin and the way the second and upward half of the life cycle brings recompense. (See Alma 36.) Alma and the sons of Mosiah had gone about intentionally "seeking to destroy the church" of God, until an angel stopped them in a dramatic manifestation. (See Mosiah 27.) Alma was unable to speak or move for three days. During this time, he descended to the bottom of the life cycle. He felt alienated from God to the point of fearing his own destruction. As he began remembering his sins in detail, his soul was so "tormented with the pains of hell" that "the very thought of coming into the presence of . . . God did rack [his] soul with inexpressible horror." He wanted to cease existing. Then, while thus plunged into his dark night of the soul, he remembered the teachings of his father concerning the coming of Christ. Responding in deep and repentant humility, Alma cried, "O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me." (See Alma 36:13, 14, 18.) As the forgiveness process began, he sensed a sweet and exquisite joy.

During this experience Alma believed he glimpsed God's presence, and his "soul did long to be there." (Alma 36:22.) With the infusion of strength from such a hope, he took the healing hand of the Atoning One, who lifted him up to begin a new course of life. He knew his reconciliation with God was under way: "The knowledge which I have is of God." (Alma 36:26.) In a spirit of true restitution, he "labored without ceasing" to bring other souls to repentance, experiencing along the way the constant support of God "under trials and troubles of every kind." Thus did he understand and appreciate the "everlasting power" of God. Each step around the life cycle, including both the compensating and the life-giving roles of the Atonement, is vividly represented in Alma's experience.

Among its other lessons, Alma's story bears witness to the power of parental teachings to return in a child's memory at some critical, future time—even though a child may appear to pay little attention at all when the teaching first occurs. The story of Enos bears a second witness to this truth. As he "went to hunt beasts in the forests" by himself, "the words which [he] had often heard [his] father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into [his] heart." (Enos 1:2, 3.) We don't know, of course, how much time elapsed between the teaching and the eventual learning in the cases of Alma and Enos, but in the long run that may not matter much. Parents whose children seem to ignore their teachings in the present should never give up, for the seeds they plant may lie dormant for many seasons before they suddenly and powerfully take root.

Not everyone who follows Alma into this classic pathway is willing to take each step as it comes. Some try to short-circuit the process of repentance when they first sense the approaching pain. Some even veer entirely off the circular path to avoid that confining discomfort, never to return to the cycle at all. Others may become stuck at the bottom of the cycle in the despair of lost hope. Still others stay within the cycle but instinctively seek a shortcut, dashing across the middle of the circle shown in the life cycle diagram from "rejection" to "reconciliation" without enduring the bitterness, humility, repentance and hopeful striving experienced by Alma—both in his moment of recognition and in his subsequent life.

But there is more to the process of genuine repentance than merely preferring acceptance by God to the initial feeling of estrangement from him. That process requires us to endure the full fury of sin's bitterness, the shame that may accompany confession, and the honest humility of facing up to our own unworthiness. If we prefer to "hurry and repent" merely by switching our declared allegiance from evil to good in some quick moment of verbal acknowledgment, we will circumvent the painful but life-altering experiences that would otherwise allow us to emerge from a sinful experience stronger than when we entered it.

A second way of entering the life cycle is by making mistakes or errors of judgment. Some of these actions might also be called sins committed in ignorance. For example, we might act selfishly or insensitively in family relationships, or allow self-interest to cloud our view of another person's needs. There is usually a difference between errors of this nature and serious sin, just as there is a difference among teenagers between foolishness and sin. The law also distinguishes between intentional wrongdoing and carelessness or negligence. Criminal acts, for instance, require proof of conscious criminal intent, suggesting that our moral culpability is higher with deliberate sin than it is with foolish errors. Regardless of our intentions, however, our careless decisions can lead to consequences that harm others as seriously as would a willful decision to hurt them.

Shakespeare's tragedy King Lear illustrates how poor judgment can lead a person into the life cycle of Adam and Eve. At the beginning of the story, King Lear announces that he is ready to divide his kingdom among his three daughters. But first he wishes to hear each one express her love for him in the presence of his court. Cordelia, the only honest daughter of the three, is shocked and hurt by this procedure. She has sincerely demonstrated her love for Lear throughout her life, and believes she should "love, and be silent." In an aside to the audience, Cordelia explains, "Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave my heart into my mouth." After her two sisters have superficially declared their love for Lear in flowery terms, Cordelia has nothing to say. She cannot cheapen her love with a few easy words. The king is embarrassed, but she will not yield. In frustration and anger, he banishes Cordelia and divides the kingdom between the other two daughters. Cordelia marries the king of France and leaves the country.

Lear then learns from sad experience that the daughters who gave the lovely speeches have no real love for him. They turn him out of their houses, and he enters upon his own dark night of the soul. His earlier act of poor judgment now casts him literally and figuratively into the lone and dreary world, symbolized vividly by a famous scene that shows him staggering through a fierce storm, rejected by his own children, and trying to make sense of his life as all nature seems to rage against him.

Finally Cordelia finds Lear in the midst of his maddening agony. In a tender reconciliation scene, the king acknowledges his error. But Cordelia, perhaps a Christ figure who lifts Lear up from the bottom of the cycle toward redemption and atonement, honors him with her constant love and respect. She then boldly accompanies Lear as they seek by military force to regain his throne from the other daughters and their husbands. In the process, Cordelia loses her life, offering the ultimate sacrifice in her devotion to her father. As the tragic play ends, Lear holds Cordelia in his arms, informed by a new understanding of love through the witness of both her life and her death. Lear, like Alma, moved all the way around the circle of experience, learning, finally, but at great cost. As Shakespeare elsewhere put it:

And ruin'd love when it is built anew Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater. So I return rebuk'd to my content, And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent. (Sonnet 119.)

There is yet a third way of entering the life cycle of Adam and Eve, a way brought about not by our wrongful or careless choices, but by the very nature of mortality. Adversity seems to stalk us as an ever present potential companion, regardless of our worthiness. In the midst of these afflictions, especially because they seem totally undeserved and unnecessary, our need for the compensating power and the affirmative endowments made possible by the Atonement may be more acute than at any other time of life.

Even the most faithful among us will have moments of loneliness and rejection. From Liberty Jail, Joseph Smith cried out, "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" (D&C 121:1.) Soon afterward, the voice of the Spirit whispered to Joseph: "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:7-8.) Jeremiah had a similar struggle: "O Lord, . . . thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed. . . . Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones. . . . But the Lord is with me as a mighty terrible one." (Jeremiah 20:7-9, 11.) And even the Savior, in his hour of greatest darkness and greatest triumph, pleaded, "If thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.)

The Old Testament prophet Elijah tasted of the life cycle during his heroic efforts to fulfill his prophetic calling. In the depth of his discouragement "he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers." (1 Kings 19:4.) Elijah's climb from this dark night of the soul is depicted in Mendelssohn's oratorio Elijah, which contains an exquisite musical representation of the Lord stretching forth his hand of atonement to aid his faithful prophet in distress. While asleep under a juniper tree in exhausted depression, Elijah is visited by angels, who sing with great reassurance, "Lift thine eyes to the mountains, whence cometh help," followed by, "He, watching over Israel, slumbers not, nor sleeps." Then an angel sings to Elijah that sublime song of assurance, "O rest in the Lord; wait patiently for Him, and He shall give thee thy heart's desires."

Strengthened by this support from beyond the veil, Elijah arises and is led to Horeb, the mount of God, where the Lord reassures him in a powerful but intimate exchange. Following a great wind, an earthquake, and a fire, comes "a still small voice," the voice of the Lord, strengthening Elijah and sending him back on his prophetic way. He returns to warn the people, singing a text drawn from Isaiah: "For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but Thy kindness shall not depart from me, neither shall the covenant of Thy peace be removed."

Throughout much of Old Testament history, Jehovah was thought to be a jealous God whose protection depended upon the obedience of his people. If the people were faithful, they felt assured of his protection against any adverse force. Therefore, when trouble came it was natural to assume that the cause was personal unrighteousness, either for an individual or for Israel as a nation. But the story of Job reveals important insights about God and adversity. Job's experience demonstrates that we can enter Adam and Eve's life cycle not only because of our transgressions, and not only because of our unwise choices, but because adversity is a natural—even an important—part of life: "Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. . . . His flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn." (Job 14:1, 22.) Yet Job's friends took for granted the traditional assumption that wickedness was the only possible explanation for his afflictions and, correspondingly, that obedience would assure his prosperity: "If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up. . . . Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence, and thou shalt have plenty of silver." (Job 22:23, 25.) His wife was more willing to accept the assumption made by the gentiles that when trouble comes to Jehovah's followers, it must be because he is not powerful enough to protect them. "Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die." (Job 2:9.) Only Job sensed, even though he could not fully understand, that he could and should trust God enough to move on around the cycle, for his sorrows signified neither God's weakness nor Job's unworthiness. "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15.)

It is not always clear whether one's entry into the pattern of the life cycle is the result of sin, errors of judgment, adversity, or some other circumstance. Adam's own case is ambiguous enough to make that point. But whatever the explanation (if we can find it at all) for our entry into the natural bitterness of mortality, the very universality of such an experience may be the most important thing to understand. In seeing that broad vision, we may expand ourselves enough to learn lessons of enormous significance and meaning from our difficult experiences.

There may even be a fundamental religious necessity in the universal opportunity we have for experiences that take our own souls into some dark night. Joseph Smith taught that "a religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation." [^1] Abraham, that archetype of the principle of sacrifice, was asked to sacrifice Isaac, his child of promise, under circumstances at least as irrational as those Job faced. In Abraham's case, he was asked to be the instrumentality of his own affliction, by performing the sacrifice himself. This alone placed God's request of Abraham beyond human ability to understand. In addition, to sacrifice Isaac was to destroy in one stroke all hope of fulfilling God's glorious promise that through the son of Abraham and Sarah the everlasting covenant would continue. Thus the image of Abraham standing over Isaac on the altar with a raised knife represents the ultimate leap of religious faith. There he stood, simultaneously at the height of faithful obedience and at the depth of personal anguish.

Then, by pure grace—in this instance through a ram in the thicket—God released Abraham from His awful commandment. In this striking symbol of the Atonement, God led Abraham into his soul's dark night, then transformed the experience into a moment of light. Abraham's willingness to give more than his own life made him worthy to receive the additional promise that through his seed all nations of the earth would be blessed, meaning the birth of Christ. Thus did "the father of faith" make his own way around the life cycle, accepting the Lord's sacrifice by virtue of his own willingness to sacrifice everything, thus reinforcing Adam's pattern of sacrifice for his posterity. Abraham also entered the cycle not through his own wrongdoing or misjudgment, nor even through nature's adversities, but through the express invitation of God.

Whether we descend into the dark night of our own soul through transgression, unwise choices, natural opposition, the invitation of God, or some mixture of causes, the crucial issue is whether we can in that experience yield our broken hearts contritely to God. This willingness to sacrifice all things must reach broadly and deeply enough to include the sacrifice of our sins, our vanity, our self-esteem, and our love for worldly comforts. Sometimes we must also sacrifice our determination to understand to our rational satisfaction why we should be lost in the darkness. When the light of the Savior's atoning power finally pierces that darkness, compensating for our bitterness and carrying us on up the cycle to reconciliation and reunity with God, the blessing of understanding will finally be ours, one result of "arriving where we started and knowing the place for the first time." [^2]

Remember once more the parable of the lost sheep. I was once in a gospel doctrine class in which we discussed the many scriptural references to sheep and lambs. We read the Savior's words: "I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." (John 10:11.) "Doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?" (Matthew 18:12.) At the end of the class, a woman I knew well was asked to say the closing prayer. She was a kind and faithful woman who lived with the daily agony of caring for her elderly husband, who was a victim of a debilitating disease. He was completely and permanently disoriented and unable to care for himself. Those who must care for loved ones in such a condition carry burdens that outsiders can never understand. In her prayer, this woman expressed gratitude for the gospel, the Church, and the relationships among our class members. She prayed for the lost sheep who need the gospel but do not accept it. Then she said with both courage and humility, "And help us, too, Father, when we sometimes are lost."

Her words caused me to think of another older woman who has experienced much sorrow in her life. After losing several close family members in death, she developed a painful illness that required surgery. It was to be a risky operation, involving vital nerves and organs. She knew of the risks and worried about them. The night before entering the hospital, she asked for a priesthood blessing, saying, "I am afraid. I want to know that everything will be all right."

The lost sheep are not just the people who don't come to church. The lost sheep are those two good and loyal women. The lost sheep is a mother who goes down into the valley of the dark shadows to bring forth children. The lost sheep is a young person, far away from home and faced with loneliness and temptation. The lost sheep is a person who has just lost a critically needed job; a business person in financial distress; a new missionary in a foreign culture; a man just called to be bishop; a married couple who are misunderstanding each other; a grandmother whose children are forgetting her. I am the lost sheep. You are the lost sheep. "All we like sheep have gone astray." (Isaiah 53:6; emphasis added.)

The times of feeling lost are not always times when we have wandered from the straight and narrow path. Not at all. We may be precisely where the Lord would have us be.

Now we may find richer meaning in a little girl's story about a lost sheep. "There was once a shepherd who had a hundred sheep. He thought some of them were lost and so he counted: ' . . . ninety-seven, ninety-eight, ninety-nine.' A little sheep was lost. Far off in the rocks and bushes was the little sheep. He was frightened and lonely. The shepherd went to find him: 'Little she-eep . . . ?' The little sheep heard him and was glad. The shepherd came and picked him up. He carried him on his shoulder back to his mommy. Then he counted again: ' . . . ninety-eight, ninety-nine, one hundred.' All the sheep were safely home."

Consider the lines from Harry Rowe Shelley's "The King of Love my Shepherd Is":

The king of love my shepherd is Whose goodness faileth never. I nothing lack if I am his And he is mine forever.

Perverse and foolish oft I strayed, But yet in love he sought me. And on his shoulder gently laid And home rejoicing brought me.

We may stray through sin, we may stray through being "perverse and foolish," or we may be blown astray by the stiff winds of adversity. Whatever the source of our wandering, we are likely to have our own deep experience with Adam and Eve's life cycle, leaving God's presence for the lone and dreary world with the hope of returning to him when someday we are ready. If we in that dark tunnel do all we can, we will see at the tunnel's end the light of him who forgives, sweetens, and makes recompense for all our troubles. When we do return, offering our broken heart to him whose broken heart binds up our own, we will understand life in ways we could not have understood before leaving. We will then be conscious of the difference between our Father's identity and ours, conscious of our independence, conscious of our dependence. Then we will understand what it means to say, "I am his" and "he is mine forever."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Blessed art thou, Joseph. Behold, thou art little; wherefore hearken unto the words of thy brother, Nephi.'' (2 Nephi 3:25.)
[^2] Friedrich Zaugg, "How I Got to Zion,'' Der Stern, vol. 34 (1902), page 60.
