Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Three

Opposition and Joy

The ultimate purpose of the Atonement is to ensure our happiness and joy. But the Lord achieves that purpose in our lives through the interaction of conflicting forces that, at first, seem determined to rob us of the joy we seek. Paradoxically, our purest joy emerges from the natural tension between those opposing forces.

Father Lehi taught his son Jacob that "to answer the ends of the atonement" God has affixed "punishment" and "happiness" in "opposition" to each other as alternative consequences for "the ends of the law which the Holy One hath given." (2 Nephi 2:10.) This same opposition is reflected in the relationship between the two trees in the Garden of Eden: "even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter." (2 Nephi 2:15.) We find such opposition everywhere, for "it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." (2 Nephi 2:11; emphasis added.)

Lehi's teachings on this subject emphasize the need for choice and agency, but they also illuminate the way in which opposing forces combine to give meaning to righteous choices. Without the taste of bitter in our experience, the taste of sweet is lost on us—we are without context, without a frame of reference, and even the sweet things of life may be without meaning or purpose for us. Thus, Adam and Eve needed to experience the "misery" of mortality in order to comprehend the sweet taste of joy. If they had remained in Eden, "they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." (2 Nephi 2:23; emphasis added.)

Perhaps because of the way this grand paradox gives perspective to the bitter moments in our daily experience, Lehi introduced his topic by referring to Jacob's brothers' "rudeness" toward him. Then he said, "Nevertheless, Jacob, . . . thou knowest the greatness of God; and he shall consecrate thine afflictions for thy gain." (2 Nephi 2:2; emphasis added.) And after he spoke to Jacob, Lehi shared a poignant, personal example of this theme—a father's tender joy in his small, last-born son, who was "born in the wilderness of . . . afflictions; yea, in the days of . . . greatest sorrow." (2 Nephi 3:1.) [^1]

Lehi's reference to the "rudeness" of Jacob's brothers suggests a specific form of "opposition" that is more sharply focused than our typical approaches to the subject of adversity. To be "afflicted" by the "rudeness" of others does not suggest a major tragedy. Rather, it suggests those minor, never-ending afflictions in which we are likely to discover the naturalness—and, hence, the meaning—of opposition in all things.

Opposition of this kind can show up when we least expect it—such as when we think we have just finished with it. For example, many students who enroll at LDS Church-owned universities and colleges are caught off guard when they discover opposition in what they believed would be a trouble-free environment. "Christianity without tears" is what Aldous Huxley called the state some students hope for. One manifestation of this pattern begins when students must work their way through considerable opposition in order to qualify themselves to be admitted to a Church-owned institution. It is not uncommon for LDS young people to experience traumatic "withdrawal" symptoms as they cut their ties with high school friends (both members and nonmembers of the Church) who are not sympathetic to the idea of going to a place such as Ricks College or BYU—which to some friends seems all too much like entering a monastery or a convent.

Sometimes these young people are truly heroic in making the life-style changes they need. I have great admiration for those who walk away from the dazzling lure of worldly friends and enticements and then make deeply felt promises to parents, bishops, and to their Father in Heaven. They often come to these campuses on the wings of new life, bringing a momentum and a determination that results in permanent changes for the better, not only in their own lives, but also in the lives of their roommates and classmates.

But frequently, just when they believe they've left their opposition behind—as if they had launched their rocket ships all the way through the backward pull of gravity—these students discover that opposition has stowed away on board, for it crawls out of the closet when they have hardly unpacked their bags. There may be unstable roommates who have not yet made a genuine break from their habits of the past; there may be disappointments with what appeared to be ideal arrangements for housing or classes; or, surprisingly, there may be new forms of temptation to which the unsuspecting are especially vulnerable when they let down their normal guard. Some have the mistaken impression that when another LDS student wants them to do something questionable, it must be all right because they're all back in the Garden of Eden, having forsaken the lone and dreary world. But if our Church campuses are the Garden of Eden, they unfortunately still have their share of serpents.

Sometimes the problems students face are more mundane, but they can still be discouraging and surprising for those who attend a Church college to escape opposition, not to find more of it. (But that is precisely the point: opposition is in all things, so we may find it in its most interesting forms exactly when we think we have just overcome enough opposition to leave it all behind.) One fall evening during my term as president of Ricks College, I received a phone call from a student's father. He was calling to complain about a problem his daughter had encountered in trying to register for her classes with our new computerized registration system. I explained that our system was new and might still have a few "bugs" in it, but said we would do all we could to solve her problem. Then he said, clearly frustrated, "Well, I might have expected computer foul-ups at another college, but Ricks is a Church school!" I replied that we must buy our computers at the same place as anyone else. He was not greatly comforted.

New converts may also be vulnerable to unexpected opposition. Having overcome many forms of resistance to reach the point of baptism and having at last found the true church (whose members are even called "saints"), they can experience disillusionment when they discover the imperfections in other Church members.

I once read the brief journal of a young man who joined the Church in Switzerland in the late 1800s. After sensing the enthusiasm of his fellow Latter-day Saints about gathering to Zion, he jumped at the chance to accept the invitation of a Church member in Utah who was looking for a young man to help on his farm. He joined a small company of Swiss immigrants headed for Utah, leaving his family in his green and fertile homeland, promising to make all needed arrangements for their eventual move to the promised new land. After a long, long journey by ship and by train, he had a mixup in meeting his host in Ogden, but finally made other arrangements, traveling two days by horse and buggy to the host's farm. When he arrived at his new home, the young man, fresh from the lush geenery of Switzerland, wonderingly examined the parched and sparsely vegetated desert. He looked around at the humble pioneer cabins and then asked in utter disbelief, "Is this Zion?" [^2]

In time he came to understand the words of his host: "Yes, here we are building Zion." But until then, he grappled with the shock of facing unexpected opposition, for he thought he had overcome his only real opposition just to get there.

Eliza R. Snow addressed the lines of a pioneer hymn to those who were coming to Zion in the belief that they had left all the afflictions of the world behind them. Her words are also appropriate for new students at a Church school, or for those entering a new marriage, a new location, or almost any other highly promising new experience. (The song's title, "Think Not, When You Gather to Zion," aptly describes the vain hope of some new students at Church schools, who come expecting somehow that they won't have to study quite as hard as might be required elsewhere.)

Think not when you gather to Zion Your troubles and trials are through, That nothing but comfort and pleasure Are waiting in Zion for you. Think not when you gather to Zion, That all will be holy and pure; That fraud and deception are banished, And confidence wholly secure. Think not when you gather to Zion, The prize and the victory won. Think not that the warfare is ended, The work of salvation is done. No, no; for the great prince of darkness A tenfold exertion will make, When he sees you go to the fountain, Where freely the truth you may take.

There is opposition in Zion, or at a Church college, because there is opposition in all things. A great deal of significant learning, about spiritual and personal matters as well as matters of the intellect, comes from working through stressful, frustrating opposition. If that is true, then coming to a serious place of learning (such as a college) really ought to bring us in contact with potentially productive opposition.

Opposition may take us by surprise in other experiences made memorable partly by their implied promise of better times ahead. Consider the example of marriage. Many young people assume if they can just get married, all their problems will be solved. One new bride reportedly said to her mother on her wedding day, "Oh, Mom, I'm so happy! I'm at the end of my troubles." "Yes, dear," replied the wise mother, "but which end?"

I think of a young couple standing on a soggy lawn at the Idaho Falls Temple one beautiful spring day to have their pictures taken following their temple marriage. It was a picturesque scene, until the groom inadvertently stepped on the ruffled hem of the bride's white gown, mashing it into the wet, muddy grass. She gently asked him to move his foot, but he was too happy to hear her. She needed to speak with more intensity and both were embarrassed. Then they had little choice but to stand through the reception a short time later, hoping to conceal the smudge that suggested, symbolically, that even a temple marriage has its share of opposition—from the beginning.

My wife, Marie, once recalled her own experience with the surprise of finding opposition in becoming married and having her first baby:

I remember our June wedding day as such a happy occasion. I think of our first summer, when we both worked at Jackson Lake Lodge in Wyoming, in the shadows of those majestic Teton mountains on whose tops we felt we were sitting—because we, as most newlyweds do, felt on top of the world. My memory is happily quite selective about the parts it leaves out—like the fact that my husband was sick much of the summer, or the fact that our lives were turned upside down by the unexpected death of his father a few months after our marriage. Or I think of our experiences with the question of when to start our family. It was only after much soul searching, fasting, prayer, and reading the statements of Church leaders, that we decided we really should not wait to begin having children. After overcoming considerable opposition in making that decision, we then—to our great surprise—began to discover what Lehi was talking about when he said that if Adam and Eve had remained in the Garden and had had no children, "they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery." (2 Nephi 2:23.) That scripture seems to say, if they had had no children, they would have known no misery. Only the parents of two-year-olds and teenagers can understand that. But notice—it also says that without children and misery they would have had no joy. How important is joy? Within two verses, Lehi tells us "men are, that they might have [that very] joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.)

In my case, here is what all that meant in a down-to-earth sense. After making the great leap of faith involved in deciding to have our first child whenever Mother Nature wanted to send him or her, how was the joyful news of pregnancy made manifest? I was sick. Odd way to be showered with "joy." For part of each day for several months, I felt one degree of terrible or another. It was morning sickness "ad nauseum." Then about four weeks before delivery, I threatened to miscarry, so I spent a number of days in bed, which seriously complicated the classes I was both taking and teaching. But when the big day finally came, even the hours of labor were worth it, as I lay there in my hospital bed holding that beautiful little boy in my arms, his reddish hair already hinting at his temperament. I thought, "Nothing could be more wonderful than this. Surely the world stops for such a beautiful baby." I can remember being shocked when I heard that another mother had another baby just minutes after I had had ours. It seemed our experience had been unique, nonrepeatable. The day after the baby was born, I was cuddling him happily in my hospital room when my doctor came in. He was my uncle and quite a salty character. He looked at us and said cheerily, "How does it feel to have the easiest part over with?" "Easiest part?" I asked. "Why, sure," he replied. "It's the next twenty years that are going to be tough."

Now, almost exactly twenty years later, I understand. After all the diapers, the bruises, the washing, the cheering, the cleaning up, the pleading, the nail-biting, the crying, the laughing, the pacing, and the praying, I understand. I feel about raising children the way Ammon felt about missionary work. "And this is the account of Ammon and his brethren, their journeyings in the land of Nephi, their sufferings in the land, their sorrows, and their afflictions, and their incomprehensible joy." (Alma 28:8.) [^3]

There is Lehi's paradox: "He shall consecrate thine afflictions for thy gain." There is a link between sorrow, toil, affliction, and "incomprehensible joy." Otherwise, there may only be innocence—"having no joy, for they knew no misery." (2 Nephi 2:23.)

Missionary work is, like marriage, a natural place to find unexpected but potent opposition. The opposition usually begins in the decision to go. A young man who was struggling to decide between marriage and a mission said to his teacher, "I'm not sure she wants me to go. I can't stand to take the chance of losing her. What if we decide to get married instead?" Then he felt a prophet's solemn words reverberate and echo between his ears and in his heart: "Every worthy young man should fulfill a mission. Every worthy young man . . ." Eventually this young man overcame the opposition and left to serve a mission. I admire the faith of young sweethearts who decide to trust the Lord in that way. It is not easy for them. But even when they find the courage to go, that, like having the baby, may be the easy part.

The Missionary Training Center is a real surprise for missionaries who have never had the experience of sustained intellectual effort. They are likely to work harder, with more intensity and longer hours, than they've ever worked in their lives. They learn firsthand about opposition in the learning process, even while pursuing a righteous path. Yet the success rate and the achievement levels among missionaries in the MTC are truly miraculous. Missionaries are typically on a well- earned "high" as they leave for their fields of labor all over the world. But opposition comes right along to the airport and the rest of the journey. There is opposition in all good things, not just in bad things.

During my own missionary days in Germany, I discovered the mission-field version of opposition—we had our share of rainstorms, dogs, sad news from home, feisty ministers, concerned relatives, and problem missionaries. But few things hurt as much as losing a good investigator—they were so rare. Once, after weeks of fruitless, frustrating tracting in a new city, we found a golden family. They were a handsome young couple with two small children. How well they had received the first three lessons. How warm they were each time we came to see them. What a contribution we knew they would make to the struggling little branch. They seemed destined to become an ideal Latter-day Saint family.

The night the fourth discussion was scheduled, we went bouncing up the stairs to the front door. Our anticipation of this evening had sustained us through days of discouragement. We rang the bell cheerfully. There was no answer. We rang again. Still no answer. We knocked. How strange it seemed. The lights in the house were on when we arrived. We stepped back from the house, threw a little pebble at a lighted upstairs window, and called, "It's us, the missionaries. We're here for the appointment!" The light upstairs went out. Then the other lights went out. All was dark and silent. In shocked disbelief, we looked at each other and then began to cry. As we trudged back to our bicycles, I felt real pain in my heart. "How can they do this to us?" I said to my companion, choking back the tears. He added, "How can they do this to themselves?" It was one of those sad and lonely missionary nights when all the pep talks about having a positive mental attitude fade away like so much salesman's chatter. At such quiet times missionaries can face stiff opposition, feeling unloved, unneeded, and personally rejected.

But disappointments of this kind only sharpened my appreciation for those rare moments when we did see a few wonderful people not only join the Church but partake fully of its blessings over time. Not long ago, just such a family and two of their five children were in our home. They had come from Germany to pick up their son, who had just completed a mission in northern Utah. Their oldest daughter had served a mission in northern Germany, the mother has been a Relief Society president, and the father has been a bishop. We enjoyed a long, refreshing visit, sharing our memories of their conversion experience. We talked about our children and our experiences in the Church. I was stirred deeply by realizing what the gospel can mean to good people after they have enjoyed its long-term fruits and blessings over a generation of time. As we shook hands when they left for home, our eyes met, and the meaning of our experiences together flooded my heart with sweet feelings. The words of the Lord's promise echoed through my mind. After the disappointments and frustrations of my missionary experience, enough time had passed to bring a ripening perspective, and I was beginning to understand that "if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance . . . and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" (D&C 18:15.)

Another area in which we sometimes experience natural opposition is the development of testimony. It is not uncommon for new investigators or new converts to be surprised by the patience and the effort required to nurture the seeds of testimony. Actually, most of the questions we face as our testimonies grow are signs that we are learning more, not less, about the truth. I once heard Elder Theodore M. Burton explain that when we first realize we have a testimony, the amount of spiritual truth we know could be symbolized by drawing and coloring in a tiny circle about the size of a pinhead. As our understanding progresses, the circle grows. When our knowledge develops to a certain point of maturity, the circle may be the size of a coin—many times bigger than our first little pinhead of knowledge. When we compare those two colored circles on a piece of paper, the tiny testimony and the larger testimony are surrounded by large areas of white, representing the unknown. As our knowledge grows in relation to the unknown, something unexpected happens. In the larger circle, the much longer circumference around the edge of the circle now puts the testimony in much greater contact with the unknown. Thus, there are many new points at which questions can arise. The more we know, the more potential opposition we face. But it is through the "growing pains" of dealing with that opposition that our knowledge and understanding increase geometrically.

Based on his extended study of the subject, a college student began having some questions about Church history. The more he studied, the more he learned; yet, because historical records are inherently incomplete, he also kept finding new questions to which there were inadequate answers. Because he was unable to find a complete answer to every question that came up, he became very frustrated. He began thinking that if he couldn't solve every historical puzzle he found, perhaps he was violating his integrity to remain active in the Church. At the same time, he loved the Church and had had a sacred experience on his mission that gave him a deep and enduring faith in the reality of Jesus Christ.

After months of struggling, he decided to put aside his unresolved questions and exercise his faith. He would simply have a believing heart. His faith began to grow again, not so much from new information as from new experiences with established gospel principles and with other people. He began to share the gospel with a friend or two at work and accepted a teaching assignment in his student ward. He found that his attempts to help others understand the gospel increased his own understanding. His renewed appreciation for the many "knowns" in his testimony soon outweighed the "unknowns," and the joy he had earlier felt as a missionary began coming back to him.

Fortunately, he refused to give up when he met opposition. He learned through his struggles and grew stronger. In time a few pieces of the historical puzzle fell into place, but the real turning point came when he stopped being so concerned about his own troubles and began trying to help other people with their troubles. Then he was experiencing the fruits of living the gospel.

Consider what life would be like if we could avoid the opposition we find all around us. If Adam and Eve had remained in the Garden of Eden, protected from the opposition and problems of the lone and dreary world, they would have remained forever "innocent." What does the word innocent suggest about the meaning of a Garden-of-Eden kind of life? A good friend once said to me as we parted company, "In case I don't see you again, have a . . . nice life." That is just what we sometimes yearn for—one nice day after another, all adding up to the glorious conclusion of a "nice life." When we are asked at the judgment bar how our life on earth was and what it all means, the following would not be a particularly satisfying answer: "Oh, it was nice. No big problems, really. It was a very nice life."

We once had two beautiful long-haired kittens at our house. Because of the way we pampered and spoiled them, they were living in the Garden of Eden. And they loved it—all that food and warmth and brushing and tender loving care. They didn't even mind being dressed up in Cabbage Patch doll clothes, which was about the worst "opposition" they had to endure. One Saturday morning our kittens (and some of our children) were relaxing sleepily in front of the television set, watching cartoons and purring lightly, enjoying their nice life. As her mother began ordering the television turned off and giving out assignments to the children for Saturday morning housework, our seven-year-old daughter said, "I don't want to do my work. I would rather be a kitten."

Adam and Eve left the Garden of Eden so that "they might have joy." Not nice days. Not yawning and stretching and lounging in front of a cozy television set throughout eternity. After Adam and Eve had been in the lone and dreary world long enough to get some idea of what it meant to "eat bread by the sweat of thy face" and to "bring forth children in sorrow," an angel taught them the plan of salvation. By then they had enough understanding to appreciate what they were taught. Adam said, "Because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy." (Moses 5:10.)

Opposition is a central part of mortal life. It is a primary difference between what life would have been in the Garden of Eden and what it is in mortality. It is the difference between being green, untested, and inexperienced versus being ripe, seasoned, tested, and having a mature perspective. As one of Shakespeare's characters in King Lear says to his father after they have undergone prolonged, terrible opposition, "Ripeness is all." Ripeness. Fullness. Richness. How different from innocence; for if there is only innocence, there is but little meaning.

The most important things we can learn in this mortal probation are learned the slow way, through practice, through trial and error. This kind of learning actually depends on opposition. Robert Browning understood something about such a learning process: "There is an answer to the passionate longing of the heart for fullness . . .: live in all things outside yourself by love and you will have joy. That is the life of God; it ought to be our life. In Him it is accomplished and perfect; but in all created things, it is a lesson learned slowly against difficulty." [^4]

In going off to a Church college, joining the Church, marrying, having children, or serving a mission, we must often overcome tremendous odds even to embark upon the experience. For that reason, it is only natural to believe that once we have won the right to the experience, we should live happily ever after. Experiences such as these may surely lead toward living joyfully, but joy—like grace—comes "after all we can do." Indeed, joy—like grace—may well come in the midst of contrary experience, for it is a real part of life. Joy is not an alternative to opposition; it is part of a compound that includes opposition.

We find in the life of President Spencer W. Kimball one further, poignant illustration of that specialized kind of opposition that haunts us even when by all believable odds we should be far beyond it. President Kimball endured a lifelong struggle against physical opposition of many kinds. He experienced so many serious medical problems that he liked to quote a poem about his "friend, pain," because pain had taught him so much.

Pain stayed so long I said to him today, "I will not have you with me any more." I stamped my foot and said, "Be on your way," And paused there, startled at the look he wore. "I, who have been your friend," he said to me, "I, who have been your teacher—all you know Of understanding love, of sympathy, And patience, I have taught you. Shall I go?" He spoke the truth, this strange unwelcome guest; I watched him leave, and knew that he was wise. He left a heart grown tender in my breast, He left a far, clear vision in my eyes. I dried my tears, and lifted up a song— Even for one who'd tortured me so long. [^5]

President Kimball knew firsthand about joy in the midst of opposition.

Elder Russell M. Nelson had an experience with President Kimball that gives insight into President Kimball's attitude. Elder Nelson, then a renowned heart surgeon, was asked to examine President Kimball in 1972. Then President of the Council of the Twelve, President Kimball desperately needed open-heart surgery; but Dr. Nelson told the First Presidency that because of his advanced age, there was no medical assurance that the surgery would be successful. When the First Presidency told Elder Kimball they felt he should have the operation despite the risks, Elder Kimball told them his greatest fear was that he might emerge from the surgery in some partially incapacitated state—alive, but unable to do his work. President Kimball's entire life had been a study in conscientious devotion. Carrying more than his share of the load had always been of utmost importance to him.

Following the counsel of President Harold B. Lee, President Kimball submitted to the risky surgery. The Brethren gave Dr. Nelson a special blessing. During the surgery, which proceeded flawlessly, Dr. Nelson received a strong spiritual impression that Elder Kimball would one day be President of the Church. For more than a dozen years after that miraculously successful operation, President Kimball continued on, against all odds, raising his cancer-stricken voice like a beacon in the night.

But he did not live happily ever after. For the last few years of life, he was medically unable to speak to the membership of the Church or to go consistently about his other duties. That which he had feared most came to pass: opposition prevented him from carrying his full share of the load. How his heart must have ached! He must have wondered why the Lord spared his life so many times but then gave him such great responsibility without maintaining his ability to do what his duty seemed to require. If someone as faithful and as "ripe" as President Kimball continued to experience opposition, it is not surprising that the rest of us must as well.

I sensed a very personal kind of love in the tender feelings of Church members for President Kimball during the years of his affliction. There was an appreciative longing for the days when the piercing quality of that unique voice sounded such a clear call at general conference; a kind of loving admiration for his courage—almost of the intimate kind felt only among members of the same family. There was more than a trace of joy and meaning in all this—the kind of meaning that comes from having been together in combat, the kind of joy borne of gratitude for a friend who touched and changed one's life. Taken in such a personal and compassionate context, richer meaning was given to his counsel over earlier years about missions, cleanliness, repentance, and the miracles of both forgiveness and access to the priesthood. The members of the Church were happy and sad at the same time; full of hope yet full of sorrow. It was a mixture of opposing feelings, as God consecrated our afflictions for our gain.

The nature of true joy as part of the rich but rugged texture of reality is reflected in the music of a great composer such as Johannes Brahms, whose exquisite melody lines are hard to pin down or capture. This kind of music—as distinguished from pop tunes—is a more complete and candid reflection of life, mirroring its rich depth and complexity. With the uncertainty and opposition we find in our earthly experience, our moments of joy and happiness—like Brahms' melodies—may rise only briefly beyond the surface and soar fleetingly toward the sun, always against the background of inescapable reality, and then they plunge back into the seas of life—not to be buried, but to be mixed with and enriched by all else that we experience.

In the sad closing scene of the musical Camelot, King Arthur finally understands that all is not lost. The emergence of a young boy who believes in the ideals of Camelot shows the power of education: The idea of Camelot will live on even though the physical kingdom is at war. Speaking of this discovery, Arthur says to his friend Pellinore that our lives are like the water that forms the great waves of the sea, moving and swelling for the most part in darkness, but occasionally a few drops break through the air, and as they are caught in the sunlight, some of them sparkle: "Some of them do sparkle, Pelly." And so he sings: "For one brief shining moment, there was a spot—of enlightenment, peace, and security—and that was Camelot." That it happened once offers assurance that it can happen again—perhaps, someday, permanently.

This elusive quality of true joy suggests rather well the conditions of mortality as we know them. The moments of supreme happiness in our lives are not really represented by the carefree, romping frolics of our childhood. Joy is not superficial or cute. It is, rather, represented by moments of understanding and recognition and appreciation that derive their meaning from the backdrop of daily reality, with all its drudgery, its responsibilities, its frustrations, and its tensions. Joy mixed with opposition is like gold mixed with ore. Somehow, our joyful experiences mean more when we are fully conscious of the alternatives and the contrasts that surround us. We prize the sweet more when we have tasted the bitter. We appreciate our health when we see sickness. We truly love peace when we know the ugliness of war. These contrasts do not deter our idealism. Properly understood, they only make the moments of true joy worth waiting for. In this way, punishment and happiness are in opposition—both "affixed to answer the ends of the atonement." (2 Nephi 2:10.) And the ultimate end of the Atonement, surrounded by such opposition, is "the great plan of happiness." (Alma 42:8.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Time, February 5, 1973, page 35.
[^2] "O My Father,'' Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), number 292.
[^3] Marie Hafen, address delivered at Ricks College Devotional, January 15, 1985.
[^4] Robert Browning, "Paracelsus,'' emphasis added.
[^5] Quoted from an unknown author in Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), page 99.
