Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Five

Two Cheers for Excellence

I am not very enthusiastic about lectures and books on "success" and "excellence" among the Latter-day Saints. Much of that material misunderstands, and therefore does not value, the place of apparently "unsuccessful" experience in helping us taste the fruits of both the tree of knowledge and the tree of life. When the bitterness of Adam and Eve's life cycle and the sweetness of the Atonement are working together for our good far beneath the surface, our most sanctifying life experiences will not always look like "success."

I strongly agree with Elder Richard L. Evans, who once told a small Church audience in which I sat, "It is good to be faithful. But how much better it is to be faithful and competent." I share this conviction to the extent of doubting that one is truly faithful if he is less competent than he could be. I know how the leaders of the Church feel about the quality of what is done in the Church Educational System. For instance, I felt the intense concern of President Marion G. Romney about professional quality when the Church created the J. Reuben Clark Law School at BYU. For President Romney, questions by law students about a choice between spiritual excellence and intellectual excellence made no sense at all. Of course, spiritual excellence came first; but to him, as to his great mentor, J. Reuben Clark, intellectual excellence was simply part of abundant spiritual excellence, and religious devotion was not an acceptable excuse for professional mediocrity.

Yet I feel an ever-deepening uneasiness about our uncritically accepting the assumptions of the Yankee ethic of success, which can be so competitive, self-centered, and superficial. That is why I have only two cheers for excellence. I have reservations not because I believe it justifiable for us to exert less than our finest efforts; rather, I fear that without a wise perspective, an unqualified commitment to "goals" and "excellence" can distort our understanding of certain long-term principles about life and its larger purposes—even if we do put forth great effort.

Consider some examples: I recently talked with a young woman who had unselfishly worked hard at being a good wife and mother through several difficult years of marriage. But now the marriage was breaking down. Her husband had developed emotional problems that seriously threatened the spiritual (and at times even the physical) survival of the woman and her children. Surrounded by many questions, she asked the one that haunted her most: "How could this have happened, when I have tried so hard to do everything the Church has taught me to do?"

Then I talked to a man who had recently joined the Church and found shortly after his conversion that he had a terminal illness. He too had done everything within his power to live as he should, making many sacrifices because of his wholehearted acceptance of the gospel. With his newly found hopes for life now cut so bluntly short, he could not make sense of it. He wondered aloud, "What have I done wrong?"

One day a young father who had a learning disability and little education asked me a question that he said had worried him for years: "Do you have to be smart and have a good education to get into the celestial kingdom?" I knew him to be a genuine, decent, and hardworking person. He had never tasted of success the way most people measure it and probably never would. As he waited for my answer, I noticed the tears beginning to fill his eyes.

To these people, the high-sounding goal of excellence is not so much a source of motivation as it is a source of frustration and discouragement. They have worked as hard as their circumstances allowed, but the rewards they thought were supposed to accompany great effort somehow eluded them. Not only were they confused about not being rewarded; their failure to achieve had produced feelings of total personal failure.

At a more general level, from the time we are school children, we grow up with grading curves of one kind or another. Because curves by definition have very few real "winners," most people develop a sense of basic inferiority. Most of us aren't among the top 10 percent of anything. Our disappointments range from being the last chosen in a sandlot game to seeing our income range officially designated as "lower middle class" to seeing somebody else always chosen as Mother of the Year.

Yet something fascinates the American public with being Number One. Hugh Nibley has noted that many of us would rather be Number One in hell than a doorkeeper in the House of the Lord. Or, as Satan put it in Milton's Paradise Lost, "To reign is worth ambition. Better to reign in Hell than to serve in Heaven."

The competitive environment is all around us. For instance, our younger children were once perpetually confused over the state and national "top ten" rankings among teams in high schools, colleges, and the pros. But they picked up the central message: If you're not "ranked," you must not count for much. So when our sixth grader's basketball team completed its city league schedule without winning a game, all our well meaning advice about the value of learning to play the game fell on deaf and droopy ears. I was reminded of the poem a depressed junior high student wrote after his team got trounced in the district tournament, and certain players' parents made it clear what incompetent wretches the team members were. Said his last line, in a mildly cynical turn of Grantland Rice's old phrase, "They cared not how we played the game, but if we won or lost."

So I cannot help wondering what we are doing to each other in the Church these days, as we subtly but continually reinforce in one another the assumption that tangible and visible "rewards" and "success" are promised those who do what is right or even those who work their hardest. Where does that assumption come from? It certainly is not taught by the gospel. On the contrary, the gospel of Jesus Christ teaches that the lone and dreary world of mortality is soaked through with adversity and trouble—not to torture us, but to teach us.

The gospel promises rewards, but "not as the world giveth, give I unto you." (John 14:27.) Rather, "He who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come." (D&C 59:23.) By contrast, those whose vision is limited to this world measure their success only by being "seen of men." Of such the Savior said, "They have their reward." (Matthew 6:5.)

Despite these plain teachings, the assumptions of contemporary America's success ethic are deeply and powerfully ingrained among many members of the Church. This may be partly the influence of history, as our acceptance of these attitudes has relatively recent origins.

During the first sixty or seventy years after the organization of the Church, there were profound distinctions between the culture of the Latter-day Saints and the culture of America. The Saints had their own ideas, not only about theology but about the total cultural environment, including economic, social, and political systems. During the nineteenth-century heyday of Yankee individualism, "survival of the fittest" was in all its brutality a cherished way of American life. But in the mountain lands of the west, the Great Basin Kingdom of that era was as isolated culturally as it was geographically. Indeed, the Church and its people had been rejected by the melting pot called America in large measure because they would not melt into the pattern of Yankee values. Economically, the Saints sought a deliberate isolation, stressing cooperation among themselves while rejecting the nation's every-man-for-himself brand of free enterprise. Politically, both the City of Joseph Smith (Nauvoo) and the Great Basin of Brigham Young sought a harmony between religious and political life that was never understood by outsiders. Socially, the practice of polygamy became the last straw to a noncomprehending American nation, although it only symbolized a far more fundamental misunderstanding.

After being pushed to the brink of destruction in a story too long to recount here, the Saints ultimately embraced their fellow Americans and worked very hard after the turn of the century to dispel former impressions of their excessive peculiarity. During the twentieth century, the Church and its members became increasingly accepted as a legitimate part of "Main Street, U.S.A." American members of the Church today are often considered among the most ardent defenders of success-oriented, entrepreneurial values.

In some sense, the apparent assimilation of many Church members into the materialistic society of twentieth-century America parallels the assimilation of ancient Israel following its captivity into Babylonian culture. At first the Jewish captives longed to return home to the land and ways of their fathers. But after a time, they had become sufficiently integrated into the larger culture that when the opportunity finally came to return home, most preferred to stay. As observed by the Jewish historian, Ernest Renan:

Many of the Israelites . . . found themselves very comfortable in Babylonia. Thanks to their practical dexterity, they were able to find a thousand ways of amassing a fortune in a city devoted to luxury and pleasure. . . . They were not at all tempted to . . . return to a narrow strip of land condemned . . . to remain eternally poor. [^1]

Similar feelings might be experienced by some Church members today, who may already be so attached to the ways of modern Babylon that they would be unwilling to leave it.

The competitive ethic of personal success and achievement is one of the chief characteristics of U.S. culture. It is not, therefore, surprising that this set of values would creep into the contemporary attitudes of Latter-day Saints through their embracing of Yankee traditions in the twentieth century. For that reason, a brief glance at the origins of the success ethic in building the American character will help us understand what the ethic is, where it came from, and perhaps what is wrong with it.

The American tradition of worshiping at the altar of excellence is as current as the latest national football poll or hit recording, and as old as the ancient Greeks, whose values America inherited through the European Renaissance: "The central ethical idea in Homer can be found in the instructions that the father of Achilles gives to his son when he sends him off to fight at Troy: 'Always be the best and distinguished above others.' " [^2]

The more recent source of this competitive heritage is the Puritan ethic, thought by many historians to have fueled much of the achievement and the rugged individualism of American history. According to the Calvinist theology on which Puritan thought was based, "the elect" of God were chosen totally by predestined divine grace, while all other people remained totally depraved. Because of the antiauthoritarianism that ran through Calvin's teachings, it was not the place of the clergy, civil authorities, or any other human being to judge who had been selected by God's will for salvation. Thus one could feel within his own heart that he had been "chosen" if he saw the fruits of God's grace in his personal affairs—that is, if he were "successful." Such outward evidence also had a way of convincing others of one's divine election. In this way, ideas of religious predestination that seemed to deny free will had the paradoxical effect of creating "a more powerful stimulus to extreme effort and a more moral force than any doctrine of human freedom." [^3] Thus, "instead of turning to fatalism and resignation," the Puritan ethic "became a challenge to unrelenting effort, a sense of burning conviction, a conviction of having a mission, of . . . being on the side of that Almighty Power which must in the end be everlastingly triumphant." [^4]

One other component that emerged in the nineteenth-century doctrine of Yankee self-interest was social Darwinism—the idea that under nature's laws for developing superior characteristics in a species, the triumphs of the strong are "supposed" to emerge amid the disasters of the weak. As described by John D. Rockefeller, one of the presumably successful products of this process, "The American Beauty rose, with all its splendor and fragrance, could not have been produced without sacrificing the buds that grew up around it." In a similar way, the development of a large business that displaces its competition is "merely survival of the fittest . . . the working-out of a law of nature and a law of God." [^5]

But there is something wrong with these ideas. A belief in "survival of the fittest" seems to justify the essentially un-Christian idea of putting others down to pull ourselves up. In contrast, the Lord has said: "He that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that abaseth himself shall be exalted." (D&C 101:42.)

The Calvinist doctrines that underlie the Puritan ethic are even more misleading. Not only does Calvinism deny free agency, it also teaches that our successes are evidence that God has chosen us, while our failures are evidence that God has rejected us. This logic seems compelling enough that those who believe it are more likely to seek success than they are to seek God. At the other extreme, those who experience personal failures can all too easily assume they are the rejects of heaven. When self-doubt of that kind sets in, the will to keep striving may wane. It is natural to assume that when we don't appear to be doing "excellently" the perfection process is not working. But the exact opposite may be true. Our moments of greatest stress and difficulty are often the times when the refiner's fire is doing its most purifying work.

In the stirring story of Job in the Old Testament, Satan, Job's friends, and Job's wife all seemed to believe in some variation on the theme of the Puritan ethic. Satan claimed at the beginning of the story that the only reason for Job's obedience was that God had blessed him with much prosperity. Who wouldn't fear God, he suggested, when doing so obviously advances one's materialistic self-interest? In response, God sent adversity to Job, with a fury that appeared unfair. It certainly seemed unfair to Job's wife, whose assumption that God had rejected them was matched by her assumption that their only alternative was to reject God.

Job's friends took the view that anybody with Job's problems must obviously have brought them upon himself by unrighteousness. "Who ever perished, being innocent?" (Job 4:7.) So they urged him to repent of whatever he was doing to anger God, promising an immediate return to prosperity as the reward: "If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt . . . have plenty of silver." (Job 22:23, 25.) But Job had the insight they lacked about the nature of both God's love and the mortal experience: "If I have made gold my hope, . . . this also were an iniquity." (Job 31:24, 28.) Job understood that the only reliable constant in life is our relationship with God, with whatever combination of joy and affliction may be ours in that relationship: "The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." (Job 1:21.) "Till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me. . . . For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul? Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him? Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God? . . . But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? Man knoweth not the price thereof. . . . It cannot be gotten for gold. . . . Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding. But he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold." (Job 27:5, 8-10; 28:12-13, 15, 28; 23:10.)

I am addressing primarily a need for perspective. I do not mean to diminish the value of serious commitments to personal achievement and responsibility. The willingness to strive and keep striving is at the heart of Job's message to us. But the striving must be to find out God and to accept fully the experiences he knows will enlarge our souls. The trouble with modern pursuits of excellence is that they can become a striving to please other people, or at least to impress them or to seek their approval. A desire for such approval is not all bad, especially among Church members, who generally reserve their approval for accomplishments having positive value. But other people are not finally our judge, and making too much of either the affirmative or the adverse judgments of others can actually undermine our relationship with God and our development of sound values.

There are many ways in which our natural desire for the approval and praise of other people can distort our perspective. For example, today's society gives great prominence to financial success and public visibility. However, as stated by Elder Boyd K. Packer, "It is the misapprehension of most people that if you are good, really good at what you do, you will eventually be both widely known and well compensated. . . . The world seems to work on that premise. The premise is false. It is not true. The Lord taught otherwise. You need not be either rich or hold high position to be completely successful and truly happy. . . . We want our children and their children to know that the choice of life is not between fame and obscurity, nor is the choice between wealth and poverty. The choice is between good and evil. That is a very different matter indeed." [^6]

Joseph F. Smith, the sixth President of the Church, once expressed the same attitude in these words: "True greatness consists in doing well the things God has ordained as the common lot of mankind." [^7]

But, as our society has become more materialistic, our vision has been blurred on many issues of meaning and value. One of the tragedies of today's emphasis on careers, for example, has been the growing public attitude that unless society places some tangible economic value on childrearing and household labor, such labor is of questionable worth. One result of this assumption is that both women and men increasingly believe they should measure life's satisfactions in terms of professional or other "career" accomplishments. This premise has found its way into virtually every corner of public discourse these days.

The effect of emphasizing individual gain on our view of domestic priorities was captured by BYU anthropologist Merlin Myers:

Members of society are important, not in terms of their kinship relations, but rather in terms of their success in getting gain. . . . For us, gain—most often reckoned in monetary terms—is the measure of social worth and status. The begetting, bearing, and caring for children does not produce gain in the currently accepted sense of the word. Rather, this [childrearing] may put strain on what gain is available, or may impede the freedom and mobility of a person in his or her quest for gain. Women are thus caught in the very unenviable position of having the most decisive attributes of their femininity, or womanhood, denigrated by the society in which they live as being an obstacle to their achieving worth. . . . Day-care centers and old people's homes . . . free those who would be responsible for children and parents in societies where kinship norms prevail, to pursue personal gain in one form or another. . . . (Compare this with the statement of the heart-rent Rachel to her husband, Jacob, "Give me children else I die!") [^8]

Another distortion in our thinking about personal achievement is our inability to see that many forms of apparent success and apparent failure result from causes beyond our control. For that reason, it is not always fair to impute responsibility for triumph or disaster to those who seem to have found them. (Rudyard Kipling's "If" expresses the hope that we may "meet with Triumph and Disaster and treat those two imposters just the same.") During my experience as a practicing lawyer, I encountered many people whose business success was more the result of good guesses, good connections, and favorable market conditions than the result of great attributes of personal character or even good management. On the other hand, I knew a number of fine people who appeared to "fail" temporarily because of business conditions or other forces quite beyond their control.

I have made a similar observation on college campuses. A common problem among students is lack of self-esteem. Many reasons for low morale are readily apparent: not having a nice car, or not having a car at all; not having lots of friends or nice clothes or a big scholarship; not enjoying a position of prominence in campus life; feeling socially unsuccessful or intellectually inferior; feeling too poor or too plain in appearance. Students on large campuses often feel discouraged and overwhelmed by the daily process of being graded (as if in some eternal sense) by relentless examinations, papers, and grading curves. Many of the obstacles to success in the campus environment, as elsewhere, are from sources beyond the control of the student, whether that is one's native intelligence, looks, or family wealth. The most frustrating feelings, not only about one's belief in oneself but also about one's belief in the fairness of life, come from the hopelessness of trying to control forces that are simply beyond our reach.

Reinhold Neibuhr's oft-quoted advice is worth pondering: "God, give us the serenity to accept what cannot be changed, courage to change what should be changed, and the wisdom to distinguish the one from the other."

From God's perspective on our lives, we can control the things that really matter: the righteousness of our desires, the purity of our motives, the wholeheartedness of our efforts to love God and keep his commandments, the genuineness of our interest in other people, and the extent to which our efforts reflect our inborn capacity. One way to distinguish what matters a great deal from what does not matter so much is to ask whether the subject is within our control. If it is, then it probably matters enough to merit our attention. But if the object of our fretting is inherently beyond our control, God is unlikely to hold us responsible for our ultimate success or failure as to that concern.

Our perspective can also be impaired by assuming that achievement in one area of endeavor establishes some general level of merit or worth. However, no specialized success can compensate for weaknesses of character. Moreover, all people represent some combination of strengths and limitations. As Elder Richard L. Evans once said, "Nobody has everything that everyone else has." As a young teenager I didn't understand that. I somehow got the idea that all people were "ranked" along some vertical scale from really being somebody to not counting for much. I gradually came to understand, as I came to know the private lives of more people over time, that each of us has been given some spiritual gift that is uniquely our own. "To every man is given a gift by the spirit of God." (D&C 46:11.) Further, each of us has weaknesses and limitations that are sufficient to keep us modest. As the Lord told Moroni, "I give unto men weakness that they may be humble." (Ether 12:27.) Each person represents some particular combination of gifts and limitations as we stand on a horizontal plane with one another. But the heroes of public attention are shown to us by the media as if they were superhuman in every respect.

Finally, our preoccupation with achievement as society defines it focuses our attention on other people rather than on God, as our judge. However, not only is popular opinion too fickle and fleeting to serve as a reliable guide for our self-worth, but others cannot possibly know enough about our hearts and the innermost elements of our lives to judge us fairly. Also, men's standards of judgment are not sound, because they lack the perspective of eternity. Thus our dependence upon outward signs of success and our vulnerability to adverse judgments by others can divert us from establishing a relationship with the only One whose judgment ultimately matters very much.

The Apostle Paul wrote to the Romans, "And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God." (Romans 8:28.) If we do all within our power to love God, the doctrines of mercy and Atonement allow him to ensure that all the circumstances of our lives will eventually "work together" for our best good.

This proposition is different from the Pollyanna-like assumption that because we are children of God all things will work out for the best. More is required of us than that. For us the requirement is to love God—to love him with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. That is no trivial task. For, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." (John 14:21.) It is a devotion that asks for all our hearts. "Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?" (John 13:38.) Joseph Smith described this same attitude in terms of the principle of sacrifice: One who offers "in sacrifice all that he has for the truth's sake, not even withholding his life," is in a position to know when his life choices are pleasing to God. [^9]

Significantly, this single-minded devotion is within our control. It does not depend upon our talents, our heritage, our looks, or our intelligence. And the completeness of our love cannot be judged by others—they are likely to know very little about it. For this is a love too private, too intimate and sacred to be seen of men, much less judged by them. There is only one judge, and on the fairness of his judgment we can surely rely. For "the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there." (2 Nephi 9:41.)

If we love God in this sense, even though we are not perfect and even though we may not be thought of as successful or excellent by others, the promise is that—while not without our effort, not always quickly, and not always as we might predict—all things will work together for our good.

Through the miracle of the Atonement and through the grace and power of the Savior, this means that—if our repentance is complete—he will compensate for our failures, our sins, and our mistakes. It further means that he will perfect us—make us truly excellent—beyond our power to perfect ourselves.

All things working together for our good is very different from all things working together for our apparent success or excellence as measured by the standards of this world. Because his making us perfect enough to enjoy eternal life is our ultimate goal, we may need all things to work "for our good" in such a way that there are growing pains, tests, afflictions, and the purification by fire. "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten." (Revelation 3:19.) This need for discipline may bring us experiences others would not judge to be big success stories. We may have encounters that are harsh, painful, and beyond our ability (let alone the ability of other people) to understand.

To develop a sufficiently independent relationship with God requires that the private world in which we dwell in communion with him transcend the other "worlds" we inhabit—the world of work, community life, friends, family, and even relationships in the Church. As we gain experience in that private and personal world, we will become less dependent upon the approval of others for our sense of personal worth. As that happens, we will come to understand what Hugh Nibley meant when he said:

I have always been furiously active in the Church, but I have . . . never held an office or rank in anything; I have undertaken many assignments given me by the leaders of the Church, and much of the work has been anonymous. No rank, no recognition, no anything. While I have been commended for some things, they were never the things which I considered most important—that was entirely a little understanding between me and my Heavenly Father, which I have thoroughly enjoyed, though no one else knows anything about it. [^10]

An image suggesting this kind of private relationship with the Lord is described in a story by Robert Louis Stevenson. Stevenson tells of his boyhood, growing up in a part of England where darkness came early in the evening. He and his friends imitated British policemen by carrying small, tin "bull's-eye" lanterns on their belts. Just for the fun of it, Stevenson and his friends made a game out of hiding the glowing lantern inside the front of their buttoned overcoats and then making their way along the dark paths as if they had no light with them. In Stevenson's words:

When two of these [lads] met, there would be an anxious, "Have you got your lantern?" and a gratified "Yes!" That was the shibboleth, and very needful, too; for, as it was the rule to keep our glory contained, none could recognize a lantern-bearer unless (like the polecat) by the smell. . . . The essence of this bliss was to walk by yourself in the black night, the slide shut, the top-coat buttoned, not a ray escaping, whether to conduct your footsteps or to make your glory public, —a mere pillar of darkness in the dark; and all the while, deep down in the privacy of your fool's heart, to know you had a bull's-eye at your belt, and to exult and sing over the knowledge. . . .

[One's] life from without may seem but a rude mound of mud: [but] there will be some golden chamber at the heart of it, in which he dwells delighted; and for as dark as his pathway seems to the observer, he will have some kind of bull's-eye at his belt. [^11]

Stevenson then describes the ultimate subjectivity of true joy, noting that other people simply cannot fully appreciate the innermost delights and sorrows of our lives. He suggests that if we could only experience forms of joy quickly perceived and acknowledged by others, that kind of joy would fall far short of the high forms of happiness and insight of which the human soul is capable.

Since our highest forms of joy (and, I suppose, our deepest moments of sorrow) are beyond the realm of ordinary speech, one great purpose served by music, art, poetry, and dance is to free us for a broader realm of personal expression. In Stevenson's words, "Only the poets find out where the joy resides, and give it a voice far beyond singing." Yet this private kind of joy, impossible to communicate objectively to others, is so significant in the human experience that "to miss the joy is to miss all. In the joy of the actors lies the sense of any action. That is the explanation, that the excuse. To one who has not the secret of the lanterns, the scene [of the boys in the dark] is meaningless." [^12] If we understand the secret of the lanterns, we will not miss the joy that awaits us in discovering that all things do work together for good to them who love God. Others may not always understand what happens in this private world of our relationship with God. This means, of course, that they may be unlikely to applaud us or comfort us in those moments when we are most in need of being understood and appreciated. But if we love God, we have the assurance of knowing that he understands and sustains us, and the uninformed judgments of others, whether negative or positive, cannot come between us and God. "For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Romans 8:38-39.)

If we were to let our thoughts be drawn out toward the heavens enough to transcend, even temporarily, the strains and limitations of daily life, we would be likely to hear the promptings of him who overcame all things, assuring us that the promise is true: He will, as an act of mercy, cause the circumstances of our lives to be for our ultimate blessing, if only we love him with all our hearts. There is no grading on a curve here: "He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and has kept my word, and hast not denied my name. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world. . . . Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God . . . and I will write upon him my new name." (Revelation 3:5, 8, 10, 12.)

To feel this assurance is to sense the reward of peace in this world and the promise of eternal life in the world to come. This is a more excellent way.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Lecture Sixth,'' Lectures on Faith.
[^2] Dialogue, vol. 8, no. 1, page 75.
[^3] From Robert Louis Stevenson, "The Lantern-Bearers,'' quoted in William James, "On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings,'' Talks to Teachers on Psychology and to Students on Some of Life's Ideals (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1983), pages 135-36.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] "Lecture Sixth,'' Lectures on Faith.
[^6] Boyd K. Packer, "The Choice,'' Ensign, November 1980, page 21.
[^7] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949), page 285.
[^8] Merlin Myers, "The Morality of Kinship,'' address delivered at Brigham Young University, November 15, 1983.
[^9] 9. John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, 3 vols. in 1, arranged by G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), page 193.
[^10] 10. These references to Job are cited and developed more fully in chapter six.
[^11] 11. Neal A. Maxwell, Not My Will, But Thine (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), page 51.
[^12] 12. G. Kittel, Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, vol. 1 (Grand Rapids: Eerdsmans, 1964), page 271. I am indebted to Jack Welch at Brigham Young University for calling my attention to this material.
