Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Six

Obedience, Sacrifice, and a Contrite Spirit

During recent years, I have noticed the increasingly frequent occurrence of two problems among LDS college students: first, those who demand too much of themselves; and second, those who do not demand enough of themselves. After thinking these two problems had nothing in common—in fact, they seem to be opposites to each other—I now see a common root. Some of us may even find ourselves in both categories at once.

Let us first consider the perfectionists, those who make extremely high demands of themselves. A recently returned missionary came to see me one day. He felt like a failure and was discouraged to the point of despondency. He had joined the Church just two or three years before going on his mission. His conversion had led to major changes in his life-style, but he had welcomed the new perspective. It had given him a fresh and meaningful sense of purpose about his education, his relationships with young women, and his very reasons for existing. His mission had been the most exhilarating and rewarding experience of his life. He had responded so positively to that highly disciplined environment that the idea of setting and reaching personal goals had become his primary motivating force. He had developed great confidence in his ability to achieve whatever standard or task he set for himself. In addition, he had come to enjoy (even bask in) the adulation of Church members and younger missionaries among whom his influence and leadership had been a positive force. All these sources of psychic reinforcement had made the latter part of his mission a "spiritual high."

At the end of his mission, this young man returned home with a strong sense of buoyancy and optimism about himself and his future prospects. Shortly after his return, he met an attractive young woman at a church function. They began falling in love, and the power of it all drew him into intimacies that seemed irresistible. After the first mistake of a serious kind, he was so shocked at his own behavior that he was plunged into a sea of self-doubt. That experience led to another, and his self-doubt grew to overwhelming self-condemnation. His former sense of confidence and direction was totally shattered, and he became convinced that he lacked the capacity to live as he should. In his own mind he was simply not celestial material. He essentially threw up his hands and said to himself, "What's the use. I've just been kidding myself about all this progress since joining the Church." Once he reached that point, he had lost all motivation to live as he should, and his behavior began to reflect that change. Fortunately, he finally caught himself before this spiritual free-fall had destroyed him—but not before coming perilously close to losing all he had come to live for.

Once a person has seriously committed himself to the high personal standards taught by the gospel, it is easy to believe there are only two categories—blemished and unblemished. The trouble with such categorical thinking, however, is that one or two blemishes can appear to taint us as negatively as a hundred blemishes. Two drops of ink in a pool of pure water can seem to create a polluted pool, just as surely as would a whole bottle full of ink.

A young father was taking his turn with a new baby in the wee hours of the night. The father, already very tired, was under great pressure to complete a demanding school assignment early the next morning, and needed all the sleep he could get. The baby was unusually fussy, however, and none of the father's sleep-inducing tactics worked at all: he walked the baby, burped him, sang to him, rubbed him gently, and fed him warm milk. After an hour, the young man picked up the baby firmly and spoke to him through clenched teeth as if the baby were a fifteen-year-old: "Go to sleep, darn you!" he insisted intensely. The baby only began to howl. As the father returned the baby to his crib, his frustration was suddenly replaced by a wave of shame. He knew the infant had some unknown irritation and was hardly keeping him awake on purpose. He knelt by the crib and prayed for forgiveness. But for some time afterward, he found himself wading through feelings of self-doubt. He had prided himself in believing he was becoming a good father. Now he questioned whether he was the kind of person he wanted to be and often appeared to be. He wondered if his outwardly mature and upstanding appearance were just a facade, masking a character that was more selfish and immature.

Another young man was beginning to experience an increasing commitment to the Church, and he felt a new awareness of the needs of other people. He found himself able to help others who needed him and discovered an inner satisfaction in his emerging ability to control immature tendencies that had plagued him as a teenager. During a week in which everything seemed to be going extremely well, in a thoughtless moment he divulged a personal confidence that led to his severe personal embarrassment. His reaction was that this error "spoiled everything," and he began to doubt whether the other areas of progress in his life were really what they appeared to be.

A sensitive and alert woman found herself in a situation in which other people were acting inappropriately. In an effort to help, she found an indirect way to say something to a Church leader without disclosing enough information to harm any individual. Her comments were misunderstood, and she became tangled in a complex pattern of personal relationships that became impossible to resolve to the satisfaction of all concerned. She felt she had lost the confidence of the Church leader as well as her friends, but reassured herself that her own integrity was intact. Then, when the problem remained unresolved, she began to see herself through the eyes of those who had misjudged her, even though their perceptions were inaccurate. At that point she started losing confidence in herself and in the validity of her judgments.

I know two individuals whose spouses died. There were differing circumstances in each case, but both of the surviving companions were people of extraordinary devotion and loyalty. They attended to the needs of their loved ones with absolute fidelity and unselfishness, showing a constant willingness to sacrifice their own needs, time, and resources when doing so could help their companions in their months and years of final illness. Yet in each case the survivors felt they should have done something that might have given additional comfort or even prolonged life somewhat longer. They judged themselves very harshly for not doing more.

Some of these people are such noble stalwarts that their unhappiness with themselves in these situations calls to mind the example of Nephi. After Lehi's death, Nephi assumed the prophetic leadership role with the extended family. Nephi had already experienced mighty visions and other miraculous manifestations of the Spirit. He had endured many afflictions, being assured in the midst of his trials, as he was in his spiritual experiences, of the Lord's interest in him. Yet, perhaps because of this very progress along the path toward perfection, the seasoned and mature Nephi was acutely conscious of his own limitations: "Notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord, in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O wretched man that I am! . . . I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me. . . . nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. . . . Awake, my soul! No longer droop in sin. . . . May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite!" (2 Nephi 4:17-19, 28, 32; emphasis added.)

The nearer we approach the holiness we seek, the more conscious we become of the blemishes that mark our humanness. Perhaps that very humiliating consciousness is part of what it means to have a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

Yet when we think, consciously or not, that success and failure are the only alternative outcomes, we will define any outcome short of total success to mean failure. Because almost no human activity or venture is an unqualified success, this means that most of what we do will seem to partake more of failure than success. If we are both honest with ourselves and committed to high principles, there will always be some distance between where we are and where we wish we were. But it can be very difficult to live with an awareness of that distance. This is particularly true when, after some kind of inadequate performance on our part, we solemnly promise ourselves, the Lord, or others that we will never falter again. Such a pledge—even though it may be the right thing to do—can set us up for trouble later on. Long-term personal growth in the natural human environment is usually accomplished by a gradual movement in the right direction, even though there may be ups and downs along the way. In the short run, however, any "downs" seem magnified out of proportion—perhaps partly because we always worry that any small or temporary change in direction may be the beginning of a permanent new trend.

I have a certain skepticism about students who have a 4.0 grade point average in college. I can't help wondering if they have deliberately avoided demanding courses of study. I also have little sympathy for those in this category who receive their first A-. I have seen them in tears at that blessed event. My reaction is to tell them, "Well, your shiny new car has its first dent. Now you can get along with your journey like the rest of us, concentrating on the sights and sounds of your travels without worrying about your car getting dusty along the bumpy road. Welcome to real life."

There was only one who was unblemished and without spot. Perhaps the scriptural phrases that describe the Savior in this way were chosen deliberately, as the total absence of any spot or blemish characterizes no other mortal. If we can think of ourselves along some broad spectrum that ranges from greatly blemished to slightly blemished, we may thus be seeing things more accurately than we do when clean and dirty are the only alternative descriptions.

Consider now those who do not demand enough of themselves. Their problem is very different from that of the perfectionists. This group could be described in a variety of ways. Some of them are simply lazy; others don't seem to know what it means to live according to any standard that makes them stretch or reach very much. I am thinking primarily of those who believe they are entitled to a few "free ones" before any penalties apply.

The phrase "one free bite" comes from the annals of personal injury law and means that the owner of a dog is not held legally responsible when his animal bites a stranger, unless the owner is on notice from past experience that his dog has a propensity to bite. I have heard the term free ones used with increasing frequency, however, among college-age men and women in the Church who face judgments of their worthiness. It is common practice for young adults to be interviewed by a bishop or other Church authority in connection with applications to attend a Church college, go on a mission, or be married in the temple. There was a time when it was highly unusual for young people who were really interested in such opportunities to ever be denied them as a result of personal unworthiness. But as the moral standards of the surrounding culture have deteriorated in recent years, more members of the Church have been confronted with serious problems and temptations. The number of people who have been temporarily or permanently denied the higher privileges of Church membership, and the number subjected to Church discipline, have correspondingly increased.

Through this accumulated experience, informal channels of communication have had a way of suggesting how much wrongdoing is likely to be considered "really wrong," in the sense of causing privileges to be withheld. In addition, the concept of repentance unfortunately is often discussed "by the numbers," or in other terms that somehow suggest a kind of mechanistic approach—something like, it's all right to sin as long as you are sure you really repent immediately afterward.

In this environment, one occasionally hears of college-age young people who yield completely to physical temptations, while playing little games with definitions and rules they believe will allow a safe answer to questions about moral worthiness. Others, it is said, will carefully watch the nature and number of their deliberate offenses, so that even when they acknowledge certain difficulties they will not be threatened with serious penalties or disabilities.

This pattern prompts a memory of some youngsters in a small community who ordered a gigantic box of powerful fireworks through the mail. When the box arrived, they devised a strategy to allow them to explode all the devices without violating local laws against such things. The most penitent-looking of their number was elected to take a handful of the tamest firecrackers to the local sheriff and turn himself in. Just as the boys had hoped, the soft-hearted sheriff was so touched that he said, "I'm so proud of you for honestly bringing me those illegal firecrackers that I'm going to let you set them off out by the city dump." The boys gathered up all the fireworks and went to the designated sanctuary to set off the entire illegal assortment in a big party of triumph. Their ingenious plan had worked.

One hears also, now and then, of prospective missionaries who chart the number of weeks before their final interviews or other deadlines, then decide what they can safely do to "live it up" in one last binge of freedom. This frame of mind was reflected in the experience of two brothers, ages seven and nine. The seven-year-old was apprehended by his father while carrying a small amount of money he had taken without permission. The father sat down with his boy for a solemn talk about stealing. After listening patiently for a few minutes, the little boy said innocently, "But, dad, Alan (his nine-year-old brother) says it's okay to steal things until you're eight!" The father then asked Alan, the young theologian, why he would tell his little brother it was all right to steal things until he's eight. Said the nine-year-old with confidence, "That's what I told him, and it's right. When he's eight, he'll be baptized and all his sins will be washed away. So I say—live it up!"

It is one thing to recall the relative innocence of younger children who gradually must learn to confront the reality of rules and commandments. But when adults of any age view transgression in much the same way, they are misunderstanding something fundamental about the nature and purpose of divine expectations. If such doctrinal near-sightedness is not corrected, it will eat away at the foundations of faith and testimony until there is nothing left—regardless of how one might have been spared by a few technicalities in an interview.

There is some risk in even discussing these two problems in the same context. If perfectionists are given advice intended to make them less demanding of themselves, the freeloaders may take that advice as license to redefine even more liberally the boundaries that limit their conduct. Conversely, if the undisciplined ones are scolded for not demanding enough of themselves, those in the first group may be made to feel even worse about their minor blemishes, whatever they are.

Yet both groups share some common misconceptions. For instance, both reflect a low tolerance for pain and discomfort. I have noticed lately how my children seem to require their own built-in, customized thermostats to be sure that their environment never becomes uncomfortable at either extreme. They also dislike boredom, and their standards for deciding whether a proposed event sounds exciting seem to rise ever higher. In such a frame of mind, the first sign of discomfort causes people with rigidly high standards to have very little patience with the source of their irritation—which is often themselves. They feel much too muddy at the first sign of a smudge, having grown accustomed to daily showers.

Similarly, the fun-loving, permissive types feel strongly about romping in the mud right up to the moment they must take their spiritual shower of repentance. For them, enjoying the excitement of a few free ones until the moment of a deadline seems their rightful due. But those who walk too close to the edge of a no-fault, guaranteed romping time may find that they cannot wash every stain from their clothes and hands. They may discover too late, as did Shakespeare's tragic Lady Macbeth, that there is not enough water in the ocean to wash their hands of the consequences of their wrongful deeds. Lady Macbeth went insane with maddened washing, crying: "Here's the smell of the blood still. All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweet this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!"

This is not to say that repentance doesn't work in the spiritual sense. It does and it can, when it is genuine. But the "entanglements" of sin (see D&C 88:86)—the bent fenders and the broken hearts, the addictions and the lost opportunities, the unwanted children and the unfortunate marriages, the bills to pay and the fences to mend—these may never wash away.

There is an even more fundamental problem common to those who are too tough on themselves and those who are not tough enough. Both reflect a basic shallowness in their understanding of the purpose behind the commandments, the significance of one's internal motivation, and the meaning of the Atonement. At issue is their comprehension of the law of obedience and sacrifice—specifically, their readiness to offer the Lord a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

Joseph Smith spoke of the importance of one's knowledge "that the course of life which he pursues is according to the will of God." The prophet taught that such knowledge is necessary "to enable him to have that confidence in God without which no person can obtain eternal life." He continued:

A religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation; for, from the first existence of man, the faith necessary unto the enjoyment of life and salvation never could be obtained without the sacrifice of all earthly things. . . . It is through the medium of the sacrifice of all earthly things that men do actually know that they are doing the things that are well pleasing in the sight of God. When a man has offered in sacrifice all that he has for the truth's sake, not even withholding his life, and believing before God that he has been called to make this sacrifice because he seeks to do his will, he does know, most assuredly, that God does and will accept his sacrifice and offering, and that he has not, nor will not, seek his face in vain. . . .

But those who have not made this sacrifice to God do not know that the course which they pursue is well pleasing in his sight; for whatever may be their belief or their opinion, it is a matter of doubt and uncertainty in their mind. . . . [And] persons whose minds are under doubts and fears cannot have unshaken confidence; and where unshaken confidence is not there faith is weak; and where faith is weak the persons will not be able to contend against all the opposition . . . and afflictions which they will have to encounter in order to be . . . joint heirs with Christ Jesus; and they will grow weary in their minds, and the adversary will have power over them and destroy them. [^1]

The second paragraph of the above statement describes the underlying problem of both those who are too demanding of themselves and those who are not demanding enough: They do not know that the course they pursue is pleasing to God, and they lack that confidence in God without which there is insufficient faith to obtain eternal life. Moreover, both lack the attitude of sacrifice of which the prophet spoke. The sacrificial attitude is that we want nothing else more than we want eternal life. It is the attitude of a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Let us apply these observations to both groups.

The returned missionary in the first illustration came home from his mission on a "spiritual high" made up primarily of confidence in himself. That was the confidence shattered by his mistakes after he returned home. Joseph Smith had much to say about confidence in his Lectures on Faith, but he spoke of confidence in God, not confidence in oneself—"that confidence in God without which no person can obtain eternal life." That same confidence is mentioned in another revelation given through the Prophet Joseph: "Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distill upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion. . . . " (D&C 121:45-46; emphasis added.)

Part of the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit is a willingness to sacrifice the love affair so many of us have with our own egos. One of the hazards of introducing modern methods of salesmanship into our missionary efforts (methods that do serve some constructive purposes) is that young missionaries may be induced to believe they can do anything they make up their minds to do. Even when they superficially "give the credit to God" for their achievements, too many of them end up believing that they are wonderful missionaries, teachers, leaders, and examples because they have "reached their goals" and are thus models of achievement. To reach a "spiritual high" under these circumstances may be, in some sense, a self-congratulatory feeling of triumph that feels so good because it makes us look so good.

Blemishes and mistakes are natural. They are part of the process of growth through which we all must pass. When we establish criteria for measuring success that somehow systematically eliminate the complex areas of life in which we may learn most from our errors, we are creating an artificial world that prospers by measuring the measurable and achieving the achievable, rather than by dealing honestly with our most genuine growth experiences.

But when we place our confidence in God rather than in ourselves, our need for self-esteem takes care of itself—not because of our manipulation of successful experiences but because our fundamental attitude allows us access to the only trustworthy source for knowing that the course of life we pursue is known to and accepted by God. It is not just the mistake-free, no-fault life that pleases God. He has deliberately placed us in a sphere where the most sharply focused purpose is to learn from our experience and to grow in both our desires and our understanding to be like him. Obviously that includes the greatest effort and integrity we can muster as we seek to do his will. But the heart of it all is not self-confidence. It is confidence in him, and in his power to make us into creatures far beyond the reach of what our goal-setting and goal-achieving can ultimately accomplish in the process of becoming as he is.

When our sacrificial attitude includes the willingness to sacrifice our preoccupation with having a contented ego, we are likely at least to be humble about our mistakes. That is a very different matter from never making any mistakes. When our hearts are right and our confidence is in God, the mistakes we make, such as they are, will at least tend to be honest ones. They may also be foolish mistakes at times, but they will not be mistakes borne of calculated attempts to fool God, our leaders, or ourselves. Our mistakes will, then, not destroy us or make us despondent. Indeed, the Lord will make the mistakes of honest, God-fearing people ultimately work for their good. He does this by helping us grow in the midst of our inadequacy and become better able to appreciate the sweet as we overcome the bitter.

Moroni was more than a little bit preoccupied with his own inadequacies in expressing the written word. He felt he was far more "mighty" in his spoken language. (Reading Moroni's description of his frustration makes us wish we could hear him on an audio tape.) Said the Lord to Moroni, "And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

Through the power of the Atonement, the Savior himself compensates ultimately for our inadequacies, even as he leads us along and strengthens our capacity for good. For that reason he is the desired repository of our confidence. To repose our confidence in ourselves rather than in him is to trust in the arm of flesh, a source of meager and unreliable confidence. Perhaps that is why Nephi concluded his lament, quoted earlier, which finally became a song of praise to God: "O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever. I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for . . . cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm." (2 Nephi 4:34.)

Now we must apply the sacrificial attitude to those who want a few free sins. A broken heart and a contrite spirit create a completely different motivation and intent than are present with those who think the commandments are hoops we must jump through or lines arbitrarily drawn to keep our pleasure-seeking at bay. One who has an attitude of honest humility really is willing to give up everything—even his sins. If he cannot bring himself to part with his secret earthly pleasures, he is indeed far from the frame of mind without which he cannot possibly have confidence in God, knowledge of where he stands with him, or the faith necessary to make spiritual progress.

Those who make only modest or casual demands on themselves are always in doubt, not only about their standing before God, but about their understanding of God. They always wonder where the line is beyond which they should not go. They always need someone else to tell them what the "rules" are, because they lack the relationship with God from which a perception about the nature and purpose of commandments can come. Perhaps the need to be forever wondering when one has "gone too far" is related to the problem of seeking for a sign. There have always been those who said they would believe if shown a sign. These the Lord called a wicked and adulterous generation, perhaps because they—like those who wish consciously to err right up to the edge of the line—wish to get away with "whatever is allowed," right up to the point of confronting a tangible sign that draws unavoidable lines.

The essential desire to get away with something is evidence of internal unholiness. For these shallow-minded ones, the Prophet Joseph Smith's description is especially true: "Whatever may be their belief or their opinion, it is a matter of doubt and uncertainty in their mind . . . [and they] cannot have unshaken confidence." Therefore, "they will grow weary in their minds, and the adversary will have power over them and destroy them."

One of the serious errors made by those in this group is the assumption that being "cleared" by a formal interview actually establishes their standing or worthiness before God. This assumption places unwarranted confidence in formalities and technicalities rather than placing confidence in God. The ultimate formality of returning to God's presence has little to do with passing an interview or with piling up more white marks than black marks in some eternal scorekeeper's book of life. That final formality is not a question of keeping score, but a question of what we have become and what we are.

The development of Christlike character, and the sense of confidence in God that accompanies it, is impossible if our heart is not in it; for it is the nourishing and changing of our heart with which the process is centrally concerned. We cannot have it both ways—drawing near to him with our lips for the limited purpose of looking good or feeling good, but keeping our heart far from him because it is set so much on the things of this world. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell once said, hearts so set must first be broken. Moreover, if we hide our heart from God, we can never give it to him.

If our heart is right, we will be free from the excesses and risks of being either too demanding or not demanding enough with ourselves. The greater our willingness to be humble about our errors and inadequacies, the less we will be likely to repeat them and the more we will learn from our experience. As this attitude draws us closer to God, our confidence in his presence will grow, as will our assurance that we do not seek his face in vain. We might then make the same discovery as did a righteous group of Book of Mormon people: "Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God." (Helaman 3:35.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See chapter nine.
