Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Seven

Human Nature and Learning by Experience

Philosophers and theologians have argued through the ages about the very nature of man. Surprisingly, a brief review of Western thought shows that the teachings of the restored gospel regarding man's nature contrast remarkably with the dominant views of both the Christian world and the secular society. Yet these gospel teachings also establish a basis for understanding the connection between the Atonement and our need to learn from practical experience.

The teachings of Christian theology since the Middle Ages are rooted in the belief that, through both original sin and natural depravity, man has an inherently evil nature. In both the Catholic and the Protestant traditions, only the grace of God is able to overcome this natural evil. The Catholics have emphasized the place of Church sacraments ("works") in dispensing divine grace, while Protestants have typically believed that God directly bestows grace upon chosen individuals whose religious faith is itself an evidence of the grace they have received. This difference in emphasis is at the heart of the well-worn debates over faith versus works.

Ideas about the corrupt nature of both man and the material world had an enormous influence on early Christian thought and civilization. The art of the medieval era, for example, depicts human beings as flat, insignificant, and shriveled to an almost prune-like state. The heavy religious orientation of the subject matter in medieval art suggests the widely shared assumption that the "other world" of the spirit should be the ultimate focus of man's devotions and aspirations. A similar dichotomy between the material world and the spiritual world is reflected in the most influential writing of the day, typified by St. Augustine's City of God, written in the fifth century A.D. Growing out of an intense personal struggle to overcome what he believed to be his own evil nature, Augustine's writings divided both people and human experience into two distinct categories—divine and worldly. For him, the bestowal of undeserved grace was the only escape from the evil of physical pleasures and the influence of the worldly "city of man," leading finally to the heavenly city of God. These ideas laid the foundation for the establishment of monastic orders.

Augustine's thought also had a significant impact a thousand years later on a young Catholic monk named Martin Luther, who had a struggle similar to Augustine's with his own personal temptations. Luther found that the sacraments and other practices administered by the Church brought him no relief from the agony of personal corruption. He then concluded through the scriptural writings of Paul that faith, a gift from God, was the source of mercy and, therefore, justification before God. The gift of faith came not from the Church but from God himself. Thus arose the revolutionary ideas on which much of the Protestant Reformation was based. But even Luther believed that man was evil by nature. He rejected the Greek idea that man can become good through self-improvement.

During Luther's time, another powerful new movement called Humanism arose, in which the Greek heritage came fully to expression. Humanism rejected the medieval view of man. In the Middle Ages, God and the spiritual world had been the center of man's attention. However, to the humanists of the Renaissance, man—not God—was the measure of all things. Believing that man was himself capable of extraordinary accomplishment without divine assistance, the humanists drew heavily on early Greek thought to create the intellectual foundation for an entire series of revolutions stretching over several hundred years in science, politics, art, and virtually every other field. Humanism also influenced Renaissance religion, as new appreciation for the wonders of man's mind and body began to express itself. In the religious art of Michelangelo, for example, human figures took on a majestic and even divine quality, as the shriveled, prune-like forms of Medieval art became full of the human juice of real flesh and blood.

By the time of the European Enlightenment in the eighteenth century, the leading thinkers of the day viewed the natural world not only with sympathy but with fascination, as man's newly awakened rational powers embarked on an adventure of discovery that continues to the present day. A keystone of their thought was the assumption that man was naturally good and, through education and human achievement, perfectible.

Hastened by the optimism and rationalism of the Enlightenment, secularization gradually gained the upper hand over religion and became the driving force behind European and American culture. In the contemporary era even some major elements of Christianity have become more concerned with this world than with the spiritual realms beyond mortality. One symbol of this shift in emphasis was the publication in the 1960s of The Secular City by a prominent Protestant theologian, Harvey Cox, who argued that, because of its preoccupation with the world beyond—the world of Augustine's "City of God"—institutional religion had become irrelevant to modern life. Under the influence of similar ideas, many elements of mainstream American Christianity have in recent years devoted increasing attention to improving the human condition in the here and now by focusing primarily on the social and economic environment, especially through movements intended to alleviate poverty and social injustice.

In the midst of this blurring of former distinctions between the religious and secular realms, the idea that the individual person is inherently good has become an implicit assumption shared by most educated Americans, with or without a religious orientation. Such an assumption arises naturally from the modern viewpoint that social problems are primarily the result of environmental shortcomings rather than personal failures. And, of course, environmental factors do influence individual and collective failures, sometimes in overwhelming ways. This viewpoint takes on added strength from the growing perception that the greatest threats to peace and personal freedom come from vast, impersonal forces beyond the control of any individual, such as nuclear war and threats of worldwide economic chaos.

Assumptions that question our level of individual responsibility for our most personal problems have also encouraged a recent popular movement that urges individuals to accept themselves as they are. This movement resists the authority of social institutions and norms that seem either to confine or to change people. [^1]

There are, of course, exceptions to this general pattern. Some religious groups have not yet immersed themselves completely in the secular city. They continue to stress the need for personal redemption as the best solution to human misery. Some also still preach the doctrine that man is totally depraved and, hence, totally dependent for salvation upon God's mercy rather than upon one's own actions or achievements. Only a few years ago, I attended the funeral for a Protestant woman who had spent virtually all of her ample wealth in the service of religious, educational, and other charitable causes. After the first speaker praised her for her "Christian attitudes" and her numerous worthy financial contributions, her own minister spoke, scolding the first speaker and anyone else in the funeral congregation who believed her charitable acts would play any role at all in her final judgment before God. He stated that God's decision whether to extend his mercy to her was exclusively in God's hands and her conduct could not influence his choice.

But today's typical educated American probably regards those who still preach the doctrine of man's inherently evil nature with the same quaint amusement that most Puritans felt toward the severe doctrines of Calvinism within a hundred years after the Puritans first arrived on American soil:

In these various ways the Puritan philosophy lost its hold on life in New England. The theory of the utter dependence of man on his sovereign God ceased to have any relevance to the facts of Puritan experience. Nevertheless, it was not discarded. The preachers continued to preach it and the laymen continued to hear it; not because either of them believed it, but because they cherished it. Beliefs seldom become doubts; they become ritual. They become intrinsic parts of the social heritage, themes of public celebration. Thus the sense of sin became a genteel tradition, cherished in the imagination long after it had been surrendered in practice. The Puritan insistence on human depravity became the compensatory justification of Yankee moral complacency. [^2]

Whatever the actual state of American spiritual life in the modern world, this brief summary of the two major ideas about man's essential nature suggests the historical alternatives to the teachings of the restored gospel. In summary, there are two main alternatives: First, one can assume that man's nature is inherently evil and then take one's pick between (a) the traditional Protestant view of confessing faith in Christ as the source of unmerited grace, and (b) the traditional Catholic belief that the Church's sacraments and rituals are the primary source of otherwise unmerited grace. In both cases, the need for grace is inescapably intertwined with the assumption that man's evil choices are primarily due to his sinful nature rather than the result of his own responsible will.

Second, one can assume that man's nature is inherently good and then take one's pick among an array of competing modern ideas about the best solution to the environmental problems that are believed to cause human misery. Among those who assume that man is inherently good there are many religious and secular alternatives; but they all tend to focus primarily on large-scale social, political, economic, and psychological redemption from the evils of mass society, as distinguished from individual spiritual redemption. Personal redemption seems far less necessary or even helpful if man's nature is already good.

The teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stand in vivid contrast to both of these major ideas about the nature of man and the process of redemption. When the Lord first instructed Adam that he should be baptized, Adam asked why baptism was necessary. The Lord's answer might strike today's Christian world as a revolutionary statement of theology regarding both original sin and the purpose of experience in mortality:

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world.

And the Lord spake unto Adam, saying: Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good.

And it is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves, and I have given unto you another law and commandment.

Wherefore, teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there. . . . (Moses 6:53-57; emphasis added.)

The Lord taught Adam that the Atonement of Christ would atone for his transgression in the garden. The children of Adam and Eve were therefore redeemed from the penalties of original sin as a pure act of grace, embodied in the Atonement. This portion of the Atonement comes as a free gift to all mankind, just as does the Resurrection.

But through the effects of the Fall, Adam's children were born into a world in which they were subject to temptation, sin, bitterness, and death. The nature of those born under these conditions is described in this passage as "whole from the foundation of the world." In modern revelation, the Lord explained further that, "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." (D&C 93:38; emphasis added.) The descriptive terms whole and innocent suggest that those who enter the mortal sphere are at first neither good nor evil by nature.

Those born into such innocence are given the mortal experience that they might learn "to prize the good" through the exercise of free choice in an environment where both good and evil are fully available. God seems to have anticipated that all of us would experience the bitter taste of pain, adversity, and evil for the express and valuable purpose of giving meaning to "the good." Meaning derives from experience. Thus, some of our experience with evil during our days of mortality may be purposely intended to make the choice of "good" a more meaningful choice. As we saw earlier, Lehi's teachings amplify this possibility:

And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. . . .

And [Adam and Eve] would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

Adam fell that men might be [mortal], and men are [mortal], that they might have joy. (2 Nephi 2:22-23, 25; emphasis added.)

Experienced parents will detect in this statement a connection between having children and knowing misery. But they will also detect the connection between having children and knowing joy. It is the context of misery and sin that gives meaning to both joy and doing good.

We may also see in this statement the reason why the Fall was a positive rather than a negative chapter in human history. Adam literally exulted for joy when he began to discover after the expulsion from Eden the meaning given to his life by that experience: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh shall I see God." (Moses 5:10.)

As explained by Elder John A. Widtsoe, and quoted previously, "These were not the words of sinners or of repentant sinners." [^3] Similarly, the children of Adam and Eve who truly learn of life's meaning from their experiences with opposition should also be seen in a light different from the one we usually cast when we think of "sinners." Once we understand that God gave Adam the right to "choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee" (Moses 3:17), it becomes more clear that the commandment to not eat of the forbidden fruit was primarily a warning of the consequences that would follow the choice to become mortal. But our first parents chose wisely and courageously.

As a result of these events, Adam's children were born in wholeness or innocence into a mortal experience that can lead them to understanding and joy. Yet King Benjamin taught his people that "the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam." (Mosiah 3:19.) Something must happen to Adam's children to make them "natural men" after they become accountable for their sins, because we also know that those who die before the age of accountability are sufficiently pure that they are saved in the celestial kingdom. (See Moroni 8.) The way in which some after that age become enemies to God was described by Enoch: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death; and we are made partakers of misery and woe. Behold Satan hath come among the children of men, and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God." (Moses 6:48-49.)

This statement confirms that those who might be called "natural men" are not automatically in that condition because of the Fall, but because—after the Fall—they yield to the temptation given all people to "worship" Satan. To the extent that men or women submit to that invitation, they "become carnal, sensual, and devilish," or, eventually, evil by nature, as the result of their own free and unrepented choices. These are they who, like Cain and those who joined him, "loved Satan more than God." (Moses 5:28.) It was because of their influence that "the works of darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men." (Moses 5:55.)

On the other hand, many who "taste the bitter" enough to sense its contrast with "the good" will consciously accept the Lord's atoning grace, willingly repent, and thus learn from their experience to prize the good. These are they who yield "to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord." (Mosiah 3:19.) Through the combined effect of their repentance, their efforts to learn, and the spiritual power of the Atonement through the grace of Christ, these children of Adam become "as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love." (Mosiah 3:19.) Through the bestowal of Christlike attributes, they can then ultimately become saints or, in other words, good by nature—even divine. That is the final potential of the spirit offspring of God, to become as he is.

Thus we see that the children of Adam and Eve have the capacity, in the beginning of their earthly experience, to choose a path that leads toward either a divine or a devilish nature. What they finally become depends significantly on the extent to which they choose one course or the other: "Man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other." (2 Nephi 2:16.) That choice places them under the influence of either Satan or Christ, both of whom have power to more fully develop the nature of their followers. The Lorenzo Snow couplet expresses a true statement: "As man is, God once was; and as God is, man may become." But it is also true that as man is, Cain once was; and as Cain is, man may become. As Jacob taught, without the blessings of the Atonement we would not only become "subject to" the devil, but would actually "become devils." (2 Nephi 9:8-9.)

The American philosopher, William James, once asked the question, Is life worth living? He replied, answering his own question, "That depends on the liver." In other words, whether life is worth living depends on who is living it. Similarly, whether man's nature is good or evil depends ultimately on the man, or the woman, and on the divine or satanic influences to which they submit.

When Adam said, "They taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good," and when Lehi said, "Having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin," both prophets were expressing the principle that the development of a capacity for autonomous personal action requires real choice. However, as important as is free agency in the abstract, there is more to these prophetic teachings than the general establishment of grounds for free choice. They are also teaching us about learning from experience, an idea that helps to explain why God would consciously place us in this risky environment we call mortality. For, as he said in modern revelation, "If they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." (D&C 29:39; emphasis added.)

Human beings learn in two very different ways. Sometimes learning involves such purely intellectual processes as memorizing information or sketching the abstractions of a proper theory. At other times, learning involves the more practical process of skill development, or the application of theory. We have noticed in our family, for example, that our children have a much easier time learning the theory of gospel principles than they have putting those ideas into practice. In learning to master any skill, whether playing a musical instrument, fixing an automobile, playing basketball, or running a computer, we learn primarily through a process of trial and error. Knowing the theory somehow does not keep us from making errors. But if we learn from the errors we make in the realm of practice, we make progress.

The process of learning to live the gospel involves both theory and practice. I can imagine that the premortal life was a better environment for learning gospel theory than it was for learning the practical skills of righteousness. Perhaps partly for that very reason, our Father in Heaven created the earth, our bodies, and the opportunity of mortal experience: "We will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:24-25; emphasis added.) Becoming like our Father necessarily involves a process of growth and development. This process requires that we learn capacities and skills, not merely collect information. And there is something about the way we acquire skills and develop qualities of character that requires our participation: We learn to do by doing. To a significant degree, our development of such Christian virtues as patience, unselfishness, and kindness depends upon this skill-development process.

The conditions and experiences necessary for these developmental forms of learning explain a good deal about otherwise puzzling and sometimes very difficult human problems. For one thing, the need for a skill-oriented learning environment helps explain why there is a veil between our world of mortality and God's world of the eternities. [^4] This same need underscores the importance of free agency, because "there is something about forcing people to be righteous that interferes with, even prohibits, the process that righteousness in a free environment is designed to enable. Righteous living causes something to happen to people." [^5] The nature of skill development also explains, in part, the importance of following as a personal example the Savior's manner of living: "By watching the master and emulating his efforts in the presence of his example, the apprentice unconsciously picks up the rules of the art. . . . These hidden rules can be assimilated only by a person who surrenders himself to that extent uncritically to the imitation of another." [^6]

Of course, the tuition is very high in the school of hard knocks. Part of the price we pay for learning through practice is that we face a continual stream of mistakes and errors and missteps. We may learn to prize the good by tasting the bitter, but bitter tastes are by definition unpleasant. Yet by this means we learn to "know good from evil," and we become "agents unto [ourselves]." (Moses 6:56.)

Without both agency and some experience with opposition (experience that includes the mistakes that go with practice), it is not possible to have real learning—or real progress toward life, joy, and meaning.

A young piano student encountered a traumatic stage in her musical development when she began feeling discouraged about making mistakes. It frustrated her that every time she worked through her errors in a piece enough to play it well, her teacher would assign a new piece and she would begin playing wrong notes all over again. She protested in tears to her teacher that, because she kept making mistakes, it was obvious she wasn't learning to play the piano; and she saw no point in continuing to try. The teacher reassured her that nobody in all the world had ever learned to play the piano without making many, many mistakes. Then said the teacher, the students who really learn to play well are those who learn from their mistakes. Those who keep making the same mistakes never do learn to play.

So it is with those who try to learn any other skill, whether typewriting, bicycling, or even learning how to love. There will always be mistakes in each phase of the learning process, from those awkward beginning stages toward the tentativeness of intermediacy and finally the confidence of advanced studies.

Every new husband or new wife has experienced the sharp pains that come in touching the nerves of outer limits, as one seeks to strike the right balance between one's own needs and the needs of one's partner. Most of us also know the feeling of sudden anger, and we have struggled to learn when and how to control it. We can learn much when our anger goes too far and others are hurt. Perhaps we are hurt ourselves. So goes our learning about honesty, as we try to find our way through the gray areas in reporting our time to an employer or our income to the government. Young people in their early romantic relationships learn from experience about physical temptation and will probably sense when they are going a little too far. In the early stages with these commonplace experiences, the warning that we have tasted the bitter often comes only from within our own conscience. If we are even mildly sensitive, we may also see the pained looks on the faces of those we have disappointed or hurt.

The crucial question in these experiences is not whether they will come along, as all of us encounter them; rather, the question is whether we can learn from our early mistakes. If we can, even if only gradually, we will learn to prize the good. Our maturation will be underway. If we cannot, we will move into larger-scale transgressions, and the voice of conscience may grow ever more dim. It may take the experience of a serious transgression for us to sense the importance of learning from a mistake, for sometimes only when we have drunk deeply from the gall of bitterness do we taste it enough to realize what it is.

Whether our experiences are mild or full-blown, the learning process is in effect, and the principle of line upon line, precept upon precept, will apply:

He that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell. (Alma 12:10-11.)

Some will learn from their errors and accept the Atonement by their repentance and their acknowledgment that the Savior is compensating for their mistakes. Others will not learn and will refuse to accept the Atonement. Through one or the other of these alternatives, the gradual process of becoming either more Christlike or more devilish is underway to some degree for all of us.

Significantly, all of us, including those who learn from the pain of a wounded conscience, need the Savior's help in compensating for the effects of our mistakes as well as our deliberate sins. For that reason Paul could say, "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." (Romans 3:23; emphasis added.) For that reason the Lord told Adam, "Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent [and be baptized], . . . for no unclean thing can dwell in his presence. . . ." (Moses 6:57; emphasis added.) These statements are true not because of original sin or because all men are inherently evil by nature. They are true because the universal trial-and-error process of learning from experience means all have erred. It is part of the process. The process is good, if we learn from the errors. But learning alone is not enough, for payment must be made to balance the scales of justice after our errors have tipped them toward the negative side. That payment can be made by the Savior's Atonement, through application of the law of mercy, if we but repent by accepting him and by learning to live better through our experience with bitterness.

All this does not mean, of course, that we are justified in going out of our way in the spirit of "all you can eat" from the table of bitterness. As discussed previously, there is no license to sin willfully while planning to repent later. For now, we are considering a basic perspective on all negative human experience, including adversity and inadequacy, miscalculations and carelessness, along with deliberate and willful transgression. All are part of opposition and mortality, and all can be the source of growth and development, depending upon our response to them.

This perspective on our experiences with "the bitter" may sound less harsh than the way some would describe the place of sin and evil. But that is precisely why it is essential to gain the perspective that life is a learning laboratory. Without this understanding, we may miss some of life's most vital lessons, not only about theology but about our relationships with others and our disappointments in ourselves. To err may be human, but our errors do not brand us as inherently evil creatures for whom all is lost; nor are they solely the influence of an external environment for which we have no responsibility. We are free agents and responsible for our errors. But because, after we do all we can, the Atonement cleanses us from the contamination and heals us from the effects of those errors, our mistakes can teach and develop us in ways not otherwise possible. To participate in that process in good faith and with a determination to learn is an important part of "all we can do." The knowledge that our Father lets us taste the bitter precisely so we can prize the good should be a source of courage and good cheer to those who, in their yearning to become like him, seek to do all they can do.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See chapter nine.
[^2] Herbert W. Schneider, The Puritan Mind (1930), page 98.
[^3] Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, page 193.
[^4] See Bruce C. Hafen, "The Value of the Veil,'' The Believing Heart (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), page 49.
[^5] Ibid., page 52.
[^6] Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge (New York: Harper and Row, 1964), page 53.
