Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Part II

THE TREE OF LIFE

Chapter Eight

Justice, Mercy, and Rehabilitation

Each of the terms mercy and grace has an independent meaning, but the two words are often used interchangeably, both in these essays and in general discourse among Church members. There may be some value in distinguishing between these terms here, although I do not intend to apply the distinctions rigidly.

Mercy is the more general of the two concepts, having broad enough meaning to include grace within its scope—which is why either term can be used in some contexts to convey the same meaning. Mercy refers both to an attribute of deity and to a universal law that allows a specially qualified third party to pay the penalty of justice on behalf of one who is subject to such a penalty. As one of our Father in Heaven's central attributes (he is a "merciful God" [^1]), mercy is in some sense the source of all our blessings—even the blessing of the earth's creation and our very presence here. It is true that the intelligences clothed by our spirits have "no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal." (Abraham 3:18.) However, this eternal, individual core of each personality was given a spirit body and the opportunity of progress through mortal experience only because of God's loving mercy. "For in him we live, and move, and have our being; . . . For we are also his offspring." (Acts 17:28.) Moreover, that same divine mercy gave us the Atonement, without which there could be no salvation or exaltation—neither hope nor meaning—after this life.

Grace, on the other hand, is the means by which mercy enacts many of its miraculous effects, particularly the blessings of the Atonement. Grace is a "divine means of help or strength, given through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ," and is "made possible by his atoning sacrifice." This "enabling power" [^2] is vividly depicted in the Savior's description of himself as the vine on which his faithful followers may be the branches: "I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing." (John 15:5.)

As discussed previously, the scriptures teach two specific applications of mercy and grace to the process of our personal development. One application is the way the law of mercy allows the Savior's grace to satisfy the law of justice with respect to both (a) Adam's transgression, and (b) our individual sins and inadequacies. A second application of mercy may be seen in the grace-filled bestowal of endowments that perfect and purify us in the process of growing spiritually toward a divine and sanctified nature. Because the first of these applications is more familiar, only a brief review of that doctrine is in order, allowing emphasis in the following three chapters on the role of mercy and grace in the process of sanctification.

The law of justice is an eternal law requiring that whenever a divine commandment is broken there must be a punishment imposed and a compensation made to restore the balance in natural law that was upset by the violation. (See Alma 42.) It is by operation of this law of justice that the punishing effects of both spiritual and physical death act upon mankind.

On the other hand, the positive side of the law of justice assures us that God grants blessings to those who obey the commandments: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.) For example, people who care for themselves according to natural laws of health are blessed with stronger physical bodies. Societies that guard against pollution of their environments are blessed by the laws of natural scientific ecology. The laws of natural moral ecology interact in the same way with personal conduct.

Several recognized works of literature illustrate the universal and inherent nature of human responses to violations of the law of justice. Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment, for example, probes the question whether one who commits a crime as serious as murder could ever be above the law, could ascribe his fault to society, or could otherwise escape legal punishment. As the title of this work suggests, however, Dostoyevsky's main character discovers that he not only cannot escape punishment, but that he must find and accept an adequate punishment to be relieved of an inner torment imposed by human nature itself. Shakespeare's Macbeth echoes these ideas. Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter and Tolstoy's Anna Karenina explore similar themes in the context of adultery.

The idea of natural law is a controversial topic in modern legal theory, but the underlying concepts of traditional criminal law in Western societies do reflect the idea that some crimes are based on violations of natural law. For example, some crimes are thought to be wrong primarily because they are forbidden by the state. These are malum prohibitum acts such as violating a speed limit—wrong because they are prohibited, not necessarily because they are contrary to human nature. However, other crimes, such as murder, have been considered wrong because they are inherently and universally wrong. These acts are malum in se—wrong in and of themselves. Malum in se crimes are likely to require punishment in many different societies. I cite these references to great literature and to the criminal law only to illustrate that the law of justice is not merely a theological abstraction but has been recognized in other major areas that reflect common human experience.

The law of mercy is another eternal law that allows someone other than the transgressor to make the payment required by the law of justice, thereby releasing the transgressor from the obligation to satisfy justice. The operation of the law of mercy is beautifully explained in parable form by Elder Boyd K. Packer in The Mediator. Elder Packer describes a debtor who is unable to satisfy his obligation to a demanding creditor. A third-party mediator comes upon the scene and offers to pay the debtor's obligation to the creditor on the debtor's behalf. Both the debtor and the creditor gladly accept this offer, and the debt is satisfied. The creditor and the mediator are then left to work out their relationship on new terms. In this parable the debtor is the individual transgressor; the creditor is the law of justice; and the mediator is the Savior. The law of mercy allows the Atonement to satisfy the law of justice by letting Jesus Christ pay the penalty for our transgressions and for the transgressions of Adam and Eve.

The transgression of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden violated the law of justice, thereby subjecting them and all of their children to the penalties of both a physical death and a separation from God, which is sometimes called a spiritual death. If no provision were ever made to overcome the effects of these conditions, we would never be resurrected and would never be able again to enter and remain in the presence of God. The death and resurrection of Christ miraculously have the effect of eliminating the barrier of permanent physical death through a universal resurrection. This is one of the principal blessings of grace through the Atonement: "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:21-22.)

In addition, the Atonement compensates for the original transgression of Adam, so that we are responsible only for the spiritual death caused by our own sins and not for that caused by the sin of Adam: "The Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children. . . ." (Moses 6:54.) Thus, the grace of Christ has already atoned for all the effects of Adam's sin unconditionally—that is, as a free and unqualified gift that requires no further action on our part.

However, the law of mercy applies to our personal sins only on the condition of our repentance. Our repentance from our sins and our willingness to be baptized and to accept the gospel become the basis for the new obligation between the debtor and the mediator: "But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance, mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment. . . . For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved." (Alma 42:22, 24.)

All of us are in absolute need of Christ's grace through the law of mercy. Without his atoning sacrifice and his implicit willingness to bear the entire burden of justice, we could not of our own power return permanently to the presence of God, worlds without end. [^3] But the sacrifice was made and the law of mercy applies. Death and original sin no longer hold us hostage; and we can obtain forgiveness of our own sins on condition of repentance. Of course, no matter how complete our repentance from our own sins, it would all be to no avail without a Mediator willing to pay our debt to justice in exchange for our repentance. Thus are we utterly dependent on Jesus Christ.

All of us need him, not only because we are the children of Adam, but because to one degree or another, we have all chosen to transgress divine laws in the natural process of tasting the bitter that we may know to prize the good. If we fail to repent, we will be required to face the full penalty of the law of justice. The Savior himself warned: "For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." (D&C 19:16-18.)

Suppose some of us do not repent and, as a result, personally satisfy the law of justice by suffering in payment of our own transgressions. Would that place us in the same position with respect to our salvation and exaltation as those whose payment is made by Christ through operation of the law of mercy? If it would, why not lead a sinful life, accept the punishment for it, and still achieve salvation by our own responsibility? These questions lead us to explore the difference between repenting of our sins and paying for them.

Students of criminology and criminal justice tell us that there are several different concepts underlying the public policies that subject lawbreakers to criminal penalties. One pragmatic reason for imprisonment is to protect society by confining those who threaten harm. Another is that giving public visibility to the penalties imposed on lawbreakers may deter others from committing crimes. At a more philosophical level is the theory of retribution—the idea that transgressors should "pay" for their sins in the strict sense of the law of justice. Under this theory, lawbreakers should not be released from prison until they have served their allotted time or "paid their debt" to society. Retribution is unconcerned about reforming criminals.

A more modern theory of criminology is rehabilitation—the idea that the criminal justice system should have as its primary aim the reform or rehabilitation of offenders. Under this view, the state should do all it can to help prison inmates not merely serve their time but change their lives so they can learn to live in harmony with the laws of society. A commitment to rehabilitative objectives now underlies our system of parole, which seeks the release of those in prison as soon as they can demonstrate their own reform. However, our record in actually achieving rehabilitation among prison inmates has been spotty, in part because the system was not originally created with rehabilitation in mind, and in part because it is so difficult to teach any adult individual to make fundamental changes.

Sadly, the current research on criminology reveals that our society has recently lost confidence in the ideal of rehabilitation. Americans have become unsure not only about whether professional techniques can help a confined person actually change his behavior, but about whether there is any such thing as a normative ideal for personal behavior—that is, any model worth changing toward. [^4] Similar doubts may plague the Christian world's view of whether the Atonement really can and does rehabilitate human nature. As Samuel Butler said of America's hypocritical love affair with the New Testament, the people would be equally horrified to hear it doubted or to see it practiced.

These various theories of criminal justice may be aptly applied to a consideration of our personal sins. The law of justice requires satisfaction, one way or the other. But if we decline the Savior's invitation to bear the burden of our sins and thus pay the eternal penalty ourselves, we will not have experienced any personal rehabilitation, even if justice is satisfied. We would still, then, be unable to live the laws of the celestial kingdom. Our basic nature would still be whatever it was when we transgressed the law and we became, to that extent, an enemy to God.

The doctrines of grace and repentance are rehabilitative in nature. The great Mediator asks for our repentance not because we must "repay" him in exchange for his paying our debt to justice, but because repentance initiates a developmental process that, with the Savior's help, leads us along the path to a saintly character: "For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

Thus, paying for our own sins may satisfy justice, but it will not return us to the presence of God. Only the process of change made possible by the combined effects of our repentance and of the Savior's influence in our lives can prepare us to return.

There are two extremes in the perceptions of Church members regarding the process of repentance. Some make it too easy and others make it too hard. In the first category are those who aren't aware of any really big sins in their lives. For them, repentance is a curious abstraction designed for somebody else—most probably for "sinners" involved in major transgressions. They seldom develop much religious intensity, perhaps because they believe that, as children of God, they have relatives in high places who will prevent anything truly damaging from happening to them.

Some others make repentance too easy by looking for shortcuts and easy answers, thinking that quick confessions or breezy apologies alone are enough. Sometimes it is simply too easy just to say I'm sorry. These people should read President Spencer W. Kimball's The Miracle of Forgiveness, which reviews a candid, exhaustive, and unsettlingly long list of transgressions, sins of both commission and omission. The book also teaches in masterful depth about the process of repentance. It leaves no doubt that each of us has serious need for continual repentance. Forgiveness is a miracle, but it is not won without our penitent and strenuous effort.

At the other extreme are those for whom the repentance process is not only demanding but overwhelming because it appears to ask more than they possibly know how to give. Many of those in this group somehow have come to believe, perhaps primarily at a subliminal level, that they are fully responsible to compensate for their own sins. Then they discover—hopelessly—that they lack the power to make full compensation by themselves. Such assumptions may spring from an excessively conscientious nature, or they may come from reading too much into gospel teachings that stress man's side of the equation in qualifying for the Savior's mercy. Significantly, these assumptions may also be the result of misunderstanding—perhaps underestimating the power of—the doctrines that teach us of the Savior's mission and Atonement. If the Newsweek findings cited previously are any indication, many Church members subscribe to some combination of these erroneous views.

Whatever the reasons, and whatever their numbers, there are many Latter-day Saints who labor under the misapprehension that they must accept not only the penalties of justice for their transgressions and inadequacies, but must also assume full responsibility to compensate for all the effects of these acts and shortcomings. Without question, the doctrine of repentance requires that transgressors make the fullest possible restitution for their wrongs, even when doing so may be extremely demanding. [^5] But sometimes this expectation cannot be fulfilled. In such cases, those who hold this view are painting themselves into corners of hopeless despair. We not only do not compensate fully for all of our own sins, there are times when we cannot fully compensate for them.

Suppose a young person is responsible for destroying the virtue of another young person, then desires to repent of his or her wrongdoing. His understanding of repentance moves him to try to make restitution, and there is much he can and should do. [^6] But ultimately, he cannot give back virtue the way he would return a stolen car, nor can he see a way to restore his own lost virtue. If he takes seriously his obligation to "make everything right" through repentance, his sense of heavy obligation may finally be his undoing, because he simply lacks the power to restore what is lost. There aren't enough R's in the steps of repentance, not enough power of restoration within the limits of human ability. Because we lack the power to compensate fully for the effects of our transgressions, we are utterly dependent on Christ, no matter how earnest our repentance.

This is not to say that in cases of serious transgression repentance is impossible or that virtue cannot be regained. Such restitution is indeed possible, but only through the Savior's intervention—after all we can do. Until those in such predicaments find the Savior at the heart of the Atonement, as did Alma the Younger, there is no complete escape and no final relief. (See Alma 36.) Once that dawns on us, how exquisite it is to discover that the Divine Redeemer truly will liberate repentant captives from the bondage of sin. Honest transgressors who make this discovery are powerful witnesses about the need for a personal Savior.

Some who carry the burden of serious sin also believe they must somehow "pay" for their mistakes through a Church disciplinary council, feeling that some high level of public shame will make adequate payment. But disciplinary councils do not pay for sins. They are courts of love, not courts of shame. A court may in special cases aid the repentance process by creating a clean slate for those with truly extraordinary problems, but it doesn't have the power to yield a changed heart and a new course of life. And it is assuredly no substitute for the payment Jesus has already made. Repentance in the case of extended transgression is far more difficult than mere public humiliation, but it is the Savior who carries the heaviest burden of sin from such a case—in exchange not merely for shame and public pain, but in exchange for a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and a faithful future course of life. So understood, a Church court is not the last step on the way out of the Church; rather, it can be the first step on the way back.

The Savior's mercy compensates "after all we can do," not only for the consequences of our sins, but also for the harmful consequences of our neglect and poor judgment—or, for that matter, the harmful consequences of decisions that were not in fact so poor to begin with. The feelings of parents whose children go astray are a particularly apt illustration of the need for mercy of this special kind.

I once had a sad and tender conversation with a stake president whose entire life represented a pattern of stalwart obedience. But he and his equally stalwart wife were carrying the burden of feeling total responsibility for the rebellion of their wayward son. He told me about their boy's very serious mischief and their inability to contain him, despite continual and fervent effort. Then he said, "You know, we always tell our members that no other success can compensate for failure in the home. And the scriptures say that if a man doesn't know how to manage his own house, how shall he take care of the Church?" (See 1 Timothy 3:5.) Because of what he saw as his failure in the home, this man asked if he should request a release from his Church position.

It was impossible for me to know, and probably impossible for him to know, just how much blame was really his for what his son was doing. But I knew firsthand of his good faith, his good heart, his own good life, and the spiritually successful lives of his other children. As I saw the tears in his eyes, I thought of the prophet Alma, whose rebellious son repented and later himself became a prophet. The older Alma was not released from his position as the high priest among the people of Zarahemla. I thought of other parents whose adolescent children have agency and friends and minds of their own. I thought of our Father in Heaven, whose rebellious offspring included not only Satan and Cain, but a third of the hosts of heaven.

I thought also that, while it is true that we can achieve no other success that will in fact compensate for our failures within or outside our homes, there is a success that compensates when we cannot—after all we can do in good faith. That success is the Atonement of Jesus Christ, whose influence can mend what for us is beyond repair. Perhaps, I thought, that holy influence could even do for this man's son what it did for the younger Alma.

Once we do all we can do, thereby qualifying for the blessings of mercy, the law of justice is satisfied. In addition, the Savior's healing power may do its work of compensation. But restoring the balance of justice and restitution to an even state is not yet enough. Faith, repentance, and baptism are essential, but they are only the beginning, the gate by which we should enter the "strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life" (see 2 Nephi 31:17-18), not the end of the road.

And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. . . . and endure to the end. . . . (2 Nephi 31:19-20.)

To receive the remaining blessings of the tree of life, we will continue to rely wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, Deuteronomy 6:5 ("And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.'') and the affirmative thrust of the fifth commandment, "Honor thy father and thy mother.'' (Exodus 20:12.)
[^2] See chapter ten.
[^3] See chapter eleven.
[^4] See Francis A. Allen, The Decline of the Rehabilitative Ideal (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1981).
[^5] See Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), pages 191-200.
[^6] Ibid., pages 196-200.
