Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Nine

Grace and the Higher Law

In the previous chapter we reviewed the doctrines of justice and mercy and the process of rehabilitation made possible through repentance and the Atonement. This chapter continues those themes, applying the Savior's grace to the next stage of spiritual development, which extends beyond our satisfying the law of justice. This is the mature stage following baptism and the remission of sins. In this stage, by pressing forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and enduring to the end (see 2 Nephi 31:20), we may become as Christ is.

Before considering this second stage of spiritual development, two preliminary observations are in order. For one thing, the two-stage process being described here is not necessarily a sequential one. Once we have repented enough to qualify for baptism, that does not mean we will never need the repentance principle again. Our partaking of the sacrament on a weekly basis allows us not only to renew our covenants, but to reaffirm the ongoing process implied by faith, repentance, and baptism. Also in that weekly renewal, the Lord reaffirms his promise to us of continual atonement. This is the process, as King Benjamin called it, of retaining a remission of our sins from day to day. (See Mosiah 4:12, 26.)

In a similar way, the Savior's gift of grace to us is not necessarily limited in time to "after" all we can do. We may receive his grace before, during, and after the time when we expend our own efforts. Nevertheless, it is helpful to an understanding of the total forgiveness and sanctification process to view the relationship between man's effort and God's grace in two stages.

In addition, stage two is less widely discussed than the more familiar terrain of justice, mercy, and repentance. For that reason, our thoughts on the topic may well be less structured and make use of less familiar terminology than we typically find in discussions of the Atonement that confine themselves to stage one. Still, the general idea that we should move beyond repentance and baptism toward some holier, perfected, or sanctified state is clearly taught in the scriptures. For example, "Therefore not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God." (JST Hebrews 6:1.) The scriptures also teach that in this second stage, the Savior's grace has as vital a role to play as in stage one.

Several gospel concepts suggest that there are two stages of spiritual development. One of these is the doctrine of spiritual rebirth, which is taught eloquently in the Book of Mormon. In the preparatory stage, we are born of the water through baptism; in the advanced stage, we are born of the spirit. (See, in particular, Mosiah 5, 27; Alma 5.) We must experience both births to enter the kingdom of heaven. (See John 3:5.)

Another expression of advanced spiritual maturity is the idea of entering into the "rest" of the Lord. The power of the Melchizedek Priesthood has some vital role to play in both preparing and allowing the Saints access to this special state while still in mortality. Moses and the higher priesthood were taken from the children of Israel because the people "hardened their hearts" until the Lord "swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory." (D&C 84:24; emphasis added.)

And Alma taught that the high priests of his day had been called in the premortal life with a "holy calling . . . prepared from the foundation of the world," for the purpose of teaching God's "commandments unto the children of men, that they also might enter into his rest." (See Alma 13:5, 6; emphasis added.) Because of their faithful response to such instruction, "there were many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God." (Alma 13:12; emphasis added.) (See also Moroni 7:3.)

The scriptures also draw a distinction between the law of Moses and the gospel of Jesus Christ, suggesting that the law of Moses is a preparatory law designed to lead us to the higher law or the fulness of Christ's gospel. A similar distinction is reflected in the "preparatory" role of the "lesser" Aaronic Priesthood, which is ultimately fulfilled in the "greater" Melchizedek Priesthood. (See D&C 84:18-27.)

Let us consider the general relationship between preparatory and advanced stages through a few illustrations. I once heard someone summarize the "goals" a member of the Church should have: From birth to age eight, the goal is baptism. From age eight to age twelve, the goal is graduating from Primary and, for young men, being ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood. At each interval from ages twelve to fourteen, fourteen to sixteen, and sixteen to eighteen there is an ordination or a class graduation. Between ages eighteen and twenty-five the goals would include a mission, education, and temple marriage. But after age twenty-five, the summary concluded, there is only one goal: to raise and provide for a righteous family and to die faithful. After age twenty-five, he said, there is but one simple age bracket and two simple goals.

I remember wondering aloud to myself as I heard this summary: Is there any sense of progress after age twenty-six? Will I never graduate from the gospel doctrine class? Will I play ward basketball on the "old men's" team forever?

Had I been sketching my impressions of what it means to grow to real maturity in the Church, I would have added more details and some other lifetime goals in that last age bracket. Yet, in an interesting way, this sketch of expectations for personal development suggests to us how the higher law of the gospel of Jesus Christ must have seemed to some of the Jews of Christ's time. Having interpreted and reinterpreted the nuances of the law of Moses for centuries, most Jews were quite unprepared for the broad and lofty principles Jesus taught them. When the lawyer asked Jesus, "Which is the great commandment in the law?" he probably expected a complex answer. But the Lord told him simply, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:37-40.)

The gospel of the higher law was so simple and so profound that the Pharisees and other learned people of Christ's day missed it completely. They missed the simple part—the core—and they missed everything.

I have wondered if we, too, might at times suffer from this "blindness" that comes from "looking beyond the mark." (See Jacob 4:14.) Because we face that risk, we must learn what it means for our personal growth in the gospel to move from preparatory levels to the levels of fulfillment; from the letter of the law to the spirit of the law; from an emphasis on externals to an emphasis on the internal; from milk to meat; from the Ten Commandments to the gospel of love. For, on our mature understanding of the higher law hangs "all the law and the prophets"—and all the goals after age twenty-five.

The Lord taught Adam and Eve the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ (the higher law), as he did all the prophets until the time of Moses. Enoch and his people, and Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob not only had the fulness of the gospel, but they lived it to the point that some of them have already entered into their exaltation. (See D&C 132:37.) When Moses first went to Mount Sinai while the children of Israel waited below, he was also given the higher law. But because the Israelites "hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence," the Lord replaced the higher law with the Ten Commandments. Then he "took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy [Melchizedek] Priesthood also." (See D&C 84:24-25.)

The Aaronic Priesthood continued with the Israelites until the coming of Christ. During this same era, Israel was governed by a set of laws based on the Ten Commandments. This "preparatory gospel" of the Aaronic Priesthood "is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments." (See D&C 84:26-27.)

Repentance, baptism, and the remission of sins are part of the lesser law. These principles and ordinances are fundamental and even hold "the key of the ministering of angels." (D&C 84:26.) But they are still only the beginning of our spiritual growth. They are but the gate by which we enter the straight and narrow path that leads to eternal life. When we move on to the more mature stage represented by the blessings of the Melchizedek Priesthood and the temple ordinances, we advance to a higher level of religious life.

In his letter to the Hebrews, the Apostle Paul explained to the Jews how the new covenant (also known as the higher law, the fulness of the gospel, and the New Testament) differed from the covenant of the lesser law. He wrote that Christ was "the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises. For if that first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second." (Hebrews 8:6-7.) The Ten Commandments had been written on tablets of stone and had to be interpreted by Levite priests, who mediated between the people and their God. But the new covenant placed the people in direct contact with Jehovah: "I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people: And they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest." (Hebrews 8:10-11.)

The scriptures are soaked through with references to the difference between the two laws, the two covenants, the two priesthoods. Always it is made clear that the preparatory law is to be respected and obeyed, the temporal or "carnal commandments" followed: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel." (Matthew 23:23-24.)

The higher law does not replace the lower law—it supplements and fulfills it. Nephi understood this: "We keep the law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled. For, for this end was the law given; wherefore the law hath become dead unto us, and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith; yet we keep the law because of the commandments." (2 Nephi 25:24-25.)

Yet Nephi also candidly acknowledged that "we speak concerning the law [of Moses] that our children may know the deadness of the law; and they, by knowing the deadness of the law, may look forward unto that life which is in Christ, and know for what end the law was given." (2 Nephi 25:27.)

Amplifying the theme of the law's "deadness," Paul tells us that "the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." (2 Corinthians 3:6.) For the "epistle of Christ" (the higher law) is given to us "not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone [as the law of Moses was given], but in fleshy tables of the heart." (2 Corinthians 3:3.)

Still, the lower law has the important purpose of being "our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ." (Galatians 3:24.) And once the schoolmaster of the lower law brings us to Christ, he himself becomes the source of the higher law as it applies to our personal needs. "Wherefore . . . feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do." (2 Nephi 32:3.) As he taught the Nephites: "The law . . . given unto Moses hath an end in me. Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live. . . ." (See 3 Nephi 15:8-9.)

This scriptural context can illuminate our attempts to live the gospel in its fullest sense, for without an understanding of what is expected of us after we have been prepared by the lower law, we could be adrift on a plateau of complacency during much of our adult lives. Without some breakthrough in attitude that lifts us to the plane of the higher law, we may think of living the gospel as little more than a superficial adherence to external commandments. At that limited level, we may not even recognize the Savior when he comes into our lives hoping to lead us beyond the schoolmaster that brought us to him.

As a practical matter, how is the higher law different? Is it simply more commandments? On the contrary, it is probably fewer commandments, but commandments of a different quality from the Ten Commandments—wide enough to include the lesser law, deep enough to transcend it. Christ himself made the contrast very vivid in comparing what had been said "by them of old time" with what he expected under the new covenant. The Lord commanded Moses in the Ten Commandments, "Thou shalt not kill." But the higher law requires, "Whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment." (3 Nephi 12:22.) The Ten Commandments state, "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." But the higher law is more affirmative: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." (Matthew 22:37.)

The contrast between the old covenant and the new covenant is also made plain in the Lord's language to Joseph Smith at the time he gave the Saints "the law of the Church" in 1831. He repeated many of the Ten Commandments, but in a context making clear that the Restoration was based on the higher law—not just the lower law. Consider, in contrast to "thou shalt not commit adultery" in the lower law, this stirring and affirmative new perspective: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else. And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out." (D&C 42:22-23.)

Moses and other Israelite leaders at times tried to teach the broad, positive doctrine of the higher law, [^1] but over time the lower law tended to emphasize negative restrictions on conduct—have no other gods, do not commit adultery. This emphasis is less concerned with motive or purpose, less demanding that we do anything affirmative, much less be anything that extends beyond what we are. The contrast with the higher law is staggering: "Love thy wife with all thy heart"; and "Be ye therefore perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) The higher law asks not only for new behavior; it asks for a new heart.

Suppose an elder is literally "picked up" by his home teachers on Sunday morning—right out of bed, without waking him. They take him gently to priesthood meeting and place him on a chair without disturbing his slumber. He sleeps right through the meeting, and they take him home. Should the quorum secretary mark him present? If not, how should he record the attendance of the other quorum members who came on their own power but also slept through the meeting? Under the lower law, it is probably enough just to be there. Under the higher law, it is not enough.

Suppose a couple is married in the temple. Is that a "celestial" marriage? Not yet. The letter of the law has been satisfied, but the spirit of the law will wait to see if the partners to the marriage truly become "eternal"—which means, like God. Then the marriage is an "eternal" one—when its partners love as God does, a love not only for each other but for others, and for him.

Yet many of us continue to have a "Ten Commandments" mentality about living the gospel. Most of us have heard those discussions about what one of our children once called "breaking the Sabbath day holy." After hearing a heated exchange about what kind of picnic would be in keeping with the commandment to honor the Sabbath day, I thought to myself that the only safe rule of Sabbath day observance seems to be: You can do anything you want to, as long as you don't have a good time. Instead of focusing so much on what we can't do on Sunday, we need to look at what we can do—even what we get to do on this special day. It is a day of doing, serving, and living joyously—not just a day of naps and don'ts. "The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath." (Mark 2:27.)

As I think about dress and grooming standards at our Church colleges and university, I yearn for the day when our students will understand the purpose behind the standards, which is so different from merely yielding to them with a technical, superficial compliance. In the mostly Mormon town where I grew up, we held dances in a Church recreation hall on Friday nights and dances in the local National Guard armory on Saturday nights. Many of the same people came—the same partners, the same dance band. But those attending the dances were expected to dress and act more appropriately in the Church building. The message I got was to respect the building; dress and act as you please, as long as you're not on Church property.

Speaking from the perspective of the higher law, the Lord said, "It is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant." (D&C 58:26.) Those who attend Ricks and BYU may only comply with the outward appearance of dress and grooming standards, but I hope they will also learn enough from those standards about modesty, dignity, masculinity and femininity that as time goes on they will apply those principles sensibly throughout their lives, no longer needing a Church sponsored code to tell them how to dress. When we learn correct principles, we do govern ourselves.

The Savior gave us the sum and substance of the higher law in the Sermon on the Mount when he taught the doctrine of becoming as he is. Our knowledge of human imperfections— especially our own—makes the goal of perfection seem preposterous. Our inability to control our tongues, our tempers, and our thoughts makes an honest person squirm and a truly perceptive person despair when we talk of living a higher law. To talk about establishing a perfect compliance with temporal, external commandments such as tithing and Church attendance may seem at first blush to be encouraging. But the distance from that point to really having a Christlike heart is overwhelming.

To be overwhelmed with the injunction to be perfect is the right attitude, because it puts us in the frame of mind to realize that we cannot, by ourselves, become as Christ is. With that perspective we are ready to consider the role of grace in the process of becoming perfected.

Jesus taught that we should be perfect as he is perfect. (See 3 Nephi 12:48.) His experience suggests that his own developmental process was marked by his being a recipient of the Father's divine grace. His experience also shows that being free from sin is not the same thing as attaining a state of perfection.

We know that Jesus Christ was the only being ever to have lived in mortality without committing sin. He was without blemish or spot, which qualified him to accept the great sacrifice of carrying the blemishes and sins of all mankind. Yet Christ tasted of a central purpose of mortality by learning and growing through his earthly experience, even though he was without sin:

Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared;

Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;

And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. (Hebrews 5:7-9; emphasis added.)

The Savior also received the blessing of his Father's grace along his path toward attaining the Father's "fulness." He offers us the blessing of following the same path, establishing a relationship with him that mirrors his relationship with the Father:

And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace;

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness;

And thus was he called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first.

And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father;

And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him.

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:12-14, 16-17, 19-20.)

Once the law of justice is satisfied and our sins are forgiven, we are then, like the sinless Christ, ready to move forward toward receiving the fulness of the Father by a process of grace.

Other revelations describe this process as part of what it means to be sufficiently perfected to enter the celestial kingdom. In the grand revelation on the three degrees of glory given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon in 1832, we find this language in the description of the celestial world and those who will inhabit it:

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory. . . .

These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood. (D&C 76:55-56, 69; emphasis added.)

Note the reference to the "fulness" here. Section 93 also mentioned this concept as what Christ received, not at first, but after he had continued, grace for grace. This same fulness was there promised "in due time" to the followers of Christ. Note also that section 76 does not describe those who inherit the celestial kingdom as having attained perfection on their own, but as "just" men who are "made perfect" through some process connected with the Atonement.

We may become "just" or justified (as when a printer lines up the edges of crooked margins; when all the lines are straight, the printing is "justified") when we demonstrate sufficient repentance to receive the Savior's mercy. The demands of justice are then satisfied. This may be the "justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ," which "is just and true." (D&C 20:30.) Then, as a second stage, we may be "made perfect" or sanctified (in addition to receiving forgiveness of our sins) as a further manifestation of the Savior's mercy: "And we know also, that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength." (D&C 20:31.) Sanctification is thus the process by which we become holy following baptism.

These passages bear a striking similarity to the final benediction of Moroni at the end of the Book of Mormon, in which the invitation to become perfect through the grace and Atonement of Christ is stated with sublime power. The significance of this description of the second stage of spiritual development is underscored by the realization that Moroni was consciously uttering his final, urgent plea to all mankind, after all else that he and his forebears had written throughout the entire book:

Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind, and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God.

And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that he become holy, without spot. And now I bid unto all, farewell. . . . (Moroni 10:32-34.)

It is natural to wonder just what this process of sanctification means, as a practical matter, and whether it takes on any actual reality during our mortal experience. Our understanding of such a profound idea is necessarily limited by our lack of experience and by the intimate, spiritual nature of the process itself. Nevertheless, we do know that we do not sanctify ourselves solely through our own power. That crucial insight underscores our complete dependence on the Savior. It also relieves us of the impossible burden of constantly failing to achieve by our own exertion the ideal standard of spiritual living to which we are committed by accepting his injunction, "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Nephi 12:48.)

Indeed, one of the specific expressions of sanctifying grace in mortality is the spiritual endowment of "hope," which grants us a new inner sight that allows us to cope with our natural imperfections with a sense of serenity and optimism. [^2]

Other specific manifestations in mortality of the perfecting grace of Christ in the process of sanctification include the gift of charity, [^3] the overcoming of evil desires, and the blessings of peace and understanding. The Prophet Mormon beautifully described these purifying endowments and placed them in relationship to our earlier stage of spiritual development:

And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins;

And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God. (Moroni 8:25-26.)

If such marvelous spiritual power is available to us in the here and now of everyday life, and if we are not expected to achieve actual perfection by ourselves, it is both natural and important to ask, By what standard must we live to qualify for the perfecting power of such grace? We are not likely to find a mechanical list of three or four steps to success in a doctrinal area of such substance that must also be adapted to our individual circumstances. But a few things seem clear. One is that the Lord will probably be most concerned with our core internal attitude of sacrifice—whether our hearts are broken and our spirits contrite.

More specifically, a variety of scriptural passages together suggest a pattern that describes the way we must live in order to prove worthy of the sanctifying gifts. These phrases suggest, as much as anything, a general flavor and feeling:

Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love [charity], which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ. . . . (Moroni 7:48; emphasis added.)

I would speak unto you that are . . . the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord. . . .

I judge these things of you because of your peaceable walk with the children of men. (Moroni 7:3-4; emphasis added.)

Teach them to never be weary of good works, but to be meek and lowly in heart; for such shall find rest to their souls. (Alma 37:34; emphasis added.)

See that ye bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love. (Alma 38:12; emphasis added.) [Note the difference between bridling and eliminating passions; also that being "filled with love" suggests an endowment from outside oneself, such as charity.]

Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness . . . and love God with all your might, mind, and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you. . . . (Moroni 10:32; emphasis added.)

Because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which . . . filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer. . . . (Moroni 8:26; emphasis added.)

These are they who are just men made perfect. . . . (D&C 76:69.)

He yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit . . . and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father. (Mosiah 3:19; emphasis added.)

And we know also, that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength. (D&C 20:31; emphasis added.)

They did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God. (Helaman 3:35; emphasis added.)

These edifying and stirring ideas speak for themselves. It may be worth noting, however, that this is not just another list of virtues; rather, in each case, the author was describing the personal characteristics we must exhibit if we would qualify to receive such specific second-stage endowments and attributes as charity, hope, the rest of the Lord, perfection and sanctification.

There is a significant distinction between (a) the way we must live to qualify for receiving the purifying manifestations of grace, and (b) the qualities that actually characterize those who have received such sanctification. The passages quoted above describe qualities that are very demanding but are still within the reach of our own efforts—being meek and lowly, bridling our passions, denying ourselves of ungodliness, being humble and submissive, loving the Lord to the full extent of our own limited might and strength, and humbly offering him our broken heart in the sacrificial attitude of a contrite spirit. These are not descriptions of achieved perfection—which is one reason it is so encouraging to read them.

However, other well-known passages of scripture are far more demanding, because they do read like descriptions of achieved perfection. If read with the assumption that we, by our own effort, should be living in just that way, these passages can be a source of confusion and discouragement. Perhaps these more exacting standards are not a list of ever-more demanding commandments we are expected to master through our own discipline and volition, but are a description of what we will be like when we do receive the full perfecting power of Christ in our lives.

Christ's Sermon on the Mount, for example, sets the lofty standard of forbidding anger and evil thoughts. He also asks us to love our enemies and states that whatever we ask in faith will be given to us. He concludes with the commandment to "be ye therefore perfect." (See Matthew 5:48.) These expectations, desirable as they are, extend past our present reach. Indeed, they extend markedly beyond the level of worthiness necessary to warrant perfecting blessings of additional capacity from outside ourselves. Yet this sermon was such a vital part of the gospel's doctrinal foundation that the Savior taught it to the Nephites among his first words to them.

In the Book of Mormon version of the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus prefaced his teachings with a stirring invitation for the Nephites to accept the gospel—to "come down into the depths of humility and be baptized," for they would then be "visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and [would] receive a remission of their sins." (3 Nephi 12:2.)

This preface in the Book of Mormon account is tied to some phrases in the Beatitudes that significantly expand the meaning of some oft-quoted language. For instance, "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (3 Nephi 12:3.) Who come unto me is not present in the version in Matthew, nor is the preface that issues the invitation to come unto him by accepting the fulness of the gospel, including all the blessings bestowed by the Holy Ghost. Moroni described those blessings as including "the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love." (Moroni 8:26.) In other words, the Holy Ghost is the agent by which the sanctifying power of heavenly endowments is administered.

The Sermon on the Mount, as clarified in 3 Nephi, seems to describe what happens when we make all the effort required to repent and serve God to the full extent of our ability and, as a result, are purified and perfected by a power not our own. In that light this sermon is not a statement of unrealistic demands, but a picture of what the Savior's true followers will become through his endowment of grace. It is thus a summary of both stage one and stage two, the preparatory gospel of repentance and baptism, plus the fulness of "the power of godliness" (D&C 84:20) bestowed through operation of the higher law.

A similar illustration is King Benjamin's final discourse to his people. When we read some of the passages in this discourse, we might logically assume that King Benjamin was primarily asking his people to live by an exceedingly high standard:

And ye will not have a mind to injure one another, but to live peaceably, and to render to every man according to that which is his due.

And ye will not suffer your children that they . . . transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another. . . .

And . . . ye . . . will succor those that stand in need of your succor. (Mosiah 4:13-14, 16.)

We have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually. (Mosiah 5:2.)

In the larger context of his entire sermon, a different perspective emerges. King Benjamin concluded his original address with a powerful statement on the Atonement and a plea that his people take him seriously. After he had concluded, the people were so receptive that a strong spiritual witness came over them, filling them with joy and a remission of their sins. They desired to receive both forgiveness of their sins and the perfecting power of sanctification: "O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified." (Mosiah 4:2.)

Benjamin then seized this teaching moment to explain further what his people must do if they wished to retain this remission of their sins and continue tasting the love of God that was then upon them. He then gave them counsel which, if followed, would always cause them to "rejoice and be filled with the love of God" and to "grow in the knowledge . . . of that which is just and true." (Mosiah 4:12.) This counsel included his admonition that his people always remember the "greatness of God" and their "own nothingness," that they humble themselves in daily prayer, and that they stand "steadfastly in the faith." (Mosiah 4:11.) If the people did these things after first receiving a remission of their sins, then they would be so filled with the sanctifying power of God's love (charity) that they would, as a direct result, "not have a mind to injure one another," "live peaceably," and so on.

In other words, as we become affirmatively purified and perfected—beyond having achieved remission of our sins—our hearts and minds begin to change, for our very nature is changing.

It was this taste of the divinely bestowed power of godliness that then caused Benjamin's people to say, "The Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent . . . has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." (Mosiah 5:2.)

Perhaps they experienced the rebirth of the Spirit, and King Benjamin counseled them then to seek a course of growth leading from spiritual rebirth to full spiritual maturity. That is the nature of stage two, as we grow from grace to grace, beyond a remission of sins and beyond rebirth until we have been perfected unto receiving the same fulness that Christ himself received from the Father. That fulness is the endowment of a perfected divine nature—being therefore perfect, even as the Father and the Son are perfect. It is the fruit of the tree of life.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Albert Ellis, "Psychotherapy and Atheistic Values,'' Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology (1980), pages 635, 637.
[^2] Allen, The Decline of the Rehabilitative Ideal, page 28.
[^3] I first heard this story from Victor Cline.
