Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Ten

Hope

The sanctifying grace of the Savior Jesus Christ is the source of an entire cluster of blessings and powers. The Atonement not only atones for our sins and compensates for our inadequacies, it is also the source of spiritual endowments that develop and ultimately transform our very nature.

The agent by which many of these forces enter our lives is the Holy Ghost, that "Comforter" whose "visitation" "filleth with hope and perfect love"—or hope and charity. (Moroni 8:26.) It is "by the reception of the Holy Ghost" that "ye may be sanctified," following repentance and baptism. (3 Nephi 27:20.)

Some manifestations of this sanctifying process may reflect the Holy Ghost's mission to act as a comforter, to bear witness of the Father and the Son, and to "teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance." (John 14:26.) The gift of the Holy Ghost thus goes well beyond a right to divine inspiration and guidance. It is by the Holy Ghost that we receive access to certain gifts of the Spirit, many of which are enumerated in D&C 46—such as the gift of knowing "that Jesus Christ is the Son of God." (D&C 46:13.) Further evidence of the Holy Ghost's influence may be found through the "fruit of the Spirit"—"love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Galatians 5:22-23.) As with other gifts involved in the bestowal of grace toward perfection, the gifts of the Spirit are not given only to those who are themselves perfect; rather, they "are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do. . . ." (D&C 46:9; emphasis added.)

Rather than developing an encyclopedic summary of the various spiritual endowments we may receive through the process of sanctification, I will select for discussion in this and the subsequent chapter only two; yet these two may be at once the most practical and the most profound of the blessings of holiness: hope and charity.

The subject of hope will be treated here in practical terms, in part because hope is such a terribly practical need. The scriptures that refer to "a hope in Christ" (see, for example, Jacob 2:19) may be referring to a particular theological meaning or experience. In a more general sense, hope that derives from our sure conviction of faith in Christ is also a gift of grace that can bestow a spiritual but practical form of the peace and insight necessary to cope patiently with our own sense of personal inadequacy. Along the pathway toward perfection, few obstacles are quite as discouraging as our own awareness that perfection seems a tauntingly unattainable ideal.

No small part of this volume's purpose is to urge the theological reality that the Savior desires to save us from our inadequacies and disappointments as well as from our sins. In the preceding chapters, we have seen these manifestations of "the bitter" take many forms—opposition in all things, psychic pains, growing pains, and life circumstances that continually fall short of excellence. It is in the midst of those very experiences that the arm of the Lord is most likely to be revealed to us in a personal way, as his outstretched hand represents hope in its most meaningful sense.

There always seems to be some distance—let us call it "the gap"—between the real and the ideal; between what is and what ought to be. Let us imagine two circles, one inside the other. The inner boundary is the real, or what is. The outer boundary is the ideal, or what ought to be. We stand at the inner boundary, reaching out, trying to pull reality closer to the lofty ideals to which we have committed ourselves. We are likely to become aware of the distance between these two boundaries when we realize that some things about ourselves are not what we wish they were, or what they ought to be. As that realization grows, so can our level of frustration.

We learn about the gap in a variety of ways. When children gradually become conscious of the imperfections of their parents, the gap may challenge their ability to follow their parents' advice without following their example. New members of the Church learn about the gap when they discover that their seasoned brothers and sisters in the gospel may not always live as Latter-day Saints should live. New missionaries are especially likely to encounter the gap, because they often begin their missionary service with more idealistic commitments than they have ever made before. Yet in spite of their most valiant efforts, they may find themselves fighting back the tears of disappointment when the promised fruits of a positive mental attitude somehow elude them. A hopeful young athlete may dedicate himself to a demanding training program on the assumption that he can achieve whatever he works hard enough to achieve, only to discover he may not be tall enough or talented enough to compete successfully.

At a more personal and spiritual level, perhaps an important prayer goes too long unanswered. Perhaps one suffers some major setback with health, employment, or a marriage prospect, and the heavens do not yield relief. Or suppose one makes solemn commitments to control an anxious tongue or a hair-trigger temper, only to find the tongue or the temper suddenly out of control again. More difficult may be the case of one who repents of some clearly sinful act, even to the point of confessing to a bishop, then commits the same act again. The gap is never more excruciating than in the unguarded moment when a previously forsaken transgression is repeated.

The gap may seem to become a pervasive, ever-present kind of thing. Some mothers dread family-oriented lessons in Relief Society, because emphasizing again the ideals of motherhood can be such a painful reminder of the way one's own circumstances fall short of the ideal. One woman I know told of coming home from such a discussion at a Church gathering, full of new idealism and determination to make hers into the perfect LDS home. As she opened the front door, however, she discovered the telltale signs of an imperfect home: the back door left open, the clutter of dirty clothes and toys in bedrooms where order had at last glance prevailed, cold cereal strewn from one end of the family room to the other, and the cat on the kitchen counter eating the lunch meat. That day she thought about the gap.

Then there are the family home evenings and scripture study sessions in our home. Somehow it has not been altogether natural for our children to glide reverently into their places all at once and all on time, prepared to ponder thoughtfully the wonders of eternity. More than likely, especially when they were young, they seemed to come swinging into the family room on the chandeliers like Tarzan on the vines, then would stand on their heads or flip themselves over the back of the couch during most of the lesson. During that stage of our family's history, our bishop lovingly referred to our children as curtain climbers, rug rats, and house apes. There were times in those days when the gap yawned as wide as the Grand Canyon.

But there were also rare moments when, somehow, the gap almost seemed to close. I think, for instance, of the evening an elderly non-Mormon gentleman joined us for home evening as part of his visit to the Ricks College campus. Perhaps his presence affected our children, but whatever the reason, there was something very open and warm and even tender that night in the communication among our young children and the three adults. Some years later, the man who was our guest recalled for me that evening in our home. He had no children of his own but had always dreamed of a pleasant family life with a house full of little ones. He described his evening with our ordinary, lovable, and usually noisy children as one of the sweetest experiences of his adult life.

I also recall the first night we showed the "family slide show," the funniest and most beautiful of our vast collection of pictures of our children, shown at family night with two projectors and individually chosen background music for each member of the family. That was the week before our oldest son left for his mission. We laughed and remembered and enjoyed being together. As we knelt in prayer at the end, there were no curtain climbers or rug rats; just young men and women whose love for one another was dawning on them. The gap seemed very narrow. Still, almost all the time, the gap remains.

After we have experienced the discomfort, the frustration, and even the anguish caused by this gap, we naturally wonder what to do about it. One popular approach is to relieve the tension by simply erasing the outer circle. For example, some call it hypocrisy to claim allegiance to values or ideals that seem unrealistic to attain. To them, the failure of a Latter-day Saint to live up to his professed standards proves a kind of dishonesty equal to or worse than the sins his standards condemn. By implication, then, the standards themselves are called into question. Honesty alone becomes a more admirable standard in this view, because of the rugged integrity that seems to come from modest claims and the total absence of pretense. If you can't practice what you preach, the reasoning goes, then preach what you practice. It is more virtuous to be true to what you claim than it is to claim what is true.

Others who erase the outer circle are trying to remove the discomfort of the gap because it has created negative feelings of guilt. To them, the elimination of guilt is by itself a worthy goal, simply because the guilt-free life seems to make people feel better about themselves. Reflecting this assumption, a therapist who claims to reflect mainstream attitudes among modern psychotherapists wrote in a professional journal that most people in his field believe that being seriously religious "is significantly correlated with emotional disturbance." He continued, "People largely disturb themselves by believing strongly in absolutistic shoulds, oughts, and musts, and most people who dogmatically believe in some religion believe in these health-sabotaging absolutes. . . . The less religious [people] are, the more emotionally healthy they will tend to be." [^1] This psychologist further believes that "unequivocal and eternal fidelity or loyalty to any interpersonal commitment, especially marriage," can also "lead to harmful [psychic] consequences," presumably because such commitments are characterized by "absolutistic shoulds, oughts, and musts" of the kind represented by the outer circle of the ideal.

The simple act of erasing the outer circle has a tantalizing power to eliminate frustration and apparent unhappiness, because in one stroke that act eliminates both guilt and the gap. If you are a student and don't like school, if you are a parent who doesn't like caring for children, if you are made uncomfortable by restraining your sexual urges, then (the reasoning goes) accept the liberation of just being honest about yourself. Accept yourself for what you are. It's unnatural to try to be someone you're not. Maybe you're just not celestial material; somebody has to be in those other kingdoms. As one well-known host of a children's television show puts it, "I like you just the way you are."

This line of thought begins with an important truth: We must start where we are and be honest and accepting toward ourselves. But in the popular, breezy form in which this valuable beginning point loses its sense of restraint, pop psychology has captured the American imagination with the misleading idea that self-acceptance is the end of therapeutic or personal development rather than the beginning. Counseling can in this way become less concerned with assisting people toward change and more concerned with simply helping them to be comfortable. [^2] That might be an adequate approach for helping someone come to terms with having a terminal illness; but it is unlikely to succeed as well in aiding the processes of personal growth and development.

So understood, a preoccupation with self-acceptance alone can limit our possibilities for growth and change, restrict the power of repentance, and, in effect, deny the Atonement. President McKay occasionally quoted a writer named Beverly Nichols, who wrote that if we deny the possibility of changing human nature, we are in effect saying to the Savior, go back, we don't want you; we don't believe you.

Suppose someone has acknowledged a transgression or a weakness and has fought his way back successfully—only to be confronted again with the same temptation. There is nothing the Evil One would rather have such a person believe than the idea that, "You haven't really changed. You never did. You're not one of those straight arrows—you never were. So why don't you quit kidding yourself? The leopard cannot change his spots."

We do not become perfect in one great act, just as we do not become irreversibly evil in one great act—or two. But painfully, slowly, it really is possible to push the inner circle toward the ideal. To trust the Savior's power in this matter is at the very heart of the gospel's purpose—to make bad men good and good men better.

Some people have quite another problem with the gap. They eliminate the tension and frustration the gap causes by erasing the inner circle of reality. Such people cling to the ideal so single-mindedly that they are able to avoid the pain that would come from facing the truth about themselves or the world around them. Others see them as they are and wonder how they can be oblivious to the facts. Those in this category may weather storms that seem formidable to more realistic types, although one wonders if they have somehow missed hearing that a storm was going on. They are also frequently represented in the letters to the editor section of the school papers at places such as BYU and Ricks College, where such shock is occasionally expressed that someone or some part of the institution has fallen short of perfection. The writer is usually aghast—surely this couldn't happen at "the Lord's university," they say.

Surprising as it may seem to this group, the work of the Church and the work in our homes is all done by imperfect people. Elder Richard L. Evans once said those who will only work with perfect people will soon be all alone. He might have added that even then they will not be with perfect people.

While we should not look excessively at the negative side of things, the Lord does expect us to accept and deal with the realities we see. As he said to Moroni, "And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. . . . I will show unto the Gentiles their weakness, and I will show unto them that faith, hope and charity bringeth unto me—the fountain of all righteousness." (Ether 12:27-28.)

Being realistic about our limitations will make us face some questions and some facts that leave us uncomfortable. But that very discomfort can motivate us toward real growth. As has been said by President Harold B. Lee, the true Church is intended not only to comfort the afflicted, but to afflict the comfortable.

One wonders which is worse—honesty without ideals, or ideals without honesty. Both impede growth and change, both are only a partial view of the entire picture of reality.

In a more specific doctrinal sense, the Lord's invitation to come unto him and let him show us our weaknesses is an important step along the pathway toward faith, hope, and charity. That path leads finally to the "fountain"—the source—of righteousness, which is Jesus Christ. (See Ether 12:28.) One of the blessings of grace along that path is the gift of hope, which is a source of comfort and strength for those who move courageously forward toward the perfecting ideal of the Savior. As put plainly and powerfully by the prophet Jacob, "Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is by his grace, and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things." (Jacob 4:6-7; emphasis added.)

Moroni spoke of this same gift of hope in this way, "Wherefore, whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God." (Ether 12:4.)

This is the spiritual endowment of hope—of perspective, of patience, of an inner serenity, a sure inner sight, that is "not weary in well-doing." (D&C 64:33.) Such hope is bestowed by the power of the Holy Ghost, "which Comforter filleth with hope." (Moroni 8:26.) It is the hope of which Nephi wrote in explaining the process that follows our entry by baptism into the straight and narrow path: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope and a love of God and of all men." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

It is the hope that Mormon recognized as a sustaining, God-given source of strength in the maturing stages of spiritual development: "I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord. . . . My brethren, I judge these things of you because of your peaceable walk with the children of men." (Moroni 7:3-4.) Not perfect, not frantic; not pessimistic and not artificially cheerful. The walk of those who walk with the endowment of hope is "peaceable."

The practical effect of the endowment of hope is illustrated by the Lord's blessing to Alma and his followers, who were in bondage and were made to carry heavy physical burdens. Alma and his people pleaded with the Lord for help, and he responded: "The burdens which were laid upon Alma and his brethren were made light; yea, the Lord did strengthen them that they could bear up their burdens with ease." (Mosiah 24:15.) The Lord intervened in this way, "that they might know of a surety that I, the Lord God, do visit my people in their afflictions." (Mosiah 24:14.)

It helps us see the place of hope to know that our development toward spiritual maturity is a process, not an event. It is a distance race, not a sprint. It is thus no race for the short-winded.

There was once a young woman who was very much overweight. [^3] For her height and build, her ideal weight was 120, but she weighed 200 pounds. She tried every dieting program she could find, and nothing seemed to work. Finally, she came across an unusually promising approach and decided to "go for it" in the greatest effort of her life. To mark the beginning and the seriousness of her commitment, she confided in her bishop and asked for his interest and support.

She lived with her sister in a small apartment. The day the new diet began, she explained to her sister what she was doing. She would help prepare meals and help clean up the kitchen, but she did not want to have access to the refrigerator by herself. She produced a huge chain she had just purchased at a hardware store and wrapped it around the refrigerator. A heavy padlock fastened the two ends of the chain in place. After making sure the padlock was locked, she gave the key to her sister and asked her to hide it. Then, on a whim, she followed her sister to see where the key was hidden. She thought it would strengthen her resolve if she knew where it was and yet chose not to use it.

After several long, weary months, she achieved an exciting milestone—she weighed in at 150 pounds. She ran home that evening to tell her sister the big news, but her sister was out for the evening. She tossed herself into an easy chair and began reflecting on her arduous journey. Her eye caught a glance at the refrigerator in the nearby kitchen, and as she saw the chain around it, she burst into laughter. That is so ridiculous, she thought, but it worked. Then it occurred to her that perhaps a little celebration was in order. So she found the key, unlocked the padlock, unwrapped the heavy chain, and peeked into the icebox. There she found a large new carton of her favorite ice cream. She spooned out a taste and flipped on the television. Then she decided she really did deserve a little celebration, so she filled a dish with the ice cream and sat down to enjoy it in front of the TV. A half hour went by, and she was engrossed in a favorite show. Suddenly, as the show ended, she discovered she had just finished off the entire half gallon of ice cream.

At that point she burst into tears and was inconsolable. She frantically called her bishop, raced to his home, and confessed in tears as though she had committed an unpardonable sin. She wailed that she obviously had no self-control. There was no point in trying to continue, now or ever.

Her wise bishop calmly replied, "Look how far you've come! You've lost fifty pounds!" Then he counseled her with a ringing central message: Dieting is a process, not an event. She only needed to regain her perspective and, thereby, her hope.

So it is with our spiritual development. To develop toward a Christlike character is a process, not an event. There may one day be some crowning event, in which the final endowment of grace completes a process that may take longer than mortal life. But to qualify for such a conclusion requires patience and persistence more than it requires flawlessness. It is, indeed, our own groping and reaching in the struggle for growth that qualifies us for divine help. Reid Nibley described this process in these lines:

A distant star But not too far To lure us out into the firmament And tho we ne'er may reach it, We have tried. And in the trying Have learned, perchance, To make an orbit of our own.

Our effort to reach for the distant star of the ideal, of what ought to be, is much like the massive effort required to allow a space rocket to break through the forceful pull of gravity. But our own orbit awaits us beyond the edge of gravity.

The divine blessing of hope gives us much-needed perspective and strengthens our will to keep moving, against the odds, against the backward pull. It is the principle by which our Father guides us—line upon line, precept upon precept. It is, "Lead, kindly light, amid the encircling gloom. . . . I do not ask to see the distant scene; one step enough for me."

And as we expand the reach of our circle of reality, the strangest thing happens: The circle of the ideal recedes to the horizon, creating both new aspirations and a new gap. We are like a toddler just learning to walk. A parent kneels a few steps away and coaxes with outstretched hands: "You can do it; come to mommy!" Just as the toddler is about to arrive, the parent might move back a step or two, stretching the toddler's reach beyond his grasp.

Our Father in Heaven also waits and coaxes and literally gives us hope—and something about the perspective of hope maintains in our vision an optimal distance between the ideal and the real. When our capacities are small, God's expectations are not very demanding—as with some commandments that are "adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints." (D&C 89:3.) But just as we master these elementary demands, we discover greater expectations that we didn't quite see before. Gradually our capacity grows, but so does our understanding of what more we must become. "For of him unto whom much is given much is required." (D&C 82:3.) The Lord would have us stretch—but not out of shape. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell has said, the soul is like a violin string—it makes music only when it is being stretched.

In the midst of this process, the blessing of hope keeps the gap at a manageable distance. Our perceptions and attitudes really can be shaped and lifted by a gift of divinely given insight that lets us feel, even with some anticipation and optimism, that we can do it. This gift of hope lets us focus confidently on steps that are within reach, but still something of a stretch. If the ideal were too close to the real in our perspective, we would be less inclined to reach to the limits of our capacity. If the ideal seemed too far away from where we are, we would be too discouraged even to try; things would just seem too hopeless.

Hope, a divinely given blessing of atoning grace for those who seek it, after all they can do on their own, establishes in the way our mind sees things just the right distance between where we are and where we strive to be. It also reassures us, somehow, that the ever-receding ideal is not a trick, but part of a growth process that can be not only acceptable but exhilarating. The growing pains become a sign of life and energy, and we are invigorated by hope to watch each step unfold. For the hope within our heart is the Spirit of the Almighty: "For I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Time, April 10, 1967.
[^2] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., "The Chartered Course of the Church in Education,'' address given August 8, 1938 to Church Seminary and Institute instructors at Aspen Grove, Utah (Salt Lake City: Church Commissioner of Education, 1980).
[^3] I first heard this story from Victor Cline.
