Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Chapter Eleven

Charity and the Tree of Life

The dictionary defines charity as "performing benevolent actions for the needy with no expectation of material reward," or as "something given to persons in need." These definitions are reflected in our calling such institutions as churches and hospitals "charitable" organizations, meaning vehicles through which service to the needy is rendered. The similar term Christian service is often associated with charitable acts, whether performed by individuals or organizations.

With these terms in mind, some people in past years have criticized the Church and its members with the claim that many of them are so preoccupied with "Church work" that they seldom render true Christian service. I once heard a provocative speech by a devoted Latter-day Saint who believed the Church should have committees on social justice and Christian service, in addition to committees on home teaching and missionary work. He shared several unsettling illustrations describing Church members who confined their service-oriented activities to interaction with other Church members or who showed insensitivity and lack of concern for nonmembers as neighbors, associates, or simply as other human beings.

I recall during my graduate school days reading an article in a national magazine that expressed concern about "the relevance of Mormonism," suggesting that "Mormonism is too much concerned with the perfection of its own organization, too little with the problems of the world." [^1] At the time I read this article, I was also becoming aware of an emerging emphasis among the intellectual leadership of the American Protestant and Catholic churches toward greater "social relevance" for institutional Christianity. That emphasis has become a major movement during the past quarter century, as Christian ministers and theologians in most denominations—including most recently the Conference of Catholic Bishops in the United States—have turned significant institutional attention toward the problems of equality, social justice, war, poverty, and other social issues.

I have been heartened to sense an increasing awareness of and concern about such issues among individual Church members in recent years. I sense that LDS college students have a higher sense of social obligation than they did a generation ago; the Church's youth activity programs are emphasizing the importance of service projects and the need to support minority people, the handicapped, the elderly, and other disadvantaged groups; the Church welfare program, including fast offerings, and the home teaching and visiting teaching programs regularly involve thousands of Church members in reaching out to the needy. When the Church a few years ago reduced its local meeting schedules to a three-hour block on Sundays, the First Presidency told Church members that the change would free up precious Sunday time for individual and family Christian service. General Church leaders are increasingly urging local leaders to spend their time "ministering" to personal needs rather than only "administering" their assignments.

There is an ample doctrinal foundation to support these developments. For one thing, although Christ's followers are not of the world, they are deliberately in it. And, as Oliver Wendell Holmes once said, "It is required of man that he share the action and the passion of his time, at the peril of being judged not to have lived." More fundamentally, King Benjamin told his people, "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) The Savior taught his followers that his Father's kingdom would be inherited by those who had fed him when he was hungry, clothed him when he was naked, and visited him when sick or in prison. But when asked, "When saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?" he said, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (See Matthew 25:34-40.) As Joseph Smith thought of losing his life in Carthage Jail, he yearned for the singing of "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief," which poignantly sets the theme of Matthew 25:34-40 to music.

Yet the Church as an institution has not been significantly involved in the momentum of recent national movements that seek to make religion more socially relevant. Nor has there been any large institutional step in the Church to turn our attention away from the traditional emphasis on families, scripture study, missionary work, and genealogy, even though service to others is becoming an increasingly emphasized theme. The counsel of Church leaders regarding political and social causes has similarly reflected a preference for individual involvement, according to the judgment of the members in their own local situations.

I have wondered at times why this institutional sense of priorities has continued over the past two or three decades of intense social and political ferment in the United States and elsewhere. Several possible reasons come to mind. For one thing, the worldwide nature of the Church makes it impossible to provide direction from Church headquarters regarding the social and political circumstances in each country where Church members live. In addition, sensitivities about Church-state relationships make it generally more appropriate for Church members to become individually involved in potential political issues. Moreover, the resources of the Church are limited, making it necessary to focus on needs of the highest possible potential. But why would our theology dictate giving high priority to missionary work, temples, and meetinghouses? The answer is, not surprisingly, a theological one. It suggests that the three-fold mission of the Church—preaching the gospel, perfecting the Saints, and redeeming the dead—is perhaps the ultimate social action program.

To explore this theological foundation, a question about the first and second great commandments is in order. The Savior taught that love for God was the greatest commandment, and the second was like unto it—love for neighbor. "On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:40.) Our relationships with God and with our fellowman might be represented as follows:

The vertical axis in this diagram represents our relationship with God. The horizontal axis represents our relationships with other people. In which of these two relationships is true charity to be found?

It could reasonably be assumed that charity is obviously located along the horizontal axis, because the very nature of charity is love of neighbor. Even "pure religion" itself consists mostly of such horizontal level acts as "to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction." (James 1:27.) But further inquiry suggests a less obvious answer.

When Paul wrote about charity in his famous letter to the Corinthians ("Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal."—1 Corinthians 13:1), he said, "And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor . . . and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing." (1 Corinthians 13:3.) How could one give away all his possessions without having charity? What could be more charitable than giving all one's goods to feed the poor?

In a celebrated sermon to teachers in the Church Educational System some years ago, President J. Reuben Clark raised a similar question:

The teaching of a system of ethics to the students is not a sufficient reason for running our seminaries and institutes. . . . To make of the Gospel a mere system of ethics is to confess a lack of faith, if not disbelief, in the hereafter. . . . One living, burning honest testimony of a righteous God-fearing man that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph was God's prophet is worth a thousand books and lectures aimed at debasing the Gospel to a system of ethics. . . . [^2]

What could be more religious than ethical standards and ethical relationships with other people? Yet both Paul and President Clark saw that the heart of the religious life—even including the charitable and ethical fruits of true religion—is ultimately to be found not along the horizontal axis but in our personal relationship with God.

Let us further explore the theological foundation of this idea. The scriptures teach us about two trees—the tree of knowledge and the tree of life. The most complete description of the tree of knowledge is found in the story of Adam and Eve. The most complete description of the tree of life is found in the story of Lehi's dream in the Book of Mormon. Lehi described his partaking of the fruit of the tree of life as follows: "And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with exceedingly great joy; wherefore, I began to be desirous that my family should partake of it also; for I knew that it was desirable above all other fruit." (1 Nephi 8:12.) This tree of life represents "the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things." (1 Nephi 11:22.) Lehi's experience was at the summit of the vertical axis. His relationship with God came to its point of highest fulfillment as he partook of God's love. Yet in that very moment, as God's love "sheddeth itself" in his heart, he "began to be desirous" for his family.

A grandson of Lehi named Enos had what seems to be a remarkably similar experience. Enos was alone in the forest when the words he had heard from his father, Jacob, "concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart. And my soul hungered; and I . . . cried unto [God] in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul." (Enos 1:3-4.) Enos received a manifestation in which his sins were forgiven because of his faith in Christ. As the Lord gave Enos this overwhelming assurance, Enos then "began to feel a desire for the welfare of my brethren, the Nephites; wherefore, I did pour out my whole soul unto God for them." (Enos 1:9; emphasis added.) In answer to his fervent petitioning in behalf of his people, the Lord made some great promises to Enos that resulted in preserving the scriptural record for their benefit. Just as Lehi "began to be desirous" for the welfare of others, so did Enos begin "to feel a desire" for others in the very moment of fulfillment in his personal relationship with God.

Following their own miraculous conversion, Alma and the sons of Mosiah developed a great desire to preach the gospel as missionaries. The description of their feelings bears clear resemblance to the experiences of Lehi and Enos: "Now they were desirous that salvation should be declared to every creature, for they could not bear that any human soul should perish; yea, even the very thoughts that any soul should endure endless torment did cause them to quake and tremble. And thus did the Spirit of the Lord work upon them. . . ." (Mosiah 28:3-4.) In his own later account of the same experience, Alma described his having "been born of God." From that time forward, he "labored without ceasing, that I might bring souls unto repentance; that I might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did taste; that they might also be born of God, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." (Alma 36:24.)

From these personal accounts we learn that complete harmony with God along the vertical religious axis leads directly to deep and perhaps permanent feelings of concern for others along the horizontal religious axis. The nature and source of this feeling of concern for others is revealed in Mormon's sublime language at the conclusion of his sermon to the members of the Church on faith, hope, and charity:

But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him.

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure. Amen. (Moroni 7:47-48.)

The "true followers" of Jesus who "pray with all the energy of heart" are here given the assurance that they may one day be "filled with this love" called charity, which is the very same "love which [the Lord] hast had for the children of men." (Ether 12:34.) We apparently cannot develop a complete and permanent Christlike love for other people on our own, even though we must qualify as "true followers of his son" in order to receive this love. To be sure, our own internally generated compassion for the needs of others is a crucial indication of our desire to be followers of the Savior—clearly part of "all we can do." For that reason, we must be reaching out to others even as we reach out to God, rather than waiting to respond to others' needs until our charitable instincts are quickened by the Spirit. But even then, charity in its full-blown sense is "bestowed upon" Christ's righteous followers. Its source, like all other blessings of the Atonement, is the grace of God: "I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity." (Ether 12:36.)

The purpose of charity, however, is not merely to cause a proper motivation for charitable acts toward other people—though that is of course one important result. The ultimate purpose is to make Christ's followers like him: "He hath bestowed [this love] upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him . . . that we may be purified even as he is pure." (Moroni 7:48; emphasis added.)

To partake fully of the tree of life is thus to be given the nature of Christ. Those so blessed as to receive this bestowal of the Savior's own character and attributes are filled with charity, because charity is central to the divine nature. The totality of the blessing, however, is complete, sanctified perfection: "Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him. . . . then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God." (Moroni 10:32-33.)

The ultimate purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ is to cause the sons and daughters of God to become as Christ is. Those who see religious purpose only in terms of ethical service in the relationship between man and fellowmen may miss that divinely ordained possibility. It is quite possible to render charitable—even "Christian"—service without developing deeply ingrained and permanent Christlike character. Paul understood this when he warned against giving all one's goods to feed the poor without true charity. President Clark understood it when he warned against equating man-made systems of ethics with the gospel of Christ. We can give without loving, but we cannot love without giving. If our vertical relationship with God is complete, then, by the fruit of that relationship, the horizontal relationship with our fellow beings will also be complete. We then act charitably toward others, not merely because we think we should, but because that is the way we are.

Service to others will surely bring us closer to God, especially when motivated by an unselfish sense of personal compassion. But even such desirable service will not of itself complete our relationship with God, because it will not by itself result in the bestowal of the complete attributes of godliness. That bestowal requires the ordinances and doctrines of the restored gospel and all the other elements of sacrifice and obedience spelled out in the scriptures. For that reason, while religious philosophies whose highest aim is social relevance may do much good, they will not ultimately lead people to achieve the highest religious purpose, which is to become as God and Christ are. It is even possible that an ethical philosophy grounded totally in a secular concern for the temporal welfare of others— desirable as that is in proper context—can by subtle logic even undermine the role of true religion. A limited ethical sense may artificially and temporarily imitate the fruits of true charity while at the same time making the pursuit of a fully developed relationship with God appear to be self-centered and, therefore, unworthy of a true Christian.

In addition, religious or ethical systems whose highest good is social justice do not necessarily provide the members of a society with the opportunity for personal, individualized development of true religious character. Indeed, such systems may impede the development of individual character by assuming that man's nature is fixed—either good or bad—and that institutional religion as a change agent should devote its attention to healing broad-scale social ills rather than to personal development. The restored gospel has a loftier and longer range purpose than this, which is empowered by forces that can change and develop the individual to the point of also solving social problems in permanent ways through the aggregation of personal solutions. Obviously, some minimal but significant level of political liberty and economic capacity are necessary for the gospel to achieve this promise, but the process of development caused by acceptance of the gospel must finally become an individual process.

Even keeping the commandments, desirable as that is, is not an end in itself. He that "receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." (D&C 58:29.) This is because the Lord's commandments are designed to develop the individual toward the capacity and spiritual state of mind needed to receive a perfected nature. Thus it may be relatively unimportant just how many white marks may be chalked up against some number of black marks over the course of one's life. Righteous acts in the past of an essentially evil person will not change what he or she has become. In the same way, disobedient acts in the past of an essentially righteous person will not change what he or she has become. What we are is more important than what we know or what we do. The Savior did not say, "Know ye therefore perfect" or "Do ye therefore perfect"; he said "Be ye therefore perfect."

This sense of becoming suggests that obedience and repentance are meaningful because they encourage the development of the spiritual maturity necessary to love God with all our might, mind, and strength. It also explains why the pursuit of knowledge and understanding by our own experience in a lone and dreary world, regardless of our errors, our disappointments, our failures and our confusion, would be the course designed by God for our ultimate preparation. After sufficient human experience, with all its variety and complexity, coupled with a meek and lowly heart inclined fully toward obedient striving, we have tasted the bitter in such a way that we know to prize the good. Then are we ready to grasp the meaning of the godlike life his grace so much desires to bestow, which includes an unbounded commitment to the welfare of others. Then we are prepared to enter into his presence. "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God." (Revelation 2:7.)

When that day comes, we will be given the quality or nature of life that God himself has, which is called "eternal" (godlike) life. It is an endowment of pure grace, the greatest endowment of all: "And, if you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7.)

This tree of life is the same tree of which Adam and Eve were not allowed to partake until they had faithfully and obediently endured the trials of mortal experience to the point of offering God a broken heart and a contrite spirit. It is the tree described as growing from the seed of faith Alma describes in Alma 32. It is the tree whose fruit represents the final bestowal of not only all that the Father has but what the Father is. No wonder that, when Lehi partook of this "love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men," he declared it was "the most desirable above all things." And an angel added, "Yea, and the most joyous to the soul." (1 Nephi 11:22-23.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Time, April 10, 1967.
[^2] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., "The Chartered Course of the Church in Education,'' address given August 8, 1938 to Church Seminary and Institute instructors at Aspen Grove, Utah (Salt Lake City: Church Commissioner of Education, 1980).
