Bruce C. Hafen, Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life's Experiences ( 1989)

Epilogue

I. The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil

And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow . . . the tree of life . . . in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. (Genesis 2:8-9.)

Eve walked in the garden in the cool of the day. The serpent saw her as she walked and he sought to beguile her, for he knew not the mind of God. The garden was beautiful, but Eve did not realize how beautiful it was, for she was innocent.

The serpent spoke to the woman. Behold, he said, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Eve looked at him and wondered who he was. Eat of this tree, said the serpent, for in the day you eat thereof shall your eyes be opened, and you shall be as the gods, knowing good and evil. Eve looked at the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. It appeared pleasant to her eyes and its fruit seemed desirable to make one wise. The serpent said, eat. Eve did eat, and also gave unto her husband, and he did eat. And their eyes were opened.

Adam and Eve walked together in the garden in the cool of the day. The garden seemed more beautiful now. They clasped their hands together as they walked. Eve was glad she was not alone. They looked toward the midst of the garden not far away and saw the tree of life. Adam wondered what this tree could be. Of a sudden, they heard the voice of the Lord God, and they hid themselves among the trees of the garden.

The Lord God said unto the woman and the man, What is this thing which you have done? Because you have eaten of the forbidden fruit, you cannot remain in the garden. You must be cast out. Cursed now shall be the ground for your sake; in sorrow shall you eat of it all the days of your life. You may now have children, but only in great sorrow. Now you may have joy, but only in the midst of misery and woe.

The Lord God said to his Only Begotten, who was with him, The man and woman are become as one of us, for now they will know good and evil. But let them not yet partake of the tree of life, or they will have no space to repent and prepare themselves to become as we are. Let them taste the bitter that they may know to prize the good.

The man and woman were driven out of the garden, and they brought forth children, even the family of all the earth.

II. The Tree of Life

And to bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man, after he had created our first parents, . . . it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter. (2 Nephi 2:15.)

Adam began to till the earth in the heat of the day. He felt the sweat drip down his face. He paused to wipe his brow and looked up at the sun. He looked back down at the fertile earth and thought about the angel who had come to him early that morning as he offered up a sacrifice to God. He had not known why God commanded him to offer sacrifices, but the angel taught him: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Adam and his wife called upon God and betimes heard his voice. But they could not see him, for they were shut out from his presence. God gave them commandments and they obeyed.

One day God spoke to Adam, saying he should be baptized and should teach his children of repentance and baptism. Adam wanted to understand and so he asked why. The Lord God said, I have forgiven your transgression in the garden, and now it is given to you, that you may know good from evil. When your children grow up, sin will conceive in their hearts, and they will taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good; wherefore, they may choose, for they are agents unto themselves. But they must repent of their sins and be baptized or they cannot inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there. As you have fallen, you may be redeemed, together with all your children, even as many as will.

Adam understood. He fell in humility to the earth and said, Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened and in this life I shall have joy. Eve heard his words, she understood them, and she was glad.

After many years, the Lord God gave a dream to a son of Adam called Lehi, in which Lehi beheld the tree of life, whose fruit was desirable to make one happy. As he partook of the fruit, it was sweet above all he had ever before tasted, and it filled his soul with exceeding great joy.

Lehi was old and full of sorrow for his children. He had been faithful in the midst of many trials. As he tasted the sweet fruit of the tree of life, he prized it with all his soul. Then he began to feel a desire for the welfare of his children, that they might partake of it also. The Lord God gave these feelings to Lehi, for the tree was the love that God has for the children of men, and which he bestows as an act of grace upon all who are true followers of Jesus, his Son. By this means, these followers take upon themselves his divine nature.
