William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

PREFACE

Happiness, said Joseph Smith, is the object and design of our existence. Lehi said it even more succinctly: Men are that they might have joy.

So here is the universal and unending quest. It's what life is all about.

But people pursue the quest in such different ways. In a Las Vegas casino, vacant-eyed men and women spend hours pulling the handles of slot machines. Half a world away in an Indian hospital, a young volunteer holds in her arms and murmurs loving words to a dying old man. Each is seeking happiness.

Some seek happiness in drugs or liquor, others in tuning the body and spirit for the highest enjoyment of this wondrous world. Some relentlessly pursue wealth and the big boys' toys that go with it; others devote their lives to family and service. Some struggle in hopes of achieving happiness at some future time; others are wise enough to know that the only time happiness can be grasped is here and now.

So the search goes on. In this volume is distilled much of what I have learned in my own personal search.

In briefest summary, it is this: Happiness has little to do with externalities; it is a state of mind. It depends not on what happens to us, but on how we react to what happens. It depends on the clearness of our conscience. And the primary truth: We are happy to the extent we get beyond and above ourselves by reaching out to others and up to God.

That is what I have tried to say, in many different ways, in this collection of short essays, almost all of which were first published as the back-page "Viewpoint" of the Church News. I am indebted to officers of the Deseret News—President Thomas S. Monson, Elder James. E. Faust, and Publisher William James Mortimer—and to Church News Editor Dell Van Orden for the privilege of contributing to this column, for encouragement to publish this book, and for helpful critique and counsel.

I am indebted to family, friends, and loved associates for ideas contributed and for being living examples of the values reflected here.

And, most of all, I am forever indebted to my best earthly friend and source of inspiration, my wife, Donna.
