William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

WHEN MESSAGES OF HOPE

FOR THY SAKE

Look," came the voice from the back row of the high priests group meeting. "If you or I saw someone suffering and didn't help, we'd be under condemnation, right? Well, when God could help, why doesn't He?"

A provocative question, one that has troubled man for centuries.

Why does the Lord allow such awesome tragedies as the volcano eruption in Colombia? The genocides in Eastern Europe, Cambodia, Uganda? The famines in Africa? Why do innocent people die in terrorist attacks? Why are good people killed or maimed in auto accidents, or ravaged by agonizing terminal illnesses, or tormented by the tearing apart of marriages and homes?

The answer is, we don't know. It is not given to man to know the mind of God, and agonizing over the meaning or cause of this disaster or that suffering can be fruitless and destructive.

But some reflection on the nature of adversity may be helpful. There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven, Section 130 of the Doctrine and Covenants tells us. We must suppose the Lord is bound by that law, just as He told us, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say." Part of that law, it would seem, is that growth and strength can come only by overcoming resistance. Just as the muscles of the arm can become strong only by exercising against resistance, so is striving against adversity essential to the growth of man. As one author put it, if life were not sometimes hard, we should have no muscles, mental or moral. There is no other way.

The words were carefully chosen when the Lord, in closing the gates of Eden, told us, "cursed be the ground for thy sake." Thorns and thistles followed. So did cruelty and hunger, broken health, lost jobs, thwarted dreams—all, in the long view, for our sake.

Remembering that, it may be easier to keep adversity from becoming tragedy. The difference is fundamental. Adversity is what happens to us. Tragedy is what we allow it to do to us. How we react to adversity determines whether we grow or, by degrees, die.

Example: A thirty-four-year-old man arrested illegally; thrown without trial into a stinking dungeon without windows, heat, or sanitary facilities; a rough stone floor for a bed; food rotting, perhaps poisoned. That's adversity. Out of it came a cry for succor, not despairing but faithful, as poignant as any in religious literature. And out of it came one of the most glorious, comforting, inspiring revelations known to man, one that concludes with these words:

"Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men . . . let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God. . . . The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." (D&C 121:45-46.)

Thus did the Lord acknowledge Joseph Smith's refusal to crumble; thus did triumph arise from adversity.

Adversity will come; it is part of the divine scheme of things. The challenge is to make of it triumph, not tragedy.
