William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

ANTIDOTES TO ADVERSITY

Adversity is part of life. It comes at different times, in different forms, in varying degrees of intensity. But come it does, to all of us.

The great challenge is to refuse to let the bad things that happen to us do bad things to us. That is the crucial difference between adversity and tragedy.

How can we preserve the difference?

In one of those senior citizen magazines, picked up in a doctor's waiting room, was an article on how to grow old gracefully. The prescription could be summarized in three words: fitness, friends, purpose. The same elements are vital in coping with adversity.

Adversity becomes tragedy if it destroys mental or emotional health. Mental health depends, to a considerable extent, on physical health. Good diet, regular exercise, adequate sleep—these are essentials of good health that are too often neglected under the stress of adversity. But fitness is more important at those times than at any other.

So are friends. The man or woman invites tragedy who, at times of illness, death, lost jobs, broken homes, withdraws into self. The brotherhood and sisterhood of the gospel is never more priceless than at such times when it is needed most. Social aloneness leads to aloneness of the spirit, and that is the ultimate tragedy.

Purpose is the enemy of despair. The man who lives mostly for and in himself is left desolate when that pertaining to himself—his health, his income, his reputation or power—is attacked or lost. But if his motivation is higher and broader, there is still purpose after these are gone. And purpose is the fuel without which progress stops and decay begins.

So fitness, friends, purpose; to these add perspective. Trouble that seems overwhelming, grief that seems unbearable, somehow becomes more manageable when seen in the majestic context of the Lord's creation. One troubled soul may find that perspective in the view from a hard-won mountain peak. Another from a worshipful walk under a starry sky. Or from pondering the wonder of a rosebud. Or standing in awe of a newborn baby. Or being soul-washed by the gift of music or art that speaks so eloquently of the genius with which God has entrusted man.

A thing of beauty, wrote John Keats in "Endymion: A Poetic Romance," is a joy forever. It is even more than a joy. The beauty, the balance, the wonder of what the Lord has created can be a healing balm. As Keats wrote:

Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing A flowery band to bind us to the earth, Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth Of noble natures, of the gloomy days, Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darken'd ways Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all, Some shape of beauty moves away the pall From our dark spirits . . .

Finally, adversity becomes tragedy in its most virulent form when it destroys self-image, when it makes us doubt our worth, doubt we are loved by God or by family or friends. Then, when the paralyzing conviction grows that no one cares, the Destroyer has his greatest opportunity.

When grief and despair make the heavens seem closed, the struggle to open them is hardest—and most essential. Then is when the scriptures and prayer have their greatest saving power. Then is when the soul most needs to open to the assuring whisper, "I am a child of God."
