William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

SEEING AS THE LORD SEES

Until that night, Don had it all.

Handsome, gregarious, athletically and mentally gifted, well launched in a prosperous career, blessed with a lovely wife and family, he was, in his early thirties, on his way.

Then came the night. Don went to bed. He awoke the next morning, blind. A rare disease had destroyed his optic nerve.

Some men would have been destroyed. Not Don. He went back to school, earned a law degree, launched a new career. For him, the principle of compensation held true—that when one sense is lost, the others are sharpened. With sight gone, hearing and touch and smell grew amazingly acute.

For years, until other physical problems stopped him, he skied Utah mountains, following the tinkling of bells attached to his partner's boots. Still today, he shoots golf in the low 80s, hitting in the direction his partner points, feeling the contour of the green through the soles of his feet, putting to the sound of a club rattled in the cup.

In a way sighted people can never understand, the loss of his physical eyes sharpened the vision of his inner eye. He "sees" the golf course, the shot he is about to hit, the problems in daily living and human relations more clearly and accurately than the rest of us.

Without many of the distractions others experience, he can see things as they really are. That focus seems to give him a special keenness of discernment and empathy that attract people to him for counsel and encouragement.

Was it not something like this that the Apostle Paul meant when he wrote: " . . . We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal [and, being temporal, subject to error and misinterpretation]; but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Cor. 4:18.)

Paul had reason to know the difference. After years of seeing things wrong, and doing terrible wrongs as a result, he, too, was suddenly stricken blind. In the moment of his sight loss and in the three days that followed, he began to see as he had never seen before.

It took fervent prayer during those three days of darkness for spiritual sight to develop. And then it took something more: "And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.

"And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized." (Acts 9:17-18.)

The connection is clear: Full spiritual sight follows faith, prayer, baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Armed with such sight, Paul began one of the greatest missionary careers in recorded scripture.

So what is our task, those of us blessed with all our physical senses? Surely, it is to use what we have been given. May we not be among those of whom the Lord said: "Eyes have they, but they see not: They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not." (Ps. 115:5-6.)

Beyond that, may we, like Don, develop the inner eye to see things as they really are. And ultimately, as we struggle toward perfection, may we strive to see as the Lord sees, "for man looketh on the outer appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." (1 Sam. 16:7.)

Then may we reach the highest good to which Paul, with his spiritually enlarged vision, aspired—to truly know God, and our fellowmen, and ourselves. "For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known." (1 Cor. 13:12.)
