William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

DESPERATION IS FOR UNBELIEVERS

Cutting across the mountainous border separating Pakistan and Afghanistan lies the Khyber Pass, the historic invasion route from Central Asia into India. Alexander the Great crossed that pass. So did the Huns, then Tamerlane, then the Mogul emperors who stamped Islam onto much of India and most of what is now Pakistan.

In recent years, a different kind of fighting raged along those passes as Afghanistan tribesmen battled to throw off a foreign yoke from their country. Their courage and determination prevailed; the invaders finally left in defeat.

But the war left a bitter legacy. Sprawling below the Khyber Pass, the fabled city of Peshawar is still crowded with refugees. The victims are easy to spot—men clumping around on one leg, children missing hands—maimed by mines sown by enemy planes. On a dusty Peshawar street, the Afghan Surgical Hospital houses the most severely injured. Some without eyes, some with faces burned away, some with brain damage or internal injuries, many with missing limbs, they lie in crowded wards, stolidly waiting for healing through surgical and medical skills, time, and faith.

Especially faith. That's the one common denominator that permeates every ward of this grim place. Twice a day, everything stops. The staff and all patients who are able move to the courtyards, kneel with foreheads to the ground, facing Mecca. Those who can't assemble turn in their beds.

These were warriors in what their Muslim leaders called a jihad— a holy war. They are men qualified in the crucible of pain to testify to the message of the Arabic banner hanging above the courtyard:

Desperation is only for unbelievers Those who believe in God never lose heart

Fanaticism can, and often does, grow from such faith. The world has seen, and deplores, the atrocities fanaticism spawns. That's the dark side. But no one can witness the struggle these fighters waged against such desperate odds, in hospital wards as well as the battlefield, without getting the all-important message that cuts across all religious, racial, and national lines: Courage comes from faith.

That's how it is with believers. But we profess to be believers, too. Is our faith as strong as theirs? Avoiding fanaticism, does it make our lives as courageous?

We fight no holy wars of knife and gun to test our courage. But tests come to everyone, in many ways. We see them every day, in our own lives and the lives of those around us.

There's the family whose strong, loving, nurturing father is taken by death. The calm strength, the bonding, the mutual support that turn tragedy into a blessing come from courage born of faith.

There's the neighbor whose heart was dying within her and who, while awaiting the miracle of a suitable donor for a transplant, blessed all around her with her radiant optimism.

There's the other neighbor left desolate when her husband rejected and left her after thirty years of marriage, who emerged from the crucible strengthened spiritually and in every other way.

There's the mother driven frantic by a teenage daughter hooked on drugs and who knows what else, whose neighbors rallied around in regular sessions of fasting and prayer, and who, while the battle isn't over, appears to be winning.

These, too, are believers. Not for them desperation. Faith gives them courage. Courage makes them strong.

That's what the Lord wants and expects. When Joshua faced his greatest test, leading Israel across the Jordan against overwhelming odds, he heard four times in one brief passage the message: Be strong and courageous.

To believers everywhere as they face their trials rings the same assurance He gave to Joshua: "Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest." (Josh. 1:9.)
