William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

THOU GOSPEL MESSAGES

ARE WE, TOO, ASLEEP?

How could they have slept, that night in Gethsemane? These three, Peter, James, and John, were His closest disciples, the three chosen to lead the continuation of His work. They had climbed the mountain with Him, had witnessed there the glory of His Transfiguration, had heard the voice of the Father testifying to His divine Sonship. "But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep." (Luke 9:32.)

Now, in the garden, the most sacred event in all human history was unfolding. In unimaginable agony, Jesus set about the task He had come to earth to do. His soul sorrowful unto death, pressed to the utmost limit of His endurance, Jesus faced His greatest trial, alone. Three times Jesus returned from the awesome struggle to find the disciples asleep.

Why? How could they?

In this luminous sentence from his great work, The Life and Times of Jesus The Messiah, Alfred Edersheim suggests an answer: "While He lay in prayer, they lay in sleep; and yet where soul-agony leads not to the one, it often induces the other."

We see so much of that among us: Good people faced with crises that demand earnest, prayerful effort run away instead. In a sense, they sleep, they escape—and become less good as a result.

To truly worship the Savior, to really remember Him, to ponder our debt in appropriate gratitude, is all-important.

So often, however, instead of being led to prayer, we escape into other realms of thought. Often, even in our sacrament meetings, we escape into forms of disturbance that not only kill our own spiritual communion but endanger that of others as well.

We come to His holy house by invitation, to worship, to give thanks, to pledge anew, to show our gratitude by our lives. Our chapels were dedicated, as was the Lord's temple at Kirtland, "that all people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord's house may feel thy power, and feel constrained to acknowledge that thou hast sanctified it, and that it is thy house, a place of thy holiness.

"And do thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this house may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they may seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said . . .

"And that this house may be a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of glory and of God, even thy house." (D&C 109:13-14, 16.)

Noble purposes, these. They should be, certainly, not too challenging for a people who count themselves among His own. But we are a social people. Visiting comes naturally. Silence is hard, the silence of worship harder still. Sleep is only one of several easy escapes.

How can we consistently take the harder course?

We can't replace something with nothing. It's not enough to empty the mind of the trivialities or worldly concerns that lead us away from worship. We can only stay in tune by filling our minds positively with our awesome debt of gratitude.

We can think of the nails piercing His hands and feet, the spear in His side. We can ponder His love for us, His washing of the feet, His final great prayer interceding with the Father for us. We can rejoice in the glory of the Resurrection.

Still, for most of us, sleep will creep up, worldly thoughts will intrude, neighbors will distract. Then may we invoke the image of our Lord prostrate in the garden, facing, alone, the full power of Satan. Picture it: There lay the Savior in prayer, the disciples in sleep.

For us, which will it be?
