William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

TRANSFIGURATION TODAY

After six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, and was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light. (Matt. 17:1-2.)

Those few simple words and the few that follow, telling of the ministering of angels and of the Father's testifying of His Son, are all we know of one of the supreme moments of the Savior's earthly ministry. In some holy, mysterious way, He who was already deeply immersed in His Messiahship received an even higher endowment. Of its meaning we can only stand in wonder and awe.

But in our continuing struggle to follow Him, each of us can, in a sense, experience transfiguration, both of the Savior and of ourselves.

In his superb little book, The Son of Man, Franois Mauriac points out how differently Christ appeared to different people. To a blessed few He appeared as the glorious Messiah; to many as a vagrant and trouble-making Nazarene. To the Samaritan woman at the well, He seemed, at first, an ordinary Jew. When Judas conspired to deliver Him to His enemies, he did not describe His stature or His striking appearance; only by a traitor's kiss could the soldiers distinguish the Son of Man from the eleven poor Jews around Him.

Yet, others loved Him at first sight. Many followed as soon as He began to speak, needing no miracle to prove His divinity. To some, one call only was needed to abandon all they possessed and follow Him.

"He cured many more men born blind than the Gospel recounts," Mauriac wrote. "Each time a creature called Him his Lord and his God and confessed that He was the Christ, the Messiah come into this world, he did so because Christ had opened the interior eye whose vision is not limited simply to appearances."

Whenever came that whispering of the Holy Spirit, whenever scales dropped from the eyes of men and women who then knelt at His feet and accepted Him as their Savior, there was a transfiguration of Jesus.

The same transfiguration blesses believing men and women today. But with the transfiguration, in our hearts, of Jesus, must come a transfiguration of ourselves. The one cannot be fully efficacious without the other.

Alma speaks of this second, personal transfiguration. "Have ye spiritually been born of God?" he challenged his brethren of the Church. "Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?"

And then, to be certain his listeners understood that this transfiguration must not be a transitory thing, he drove home the point: "If ye have experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:14, 26.)

The transformation of countenance of those who have experienced this mighty change of heart is remarkable, sometimes almost startling. Who has not seen in a crowded airport or some other place a stranger who was instantly recognized as a fellow Church member? Who has not seen the special glow of peace and calm strength come over the countenance of one whose life is in harmony with a testimony of the Savior—or, sadly, the distressing change of countenance of one who, having had such harmony, has lost it?

With such harmony comes the great blessing of confidence. It brings confidence in self as a beloved child of God. It brings confidence in others and our relationships with them, for they, too, are children of God, our brothers and sisters.

It brings the ultimate confidence, confidence in one's relationship with God. He has clearly told us how to achieve it: "Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God. . . . " (D&C 121:45.)

Those whose countenances radiate such confidence are transfigured indeed.
