William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

IF ONLY WE HAD BEEN THERE

Tradition has it that when the barbarian Clovis learned, centuries later, of the arrest, trial, and crucifixion of Christ, he clenched his fist and cried: "If only I had been there with my Franks!"

If only he had been there. If only we had been there. Would it have been different?

Had we been at Gethsemane on that moonlit night when Jesus waged His decisive battle with the powers of Satan, what would we have done? When the eternal fate of mankind hung in the balance, when His agony in shouldering our sins was so great He sweat drops of blood, would we have slept?

When He was betrayed by a kiss, bound, and led away, would we have forsaken Him and fled? Fearful of our safety in being associated with such a man, would we have denied knowing Him? How would we have acted had we been there? More to the point, how do we act here and now? The awesome truth is that Gethsemane was not just back then. It is also now. The final act of our redemption is yet to come.

Jesus did His part at Gethsemane. With infinite love and mercy, and infinite pain, He paid His part of the price of our redemption.

There remains our part, including faith, repentance, and righteous works. Unless we pay it, even His supreme sacrifice is powerless to bring us to exaltation.

So how faithfully are we paying the price?

"Watch and pray," Jesus enjoined His three chief apostles, "that ye enter not into temptation." (Matt. 26:41.) But they did not. Three times He returned from His divine agony to find them asleep, even as they had slept through that other glorious moment of His ministry on the Mount of Transfiguration.

Watch and pray, He has also enjoined us, for the same reason. Do we? Or do we sleep?

"Let your light so shine before men," He pleaded on another occasion, "that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:16.) Do we? Or when things get sticky, as on that night in Gethsemane, do we silently steal away?

As Paul reminded us, the Lord commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify. (Acts 10:42.) Do we? Or, to save ourselves embarrassment or inconvenience, do we, by our silence, deny we know Him?

Judgment should not be too harsh on those early apostles who slept and fled and denied on that fateful night. They were but human. True, they had sat at His feet and felt His love, had witnessed His miracles. They had heard His own testimony that He was the Son of the Living God, that He had come to save the world. But those are such large truths, so incomprehensibly far beyond their experience.

They could believe these things intellectually, because One whom they loved had told them. But to know them internally, with a certainty that banishes all sleepiness and timidity, perhaps that is too much to expect of unaided mortals.

The aid came, on the day of Pentecost, with the bestowal of the Holy Ghost. With that gift adding spiritual certainty to intellectual assent, the apostles slept or fled or denied no more. Fearless in the armor of God, they and countless followers set about building the kingdom, in total disregard for their own lives.

If only we had been there. But we are there. We are there, armed with the same gift of the Holy Ghost that turned fearful disciples into spiritual giants. What will we do about it?

LET GO AND REACH UP

It was a family outing in the magnificent red-rock and blue-water country of Utah's Lake Powell, one of many this close-knit family had enjoyed. In one of the lake's lovely coves, the lure of the deep, blue water was strong. The motor was switched off, the houseboat drifted, and everyone went overboard for a swim.

"Everyone" included the family's eighty-five-year-old patriarch. Not much of a swimmer but never one to be left out, he donned a bulbous orange lifejacket and slipped over the side.

The boat's boarding ladder had been lost—no problem for strong young arms and supple bodies when it came time to get back aboard. But for an eighty-five-year-old it was a serious problem.

Grasping a stanchion, the patriarch struggled to climb aboard. Grown sons tried to push from below. Others tried to pull from above, but his white-knuckled grip on the stanchion prevented effective help.

Finally, when his struggles had reached the point of despairing exhaustion, the plea of a daughter came clear: "Dad! Dad! Reach up! Let go and reach up!"

It took faith, in his exhausted condition, to let go of that stanchion, but he did, and reached up. Strong hands grasped his wrists and lifted him into the boat.

"Thanks," he gasped as he sprawled on the deck. "I don't know how much longer I could have lasted."

And then, after a long, reflective pause, he seized the teaching moment: "You know, I wonder how many times in my life I have struggled and relied on my own powers when what I needed to do was let go and reach up for help from above."

Through the centuries, men of greatness have been those with the faith to let go and reach up. Abraham, struggling with the awful command to sacrifice his special son, let go and reached up—and heard the ultimate affirmation of his faith: "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice."

Moses, struggling with a stubborn, rebellious people on one hand and an angry and vindictive pharaoh on the other, let go and reached up—and the children of Israel passed through the Red Sea in safety.

The three Hebrews in Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace, Daniel in the lion's den, like all the prophets who struggled to bring the Lord's words to an uncaring world, when the crisis came found they had to let go and reach up.

Even the Son of God, our Lord and Savior, after the despairing cry, "My God, why hast thou forsaken me," showed us the way by letting go and reaching up.

And in our time, a fourteen-year-old boy who let go his struggles over the confusion of churches and reached up for help opened the glorious Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

Do we have the faith to follow these examples as we struggle with our problems? Or are we more like the man who missed his footing at the top of a precipice, plunged over, and saved himself only by clinging to a bush growing out of the cliff?

Feeling the bush slowly give way, he prayed fervently for help and cried, "Isn't there anyone up there who can save me?"

From above came a voice: "I have heard your prayers, my son. Let go of the bush and you will be saved."

A long pause, and then the reply: "Is there anyone else up there?"

"Prove me now herewith," the Lord said, "if I will not open you the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Mal. 3:10.)

And what are the blessings? They are almost beyond counting. The Lord has promised great blessings to those who pay an honest tithe. He has also promised peace to those who follow Him. The Word of Wisdom promises yet other blessings: ". . . they shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, and shall run and not be weary and walk and not faint. . . ."

These and so many other blessings to help through the trials of this life are promised to those with the faith to let go and reach up. Finally, of course, is offered the greatest of all blessings—that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
