William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

OUR GIFTS FROM CHRISTMAS

What did you get for Christmas?

Immediately following the Christmas season you hear this question everywhere as the Western world sets about tidying up after its annual splurge. The more thoughtful among us might ask the question in an importantly different form: What did you get from Christmas?

Poor is the man with no one to love him and bring gifts at Christmastime. But poorer still is he who takes from the Christmas experience no lasting values to ennoble his life.

So let's prepare to ask ourselves, when the great day is over, what did we get from Christmas?

Will it be fresh appreciation for the goodness and open-heartedness of people, an appreciation that will make it easier to live in love and harmony with our fellowman as the Savior taught?

Will it be a keener awareness of the want and sadness and loneliness that afflict so many lives—and a greater personal commitment to help? Instead of spending Christmas Eve in the peace and security of their family circle, some will go as volunteers to the rescue mission and other such places where they will serve dinner to homeless, despairing people who will know little peace and security. What they will get from Christmas is the inner glow that comes from emptying our hearts of acquisitiveness and self-centeredness to make room for love and generosity.

At Christmas men come closer than at any other time to the goodwill that God pleads with us to practice at all times. If we get this gift from Christmas, can we keep it glowing throughout the year? Will our gift be new dedication to the great mission that began with His birth: to teach His Gospel and build His kingdom so that through Him all nations of the earth might be blessed? For members of His Church, failure to receive and keep this gift invites condemnation.

Will we get from Christmas a new sense of optimism? Optimism is so much needed today in a world tormented by terrorism, fear of nuclear destruction, drugs, moral breakdown, family disintegration. But the Christmas story reminds us that the world the shepherds knew was pretty dreadful, too, gripped as it was by a tyrant so filled with paranoia and blood-lust that he would shortly order the slaughter of all male infants. To them, in their extremity, came the same message that comes to us in our difficulty: "Fear not: For behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people." With that divine assurance, who can despair about mankind's future?

The shepherds got something else from Christmas that we, too, can get. They returned to their fields after that visit to the stable, the scriptures tell us, glorifying and praising God.

That was after Christmas was over. But what a glorious gift to take from Christmas and to try to keep throughout the year—a sense of God's power and goodness and mercy, an appreciation of the goodness of His creation, a dedication to do His work, a gratitude so profound that we will return to our fields glorifying and praising God.

Glorifying God is, of course, more than singing praises to His name—though more of that would be good for all of us. It is living so that men might see our good works and glorify our Father which is in heaven. It is filling our souls with the love that leads to godly action. It is doing what we can do to aid in His supreme mission—His glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

"Glory to God in the highest," peals that glorious Christmas anthem. And what follows? "Peace on earth, good will toward men."

That's what we can get from Christmas.
