William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

CHRISTMAS IS HOPE

Why can't I have everything I want?" the petulant child demanded of the department store Santa Claus.

"Because," came the answer as reported in USA Today "then there would be nothing left to hope for."

Simple as it seems, there may be no more profound way to express the ultimate Christmas message. At both the material and spiritual levels, hope is the essence of Christmas.

Hope is what makes each brightly wrapped package so full of possibilities. For the receiver, anticipation is the magic of Christmas. It is so for the giver as well. The more love and care that have gone into selecting the gift, the keener the anticipation, the hope, that this gift will prove to be exactly right.

In part because of those hopes, Christmas Eve is, in most homes, the best part of Christmas. But there is more, far more.

In the quiet expectancy of Christmas Eve, before the hectic materialism of the day itself, there is time for deeper hopes. There is the hope for stronger family bonds, for more love and mutual support among neighbors and friends, for lives more enriched by precious human contact.

There is the hope that what began in that stable will really change lives, that men will really begin to love their enemies and bless and do good to and pray for them.

There is the hope that as mankind is elevated in the light of Christ, there can actually come peace on earth, good will to men.

So far, the record isn't encouraging. In two thousand years since that holy night, there has hardly been peace on earth. The violence and terrorism, the family disintegration, the economic confusion, the drug abuse and moral decay and the terrifying new disease they spawned—all these demonstrate little progress of good will toward men.

But Christmas is hope. It is a time to reflect that, grim as our prospects seem today, this is nothing new. Grim, indeed, were the prospects of the shepherds huddled that night on the hills outside Bethlehem.

Palestine squirmed under the rule of a tyrannical, bloodthirsty Roman puppet, a ruler so depraved in his madness he would soon order the slaughter of all male infants.

In such a place at such a time, hollow indeed to those without hope must have sounded the message: "Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy. . . . " (Luke 2:10.)

The world has always had its Herods, and always will until the end comes. But God can and does change human hearts. He can and does replace greed with compassion, hatred with love. Not for all men and at all times has such change come. But enough that mankind has always survived the Herods.

Of course, the outcome is more critical now, more immediate. For the first time, our generation has the technology to destroy civilization. There may not be time for the mills of the gods to grind slowly, for the goodness among mankind to gradually overcome the evil. Which is why it has never been more urgent for men to turn to God, to put their trust in His promise: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. . . . Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

The shepherds who worshipped at the manger and those who similarly worship today share the blessed assurance that the final word will be that of God, not man.

That is the hope of Christmas.
