William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

HE WILL STAY

In a system of designation based on phases of the moon, Easter may fall as early as March 22 or as late as April 25. Merchants and chambers of commerce don't much like that system. Men have tried to change it. The League of Nations in 1923 called a conference to agree on a fixed date; the British Parliament passed a fixed-date act in 1928; the Vatican II Ecumenical Council in 1963 recommended a fixed date.

But agreement seems distant; the tradition of seventeen centuries is strong. And it is just as well, because there is profound, if unintended, symbolism in the way the date is set.

It was the Council of Nicea in 325 a.d. that set Easter on the first Sunday after the first full moon following the spring equinox. At that time, thousands of devout Christians were making pilgrimages to the Holy Land. The Easter policy was adopted to help them travel in safety by the light of the full moon.

Travelers don't need the light of the full moon today. But in a higher sense, we are all pilgrims. We all seek the Holy Land. In the effort to get there safely, we face dangers more sinister, in the eternal sense, than did those seeking to reach Jerusalem.

How desperately we need to make the journey in the Light of Christ. Two who learned to walk in that light we learn about in the 24th chapter of Luke. One was a disciple named Cleopas. The other, judging by the immediacy and passion of the account, probably was Luke himself.

They had been in Jerusalem, apparently, during the terrible night and day of the Savior's betrayal, arrest, trial, and crucifixion. They had heard the perplexing reports of the two Marys and Peter and others about an empty tomb and angels saying He is risen. Like Peter, they had undoubtedly wondered at what had come to pass. Certainly they had not understood.

And now, later on that same day of resurrection, they set out from Jerusalem on the road to Emmaus, some seven and one-half miles away. Sad, confused, no doubt bitterly disappointed in the blighting of their hopes for a Redeemer, they could talk of nothing else than the events of those three days.

When the Risen Lord himself joined them along the way, their hearts were so turned inward to their own grief they did not know Him and poured out the story of how He who was to have redeemed Israel had, instead, been condemned and executed.

To such sorrowing, confused, ordinary human beings, the Resurrected Savior gave His first extensive teachings. Nor was it new doctrine He taught. Turning to the scriptures, He patiently explained how prophets since Moses had foretold the mission of the Messiah, His suffering, His resurrection.

At last, they began to understand. Their hearts began to burn with the conviction that leads men to total discipleship. When the village was reached and He would have left them, "they constrained Him, saying, Abide with us." And He stayed, even as, over and over, He has said . . . knock and it shall be opened . . . seek and ye shall find.

Now no longer a stranger, but the Master, He broke bread, blessed it, and gave to them. "And their eyes were opened, and they knew Him, and He vanished out of their sight."

He lives! Man shall live! There is no more vital, eternally meaningful, unspeakably joyful message than this.

But there is more: The truth that here and now, in this complex, challenging, risky pilgrimage on which we all have embarked, we ordinary men and women can walk by His light. He has given us the words of the prophets to help us know how to turn to that light. He has spoken to us peace. And, wonder of wonders, if we constrain Him, if we earnestly seek His presence, He will stay.
