William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

MESSAGES FOR A HAPPIER LIFE

RISING ABOVE OURSELVES

In his insightful and provocative book The Seven Mysteries of Life, Guy Murchie describes a phenomenon in nature he calls social transcendence. When the individual consciousness is absorbed into and becomes part of a group consciousness, individual capabilities are transcended in astonishing ways.

Examples are many. One of the most dramatic is that of the carnivorous army ant. Individually, this ant is no match for other ants or many other insects. Individually, it behaves randomly, if not moronically. "But when a colony of thousands or (better) millions of ants is functioning," Murchie writes, "a definite intelligence is evident and the ants' activity becomes coordinated and purposeful, sometimes rising to the point of instinctive brilliance."

Marching by the millions in a column a yard or two wide, perhaps one hundred yards long, the army ant is invincible in the animal kingdom. Even elephants flee its approach. Pythons and crocodiles as well as smaller victims are killed and consumed in a matter of minutes. Facing hot coals, ants in the forward ranks sacrifice themselves, "creating with their thousands of bodies, an eventual causeway of ash the rest of the army can march over." To cross a stream, they will form a living bridge, clinging to each other to the death while the rest cross over. If the stream is too wide, they form themselves into "a kind of Noah's Ark, a roughly spherical vessel with enough enclosed air to float, and thus launch themselves as if with a single mind."

Colonies of termites act with a similar kind of group consciousness and intelligence. So do beehives. So do schools of certain kinds of fish and flocks of some birds. Individually, such creatures can hardly survive, much less act purposefully. Only as part of a group mind can they attain the purpose of their creation.

These simple examples may tell us something profound and divine about man's relationship with his fellow beings and with his Creator.

Some find it a hard doctrine that, as king Benjamin told his people, "the natural man is an enemy to God" (Mosiah 3:19), a person of "nothingness" in a "worthless and fallen state." (Mosiah 4:5.) We are sons and daughters of God, created in His image. How can we be nothing and worthless?

The nothingness of the army ant, acting in and of itself, may give a clue. Believing our own self-sufficiency, failing to yield ourselves to the mind and will of God, failing to acknowledge our dependence on Him and His redemptive sacrifice, failing to live His teachings, we are, in the eternal scheme of things, also worthless and purposeless.

King Benjamin's people learned that message. They believed his words "because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." (Mosiah 5:2.)

What an invincible force would be a society—a church—made up of individuals who had experienced that mighty change, who had united in the disposition only to do good, who had become one with the will of God. In such a society, our individual powers would be transcended here and, in ways beyond human comprehension, hereafter.

But, it may be objected, we are not ants. We possess God-given intelligence and are expected to use it, not submerge it in a group mind. What of our freedom if we yield our will to God's will?

Here is the great secret. True freedom is in voluntarily, intelligently choosing a higher realm of operation. When we experience the "mighty change" and lose the disposition to act carnally, we throw off the shackles tying us to carnal things. Having only the disposition to do good, how glorious would be our freedom to make our decisions in that realm.

King Benjamin spoke to his people, and us, of that freedom: "And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters.

"And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free." (Mosiah 5:7-8.)
