William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

THE ATTITUDE OF GRATITUDE

What would you not pay to see the moon rise if nature had not made it free entertainment? (Richard Le Gallienne.)

What, indeed, would one not pay for sunshine, for rain, for a child's love, for sleep, for fingers that work, for each new day, had all these blessings and infinitely more not been freely given by a loving Heavenly Father?

Yet, how seldom we pause to give thanks for these everyday things. How seldom are our souls suffused with awe and gratitude for the magnificence of His gifts.

How unthinkingly, how obtusely we take it all for granted.

Gratitude, Samuel Johnson said two centuries ago, is a fruit of great cultivation; it is not found among gross people. If this be true, it follows that an essential goal in our striving toward perfection must be development of a lively and unfailing attitude of gratitude.

The Lord expects it of us. Over and over, the scriptures enjoin us to give thanks in all things, to praise and thank God without ceasing. His promise is great to those who do. If we thank the Lord in all things, if we offer a broken heart and contrite spirit, keep the Lord's day holy, and do these things with thanksgiving, with glad hearts and cheerful countenances, then the fullness of the earth is promised us, "all things which come of the earth . . . to please the eye and gladden the heart . . . to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul."

But then comes the warning: "And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things. . . ." (D&C 59:21.)

Pride and arrogance the Lord hates. (See Prov. 8:13.) What greater pride is there than failure to acknowledge that all blessings come from God, what greater arrogance than failure to give thanks for them?

Essential along with an attitude of gratitude to God is a like attitude toward our fellow men. Gratitude is the lubricant in human affairs. The service we freely give to those we love, or to those we don't, would become drudgery and grind to a halt without it.

On the wall of a teenager's bedroom hangs a poster:

Gratitude takes three forms A feeling in the heart An expression in words And a giving in return

He is happiest and comes closest to perfection who keeps the feeling of gratitude in his heart at all times, whatever happens to him. Depression and despair attack those who convince themselves that no one cares. That conviction is impossible for one who carries in his heart a feeling of gratitude to a loving Heavenly Father and to his fellowmen. Gratitude and depression cannot exist in the same mind at the same time. Gratitude in the heart blesses the one in whose heart it grows. Gratitude expressed in words blesses others as well.

The story is told of a group of men who were talking about people who had influenced their lives and to whom they were grateful. One man thought of a high school teacher who had introduced him to Tennyson. He decided to write and thank her.

In time, written in a feeble scrawl, came this letter:

"My dear Willie:

"I can't tell you how much your note meant to me. I am in my 80s living alone in a small room, cooking my own meals, lonely and like the last leaf lingering behind. You will be interested to know that I taught school for 50 years and yours is the first note of appreciation I have ever received. It came on a blue, cold morning and it cheered me as nothing has for years."

So little effort to express thanks. So greatly multiplied the effect. So it is in all human relationships—and in relationships with God.

As for giving in return, Edward Arlington Robinson spoke of

Two kinds of gratitude; the sudden kind We feel for what we take, the larger kind We feel for what we give.

So it is. Gratitude felt and spoken ennobles the soul. Gratitude expressed in action, in giving, enlarges it as well.
