William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

READY FOR A CRASH LANDING

For two hours the airliner, its landing gear crippled, had circled over the Florida coast, dumping fuel. For two hours its passengers had prepared for the crash landing they knew was coming. Some prayed. Some wept. Some spoke quietly together of lives shared, of love given and received. Some, no doubt, anguished over deeds done or undone.

At last, the waiting was over. The time had come to live or die.

With the greatest care the pilot eased onto the runway at Miami airport. On its belly the giant jet skidded and bounced to a halt as fire trucks raced alongside, smothering with foam the fire that briefly erupted. Passengers tumbled down the emergency chutes and dashed for safety.

Foam-drenched and shaken, but safe, the passengers recounted their emotions and thoughts during the ordeal. A never-to-be-forgotten comment came from one of a group of LDS missionaries returning from Ecuador: "I resolved to live the rest of my life prepared for a crash landing."

That was in essence the Savior's urgent last message to His disciples before His last night on earth. Be ready for a crash landing. Be ready for the Lord's coming, or—more to the point for most of us—for our going.

He had just spoken (see Matt. 24) of the signs of His coming. He had warned that no man knew the hour or day, simply that we should be ready. Then followed two of his most pointed parables (see Matt. 25), among the last He would give.

Eagerly, ten virgins, bridesmaids, awaited arrival of the bridegroom. Each had brought her lamp to light the wedding procession. Five had brought no oil, expecting, perhaps, to be provided from a common supply. The hour grew late. The bridesmaids slept. Suddenly, at midnight, the cry came, "The bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him."

Hastily, lamps were lit. Five, without oil, immediately went out. Their owners asked the others to share. No, they were told, they must provide their own. While they scrambled to do so, the bridegroom arrived, the door was shut, the five unprepared bridesmaids missed the wedding.

The meaning cannot be misunderstood. The bridegroom is the Lord, whose second coming has so long been awaited. The wedding is His Kingdom, the bridesmaids His disciples, the lamps the symbol of their discipleship, the oil the individual, personal preparation essential to make the lamp burn.

Each of us is responsible for his own oil. There can be no borrowing from others. There is no common supply. When the unknown day and hour arrive, it will be too late for last-minute preparation.

Caught short of oil, no matter how earnestly we profess discipleship, we are in danger of hearing those dreadful words: "I know you not."

How, then, must we provide the oil? The Lord's entire ministry was devoted to teaching and showing how. But the parable that immediately follows that of the Ten Virgins makes unmistakably clear what He expects of those who profess to follow Him.

The parable of the talents, the blessing of the servants who used and doubled their talents, the condemnation of the one who didn't, is generally—and properly—understood to mean that God expects us to use constructively the time, energy, and intelligence He has given us. If we do, these gifts will be increased. If we don't, they will be lost.

But to His disciples, the meaning is more specific. They were His own servants whom the Master had called. They were His goods with which He entrusted them before leaving for a "far country."

The Lord has left to be with His Father. He has left His kingdom in the hands of His servants. To some He has entrusted five talents, some two, some one. Some are called as General Authorities, some as bishops, some as stake missionaries, some as home or visiting teachers.

For all, the expectation is the same: Magnify the calling. Proclaim the gospel. Perfect the saints. Redeem the dead. Return to the Lord, when He returns, His kingdom enlarged and strengthened and perfected.

To those who do, who come to the wedding with their own oil, will He say: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matt. 25:21.)
