William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

ARE WE REALLY FREE?

Free agency is the gospel's cornerstone. Without it, the Savior's redeeming sacrifice and the plan of salvation itself, would be meaningless.

The scriptures on freedom are convincing: "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free. . . . " (Gal. 5:1.) " . . . Behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free." (Hel. 14:30.)

But there is a problem here, or seems to be. What of those who don't have the truth? What of those who never heard of Christ or the knowledge He gave? What of the billions of people who struggle for existence against starvation and disease in the dark places of the earth—or, indeed, those in our "modern" nations who are trapped in crime-ridden pockets of poverty, ignorance, and despair? What, in fact, of ordinary people living ordinary lives suddenly overwhelmed by crises or tragedy not of their own making?

Are these people really free? Are they not hopelessly trapped by what is happening to them?

Dominique LaPierre in his book City of Joy suggests an answer. He describes the desperation of life in Calcutta's leprous, starvation-ridden slums. And then he writes: "In these slums people actually put love and mutual support into practice. They know how to be tolerant of all creeds and castes, how to give respect to a stranger, how to show charity toward beggars, cripples, lepers and even the insane. Here the weak were helped, not trampled upon. Orphans were instantly adopted by their neighbors, and old people were cared for and revered by their children."

The Jewish psychiatrist Victor Frankl examines this question of freedom. In his book Man's Search for Meaning he describes his life in Nazi concentration camps, where his father, mother, brother, and wife perished in the gas ovens.

And he asks: "What about human liberty? Is there no spiritual freedom in regard to behavior and reaction to any given surroundings? Is that theory true which would have us believe that man is no more than a product of many conditional and environmental factors—be they of a biological, psychological or sociological nature?"

His answer is unequivocal: "Man can preserve a vestige of spiritual freedom, of independence of mind, even in such terrible conditions of psychic and physical stress.

"We who lived in concentration camps can remember the men who walked through the huts comforting others, giving away their last piece of bread. They may have been few in number, but they offer sufficient proof that everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose one's attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one's own way."

As a further witness, hear the apostle Paul. Near the end of his ministry, times were tough for Paul. Writing to the saints in Corinth, he described his personal ordeal: Five times scourged with the thirty-nine lashes that sometimes killed the victim; three times beaten with rods, once stoned, three times shipwrecked, constantly imperiled by robbers, by his own countrymen as well as by heathen, by the wilderness, by the sea, by false brethren.

Nor was he alone. Stephen had died a martyr. So had others. So, soon, would Paul.

In these conditions, this was his testimony: "We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair;

"Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. . . .

"For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;

"While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Cor. 4:8-9, 17-18.)

Man is free. His true freedom has nothing to do with his place of birth, his economic or social or educational status, the vagaries of man or even of nature.

Freedom is given by God. It is within. No outward force can destroy it. Whether in a Calcutta slum, a Nazi concentration camp, on the wrong end of a scourging, or in any of the vicissitudes of modern life, man is free to choose—either to surrender, or to live the dignity and integrity of Christ-seeking humanity.
