William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

THE LOAN OF LIFE

A thunderstorm with its deadly windshears. A light plane attempting to land. A sudden, terrible gust, and a family of five is dead, including a man and his wife, their son, daughter-in-law, and grandchild.

Surviving family members struggle to understand. So do officers and employees of companies this man had founded and fostered. So do many in business, government, and education who had looked to him for leadership. So do friends who had loved this family for its generous goodness, and who feel deeply the loss.

Comfort and sympathy are freely expressed. Explanations are attempted. But who knows the mind and purpose of God? In the end, the wise among us accept the message expressed on a plaque hanging on the wall of a venerable family doctor:

It has taken all my life for me to understand that I don't need to understand everything.

What we do understand, and are reminded of almost any time we pick up the daily paper, is that life is tenuous. It can end without warning, and had better be lived fully and responsibly and productively—as this family certainly lived theirs—while there is time.

A four-word phrase in king Benjamin's address to his people makes the unforgettable point: "I say unto you that if ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants." (Mosiah 2:21; italics added.)

By lending you breath; what an insightful key to the mystery of mortal existence. Our bodies, our minds, our abilities, our very breath are on loan from our Creator.

There are certain things about loans that we all understand. One is that this kind of loan can be called at any time, at the lender's will, without recourse or argument or explanation. That's the condition on which we accept the loan. If it's called earlier than expected, sorrow is appropriate, but certainly not bitterness or feelings of injustice.

Another is that we are expected to return the loaned object in good condition, excepting normal wear and tear. Those who say, "It's my body, and no one can tell me what to do with it," don't understand. It isn't their body. It's a loan. To damage it carelessly is irresponsible and shameful.

A third thing about loans is that there's an interest charge attached. The lender expects a profit. He expects us to improve our talents, not bury them. He expects service to our fellow men as the interest we pay. It's true that the loan is so magnificent that, no matter how hard we try, what we repay can't possibly represent profitable interest by earthly standards. But the Lord's bookkeeping isn't based on earthly standards.

In His unimaginable generosity, ". . . all that he requires of you is to keep his commandments . . . [and] if ye do keep his commandments he doth bless you and prosper you." (Mosiah 2:22.)
