William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

RAISE YOUR THERMOSTAT

In the Northern Hemisphere on wintry days, a device hanging unobstrusively on the wall in most homes determines, to a large extent, our physical comfort.

It's called a thermostat, and is a marvel of efficient simplicity.

Set one pointer at a certain level and it turns on the heating system when the temperature falls to that level. Set the other pointer a few degrees higher and it shuts off when the heat reaches that level.

The range of temperature between those two points is called the comfort zone. Someone in authority determines what the comfort zone should be—usually after considerable prompting—and sets the thermostat. There it stays, faithfully keeping the temperature in that range—until someone else overrules the someone in authority and sets it higher. Which, in the home we know best, usually comes sooner than later.

There is within each of us a thermostat that governs our performance. It's called self-image. Each of us determines who and what we are and sets the thermostat accordingly. When we get outside the comfort zone we set for ourselves, it creates tensions and we correct our behavior to get back where our self-image tells us we belong.

"As [a man] thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) We are what we think—or, rather, feel—we are. The only way we can achieve lasting, productive change in our lives is to change the way we feel about ourselves.

Around the first of the year, there's a lot of resolution-making. We resolve to perform better in our jobs, abandon sin, be more energetic, lose weight, treat our spouses better. But all that resolving is useless if we still think of ourselves as inefficient, sinful, lazy, fat, or mean.

We must reset the thermostat. But how?

If we fully understood—and lived—the gospel, we would have no trouble with self-image. How could we, knowing that we are sons and daughters of God, made in His image, having within us the potential of godhood? How could we doubt our worth as individuals, knowing we are so worthwhile, in God's eyes, that His entire plan of salvation, His work and glory, His gift of His Only Begotten Son, are to bring to pass our eternal life? Knowing this, having low self-esteem is a form of blasphemy.

The trouble is, we don't act like sons and daughters of God. We sin. We fall short of His hopes and expectations. We feel guilt, and guilt keeps us from feeling good about ourselves.

That is when it is most important to stay in touch with Him. That is when searching study of the scriptures and searching prayer are most essential, to be assured by His word that we are His children, that He loves us, that we are worthy of His love, that because we are worthy He has given the great gift of repentance with the promise that if we repent, our sins will be wiped away, that He will remember them no more.

If God remembers not our weaknesses, we must forget them, too. Forget our crooked teeth or halting speech or lack of confidence around others. Forget all our weaknesses and emphasize our strengths. Forget our failures and remember our successes. Know that we can succeed, because we have succeeded.

It is told of the painter Whistler that he once created a tiny painting of a spray of roses. The artistry was so superb that it was the envy of artists who saw it, the despair of collectors who yearned to buy it. But Whistler refused to sell, saying, "Whenever I feel that my hand has lost its cunning, whenever I doubt my ability, I look at that little painting and say to myself, 'Whistler, you painted that. Your hand drew it. Your imagination conceived the colors. Your skill put the roses on the canvas.' Then I know that what I have done, I can do again."

Like Whistler, let us hang on the walls of our minds the memory of our successes. Take counsel of our strength, not our weakness. Remember the big moments, the times we have risen above our comfort zone, and know that what we have done we can do again. And again.

"Neglect not the gift that is in thee," the apostle Paul exhorted his young disciple Timothy—and each of us. "For God has not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." (1 Tim. 4:14; 2 Tim. 1:7.)

Power. Love. Sound mind. This is how God sees us. Can we not so see ourselves, reset our self-esteem thermostat at a higher level, and perform as God intended?
