William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

FIVE ANTENNAE FOR HEARING GOD

Prayer keeps a man from sin, Brigham Young once said, and sin keeps a man from prayer.

It's true. The scriptures are full of the assurance that prayer is the first and best defense against the powers of the destroyer. "Humble yourself before the Lord," Alma pleaded, "and call on his holy name, and watch and pray continually, that ye may not be tempted above that which ye can bear." (Alma 13:28.)

Sin can clog the communication lines to heaven. The soul darkened with unrepented sin is in no condition to get a message through. Mark Twain knew about that. His Huckleberry Finn described the condition of far too many of us: "I about made up my mind to pray and see if I couldn't try to quit bein' the kind of boy I was and be better. So I kneeled down. But the words wouldn't come. Why wouldn't they? It weren't no use to try and hide it from Him. . . . I knowed very well why they wouldn't come. It was because my heart wasn't right; it was because I was playin' double. I was lettin' on to give up sin, but way inside of me I was holdin' on to the biggest one of all. I was tryin' to make my mouth say I would do the right thing and the clean thing, but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie and He knowed it. You can't pray a lie."

But it's not just sin that keeps us from prayer. It's also indifference or laziness. Effective communication with God takes hard, concentrated effort. Too often, we make prayer a matter of convenience instead of high priority for our time and attention.

And often, it's lack of faith—real faith that He will hear and answer—that makes our effort superficial, if we make the effort at all. We haven't recognized a clear answer to our prayers, or it has been a while and we've forgotten. The Lord must have known how quickly we forget, which is why He pleaded with us to pray evening, and morning, and at noon (see Ps. 55:17), to pray without ceasing (see 1 Thes. 5:17), to call on the name of the Lord daily (see Mosiah 4:11), to let our hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually (see Alma 34:27).

Or it's that we don't recognize answers when they come. We pray, but don't listen. Or we don't listen long and patiently enough. Jesus' plea (Matt. 24:42) to watch, "for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come" applies not only to His second coming, but also to those times in the life of each of us when quietly He comes in answer to our prayers.

As we listen for the answer, we may well reflect on how it may come. It may come directly, powerfully, immediately recognizable, of course. But it may come subtly, knowable only to the sensitive, listening heart.

In his luminous little book, He Touched Me; My Pilgrimage of Prayer, John Powell suggests five quiet ways in which God may answer prayer: "Can God put a new idea directly and immediately into my mind? Can God put new desires into my heart, new strength into my will? Can He touch and calm my turbulent emotions? Can He actually whisper words to the listening ears of my soul through the inner faculty of my imagination? Can God stimulate certain memories stored within the human brain at the time these memories are needed?

"If the answer to these questions is yes, then God has at least five channels through which He can reach me, five antennae in my human anatomy through which He can 'touch' me. . . . I feel sure that God can and does reach us in these ways. . . . God is available and anxious to speak to you and me. Yes, just as anxious as he was to speak to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Isaiah and Jeremiah."

LIGHT IN DARK PLACES

The day was dark. Clouds lowered over the higher peaks as the highway climbed the canyon. But autumn made the world beautiful. Maple reds and oranges splashed the lower slopes. Higher, pockets of golden aspen gleamed among the dark conifers.

"Isn't it interesting," someone remarked. "Where those aspen are, it looks like the sun is shining."

So it is in human affairs. Where one individual, or a few, glows with the light of Christ, no matter how dark the day or the time, it looks like the sun is shining. If the glow is bright enough and lasts long enough, sooner or later it will shine.

The young mother stood in front of her house, her year-old baby in her arms, warming in the morning sun. Idly, she watched three planes approach from the south. She glanced at her watch: 8:15. Time to fix breakfast for the children and her mother and sister. But just a few minutes more in the sun.

The day: August 6, 1945. The place: Hiroshima.

Yoshiko Nakamura never felt the cataclysm that blasted her into unconsciousness. Neither did her baby; it died instantly. So did her mother and sister. Seventy thousand others died in that instant and the days of agony that followed. Her two-year-old son lived thirty-three days and died from burns, her husband ten years later from radiation.

Her own body was badly burned. "For three years, I had no hair," she recalled. "My teeth hurt so I couldn't eat solid food for a year. My legs were so full of splinters I couldn't walk for three months."

Dark times, dark places. But the light of Christ can make it seem like the sun is shining.

"Four months after my husband died, the missionaries came to my door," she recalled. "I understood their message and was baptized. I have been so happy."

Twenty-five years later, that bereaved mother had been several times Relief Society president of the Hiroshima Branch. "All these are my family now," she said, indicating fifty or so branch members and investigators leaving the tiny chapel. She had cared for their sick, helped bury their dead, taught them to be better mothers, helped them learn the gospel, as Relief Society presidents have done the world over.

Her glow and that of others like her were strong enough and long enough that the sun broke through and shines bright today. Where 70,000 bodies once lay in the rubble of a ruined city, a stake of the Church prospers, as do twenty-two others throughout the country that was once a hated enemy.

That's primarily how the gospel spreads—through the glow of people. The Holy Ghost does the converting, of course. But the Holy Ghost seldom gets a chance until the potential convert has first been attracted by someone—a missionary, a neighbor, a fellow worker, a schoolmate—who is following the Savior's injunction to "Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:16.)

What is it that makes a man or a woman glow? A noted expert on personal and corporate behavior lists such attributes as self-esteem, a sense of responsibility, optimism, imagination, awareness, creativity, joyfulness, trust.

These are helpful. But it's simpler than that. The apostle Paul gave the ultimate formula for glowing, no matter how dark the place: "And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity." (1 Cor. 13:13.)

By charity, the commentaries and other translations make clear, is meant pure love—love that suffers long and is kind, that has no room for envy, is not easily provoked, that thinks no evil but rejoices in the truth, that bears all things, hopes all things, endures all things.

Most of us are blessed to know a few—not many—people like that. In them we see a glow that seems to let sunshine into the dark places in their lives and our lives. In them we see light that, shining, leads others nearer to God.
