William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

LIVING FOR THE GIFTS

Some years ago, the newswires reported the death of a Missouri minister after a fast of forty days. In papers found after his death he revealed his purpose: "I am seeking the more perfect will of God for my own life, and asking God to show me why the gifts of the spirit do not follow my ministry as Jesus said they would."

The gifts of the spirit—precious enough that one man died in search of them. How precious are they to us today?

Nearly a century ago, President George Q. Cannon spoke these blunt, challenging words to the saints: "How many of you . . . are seeking for these gifts that God has promised to bestow? How many of you, when you bow before your Heavenly Father in your family circle or in your secret places, contend for these gifts to be bestowed upon you? How many of you ask the Father, in the name of Jesus, to manifest Himself to you through these powers and these gifts? Or do you go along day by day like a door turning on its hinges, without having any feeling upon the subject, without exercising any faith whatever; content to be baptized and be members of the Church, and to rest there, thinking that your salvation is secure because you have done this? . . .

"God is the same today as He was yesterday . . . [He] is willing to bestow these gifts upon His children. I know that God is willing to heal the sick, that He is willing to bestow the gift of discerning of spirits, the gift of wisdom, of knowledge and of prophecy, and other gifts that may be needed." (Millennial Star, April 23, 1894, p. 260.)

These, and others, are the gifts of the Holy Ghost promised in 1 Corinthians chapter 12, Moroni chapter 10, and Doctrine and Covenants, section 46. How precious they are, these gifts of wisdom and knowledge and discernment, of faith to heal and be healed, of miracles and prophecy and tongues.

How eternally precious, especially, is that greatest of gifts, the knowledge that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Savior of the world.

But the gifts of the Spirit are not limited even to these. Paul opened a broader vision. In what may have been the last of his great epistles, written from a Roman dungeon from which he would soon walk to his death, he exhorted his young disciple, Timothy, to: " . . . stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." (2 Tim. 1:6-7.)

With such a testimony from such a man in such circumstances, who can deny man's responsibilities as spelled out in discomfiting clarity by President Cannon:

"If any of us are imperfect, it is our duty to pray for the gift that will make us perfect. Have I imperfections? I am full of them. What is my duty? To pray to God to give me the gifts that will correct these imperfections. If I am an angry man, it is my duty to pray for charity, which suffereth long and is kind. Am I an envious man? It is my duty to seek for charity, which envieth not. So with all the gifts of the Gospel. They are intended for this purpose. No man ought to say, 'Oh, I cannot help this; it is my nature.' He is not justified in it, for the reason that God has promised to give strength to correct these things, and to give gifts that will eradicate them." (Ibid.)

God does not expect us, like the fasting preacher of the Ozarks, to die in search of His gifts. He expects us to do something far more important. He expects us to live in search of them.

THE TIME TO CHANGE IS NOW

A special expectancy charged the congregation as the speaker approached the pulpit. Here was a much-respected man who for many years had not affiliated with the Church. Only recently had his life changed. The rejoicing over his return was still fresh. What, now, would be his message?

"By this hour next week," he began, "we will have observed a new year. Tradition has it that we make resolutions and make changes for the better at the beginning of a new year."

Appreciative nods. This man, surely, was qualified to talk of new beginnings and changes for the better.

He continued to explain that we have come to give special significance to certain times for changing, for starting or stopping things. But we should be ready and eager to do differently, to improve, at any time.

"We could decide at any moment to settle some difference, to do some service, to break a bad habit, to do better, to learn better, to live better. Such decision need not be left to a special day, a special hour, or a particular time in the future.

"And if we pass a particular time for improving or repenting, or if we falter or fail after having made a good resolution, we need not postpone the act of repentance or improvement for another special day, or hour, or another such season. The resolve to change should be a continuous process, with frequent reminders, perhaps, but not with needless dramatics. A simple, quiet consistency serves best."

Then came what many had been anxious to hear—the account of what had turned around the life of this good man.

"Shortly after the return of my son Greg from his mission a small sign appeared on the refrigerator door:

'Be careful how you act. 'You may be the only Standard Work people read.'

"The sign appeared without fanfare. It has never been mentioned in my presence. It resides to this day in its place at the top of the refrigerator door—a quiet, frequent, consistent reminder.

"My son Greg knew it was quite possible that I might not ever read the Book of Mormon. But he knew quite certainly that I would read the language of his daily conduct. I read the pages of his life as he wrote them. It became my desire to be with him more often and to share his experience more fully. Eventually this desire led me to read the Book of Mormon."

Then followed his convincing testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon, of the Savior's Sonship, of the missions of past and present Church presidents as His prophets.

"That these things are true," he testified, "I came to learn slowly through a process that began with my son's resolution to be careful how he acted."

In this simple, eloquent message are the essential elements of living successfully:

First, so live that others seeing your good works may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. What a joy for a son to know he has done that for his father.

Second, to know the truth, turn to the source of truth, the scriptures—in this case, especially the Book of Mormon.

Third, when a change is needed, do it. Do it now. Don't wait for New Year's resolutions or some other time based on custom or calendar.

Wisely, Lin Yutang counseled us about that:

"As we review our New Year's resolutions, we find we have fulfilled one-third of them, left unfilled another third, and can't remember what the other third was."

We should expect of ourselves better than one-third performance. Surely the Lord expects more. To help us achieve it, He gave one of His greatest gifts, repentance, and with it a total absence of restrictions as to time and place.
