William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

MESSAGES FOR THE FAMILY

A BOUQUET EVERY DAY

Our neighbor around the block is known as the best gardener in our end of town. A special understanding seems to exist between her and her plants that enables her to coax them into glorious bloom at precisely the right time for her garden parties and other special events. While the rest of us fight aphids and mildew and the August blahs, her garden goes on and on blessing or comforting or gladdening every home within reach of her generous spirit.

For a long time, we had wanted to ask what her secret was. Finally we did. She came by during one of our infrequent but determined efforts to whip the garden into shape, grimly pinching back straggly petunias, pruning wilted rose blooms, staking sagging dahlias. When she stopped to chat, we straightened an aching back and asked right out: "How do you do it?"

Instead of some profound and technical explanation about soil and acidity or seeds and plant selection, or possibly something about planting in the right phase of the moon, the response was simple: "You just pick a bouquet every day."

"Oh, I see," we nodded, without the faintest idea what she was talking about.

Patiently, she explained. "Many days I don't need a bouquet. Some days I don't want one. Sometimes I don't feel like getting into the garden. But I have disciplined myself to make a new flower arrangement every single day.

"What it does is this: It makes the flowers feel wanted. It means I cut them when they are at their loveliest, not simply trimming off wilted blooms. They seem to appreciate this and put out a special effort. When I cut flowers daily, none of the plants gets straggly or goes to seed." She glanced at our pile of prunings and dead flower heads, but was kind enough not to press the point.

"What's more," she went on, "it keeps me close to the garden. I see each day what the flowers are doing. I recognize those that are struggling and I plan a way to help them. I spot trouble symptoms. When you are selecting and cutting flowers every day, you see the weeds and pull them out early. You see the aphids and the snails and the cutworms, and you keep them under control.

"But the main thing is, to enjoy the garden; it's amazing how much better flowers do when somebody enjoys and appreciates them."

As she walked on down the street, her words remained: Flowers do so much better when someone enjoys and appreciates them. And so, we thought, do people.

What if, in our relations with our children, we picked a bouquet every day? What if every day we made a special point of enjoying their talents, the warmth of a hug, the closeness of a private talk about things of special meaning to them?

What if we stayed close enough and interested enough, every day, to recognize the trouble spots early? What if instead of the periodic and inevitable confrontations, lectures, and discipline to cut back accumulated bad habits and enforce conformity—with all the trauma and alienation such confrontations produce—we handled these things gently and lovingly day by day?

What if every day our children knew—really knew—we enjoy and appreciate them? How much better might they do?

It's a heavy responsibility parents have been given in bringing children into the world and rearing them to responsible adulthood. The scriptures are full of exhortations to good parenthood and warnings to those who fail to make the effort.

Meeting the challenge has never been easy. Meeting it today, when families are so fragmented and destructive pressures are so great, is perhaps harder than it has ever been. Volumes have been written on how to do it. One widely quoted book on child care came to this conclusion:

"The more people have studied different methods of bringing up children the more they have come to the conclusion that what good mothers and fathers instinctively feel like doing for their babies is best after all." (The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care, chap. 1.)

But it's not that simple. As our neighbor has days she doesn't feel like getting into her garden, there are days even a good parent doesn't "instinctively" feel like coping with children.

But you pick a bouquet every day. And the rewards are great: "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth." (3 Jn. 1:4.)
