William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

PARENTS, EASE THE PRESSURE

The young woman in the counselor's office had grown up in a luxurious home where both parents had been outstandingly successful. Now, off on her own, she realized she would never achieve such success or affluence. Her parents' expectations of her had been so unrealistic and now seemed so unattainable that at age twenty she had already branded herself a failure. She was being treated for severe depression.

As reported in the New York Times, hers was among cases discussed at a recent workshop in Connecticut examining the special pressures and difficulties faced by children of "fast-track parents."

Many such parents have become so blinded by their own ambitions, one psychotherapist reported, that they fail to see the effect their attitudes have on their children.

"These children see their mothers and fathers placing such priority on getting to the top that they worry that their parents won't love or respect them unless they do the same," she said.

"They must always have their eye on winning," another counselor said. "No wonder we see in them the diseases of adults, like ulcers and depression. Even minor personal shortcomings seem to trouble them more than others, because failure is so often met with condemnation rather than compassion."

Often, he added, such children underachieve because they see the goal of meeting their parents' expectations as impossible.

Counselors urged parents to help a less competitive child develop a talent or skill that will provide an adequate income and a sense of pride, as well as a simpler, less pressured life. They argued that there is equal—if not greater—value in not seeking the highest-paying, most prestigious jobs, but work that, though lower in pay and status, provides a real public service.

This eminently sound advice is especially pertinent to LDS homes with our special understanding of the eternal destiny of the individual.

"Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.)

That profound scripture makes the priorities clear. It speaks nothing of wealth or prestige. It speaks only of knowledge and intelligence, diligence and obedience. It makes no distinction between kinds of knowledge. Knowledge of high finance or corporate management is given no more weight in the eternal scheme of things than knowledge of how to build a beautiful cabinet or lay a lasting driveway.

What does count is doing whatever we do as well as we are capable of doing it. That and, as Jesus repeatedly emphasized, obedience and service.

Parents hungry and impatient for their children's status and wealth might well ponder how pointedly the Savior drove home that lesson. "And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much.

"And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing.

"And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury.

"For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living." (Mark 12:41-44.)

If only parents could treat their children with such sensitivity and wisdom! If only they could understand and always remember that it is not the test score or the size of the salary check that counts, but the honesty and diligence of the effort.

Parents want their children to succeed. So does the Creator, but by a different, better, more eternal measure of success than many of us comprehend.

The wise parent will back off on the pressure and concentrate on helping the child understand and use the Savior's way of measuring.
