William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

CHILDHOOD'S MINISTERING ANGELS

Hearts everywhere were touched by the story of Cecilia Cichan, lone survivor among 159 persons aboard the Northwest Airlines plane that crashed after takeoff from Detroit.

Cecilia, four, was found alive when rescuers heard faint whimperings in the wreckage. Her mother's body, shielding her in a last act of love, had saved her from the crash and the flames that followed.

As a social worker's letter in the New York Times points out, her rescue was a poignant reminder that life is filled with tragedy for many children and that emotional scars can be minimized only by constant infusions of love from relatives, friends, and professionals.

"However sad this case may be," the social worker writes, "it should also serve as a grim reminder that violent and sudden death, followed by the lifelong psychic pain resulting from such loss, confronts children every day in the United States. Not all of these young victims have two sets of grandparents, dozens of close relatives and friends, thousands of dollars in donations from strangers, and front-page news stories to look back on for solace. . . . "I can no longer count how many little boys and girls I know who have survived crashes, witnessed the deaths of their parents by murder, accident or suicide, or been unwilling participants in violent family dramas that left them scarred and orphaned, in every possible way. . . . I see children who may be left with one elderly, sick grandparent, or with no grandparents and with no caring aunts and uncles, no front-page publicity, no outpouring of gifts, love, money or sympathy. . . . "

Add to this tragic list countless others who bear other kinds of trauma and misery—those with mental or physical disabilities, those with deep feelings of inadequacy or insecurity or guilt, those who feel alienated and lonely.

Without loving, nurturing support, these innocent children will grow up to become nonfunctional or antisocial adults. Society faces a heavy responsibility for these children. Meeting it will require far more effort than has been given.

But within the Church, not a single child need be without nurturing support, if the system works as it should. Consider the support team, in addition to the family, behind every child:

There are home teachers and visiting teachers, called to watch over the Church and qualified by the gift of discernment to do it.

There are Primary teachers and youth class and quorum advisers who, beyond simply teaching lessons, are responsible for each member. There are class and quorum officers to help meet that responsibility. There are presidencies to back them up.

There is a bishop whose major responsibility is the youth of the ward, and counselors to help.

There is the ward council whose most important item on the agenda should be to consider the individual needs of ward members.

There is the entire ward family as a resource for love and nurturing.

Never was the Savior's ministry of love more tenderly expressed than when He called a little child to Him and exhorted His followers: "And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me . . . it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish." (Matt. 18:5, 14.)

On another continent at another time, " . . . he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them.

"And when he had done this he wept again;

"And he spake unto the multitude, and said unto them: Behold your little ones.

" . . . and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them." (3 Ne. 17:21-24.)

In His love for children, the Lord needs angels to minister here and now, today. Are we ready and willing?
