William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

MESSAGES FROM OUR HERITAGE

A REBIRTH OF VISION

During the month of February, Americans pause to remember and honor two of the greatest men in their history—George Washington and Abraham Lincoln. But not only Americans should celebrate. If any American holiday ought to be given reverent attention by lovers of freedom everywhere, particularly by Latter-day Saints, it is Presidents' Day.

The nation founded, nurtured, and preserved by those two men has, through the years, been the exemplar of freedom, the standard to which men everywhere could aspire. More eternally important, in the soil of its freedom the restored gospel could be planted and grow; on the foundation of its economic strength the restored Church could be built worldwide.

It would be hard to imagine two men more disparate than these two who more than any others built the nation. Washington was the landed aristocrat, trained as an officer when soldiering was a gentleman's avocation, never an office-seeker, hardly eloquent with tongue or pen, stiff and formal with all but his intimate associates. Contrast Lincoln, the rail splitting, yarn spinning, rough-and-tumble wrestling, circuit-riding country lawyer, born in poverty and perpetually poor, repeatedly defeated as a politician, self-taught but a master of simple eloquence.

What did they have in common, these two? First and most important, Latter-day Saints believe, they were raised up by God to meet the needs of their day. Washington did not speak much of spiritual things. Example spoke for him; the image of his kneeling in the snow that bitter winter at Valley Forge told his countrymen all they needed to know about the source of his strength. But in a prayer remarkably like Book of Mormon warnings that to prosper and remain free this nation must serve the God of the land, he pleaded:

"I make it my earnest prayer that God would have the United States in His Holy protection; that He would incline the hearts of the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to government; to entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another. . . . And finally that He would dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and to demean ourselves with that charity, humility and pacific temper of mind which were the characteristics of the Divine Author of our blessed religion, and without an humble imitation of whose example in these things we can never hope to be a happy nation."

How badly such wisdom is needed today, when the doctrine of separation of church and state has been tortured to the point a federal judge has outlawed a team's prayer before a high school football game.

Lincoln was even more eloquent in his declaration of dependence on God. As he first left Illinois for the White House, his words of farewell concluded: "I now leave, not knowing when or whether I may return, with a task before me greater than that which rested upon Washington. Without the assistance of that Divine Being who ever attended him, I cannot succeed. With that assistance I cannot fail."

In the dark days when the fate of the Republic hung in the balance, he testified: "I am driven to my knees, because there is no place else to go."

And to a group of senators who came to argue with him about war and slavery, he uttered the same truth Washington and Book of Mormon prophets had earlier proclaimed:

"I not only believe that Providence is not unmindful of the struggle in which this nation is engaged, that if we do not do right, God will let us go our own way to ruin; and that if we do right, He will lead us safely out of this wilderness, crown our armies with victory, and restore our dissevered Union . . .[in] accord with His plans of dealing with this Nation, in the midst of which He means to establish justice. I think He means that we shall do more than we have yet done in the furtherance of His plans and He will open the way for our doing it. I have felt His hand upon me in great trials, and submitted to His guidance, and I trust that as He shall farther open the way, I will be ready to walk therein, relying on His help and trusting in His goodness and wisdom."

These great men clearly saw the mission of America and the need for righteousness to fulfill it. How badly the nation today, as it flounders in its troubles at home and abroad, needs a rebirth of that kind of vision.
