William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

KEEPING THE REPUBLIC

The summer of 1787 in Philadelphia was unusually hot and humid. Despite the heat, and to preserve the confidentiality of what they were doing, the fifty-five men sweltering there kept the windows shut tight.

They labored under other difficulties besides heat. They came from twelve separate, diverse, and independent states. A thirteenth, Rhode Island, had refused to send a delegate. None of the states had empowered them to do what they were doing. They had been sent to Philadelphia to revise the Articles of Confederation, not to launch into a wholly unique experiment in government. The debates, dragging on for four months, were tense, often abrasive.

But finally they finished their work. A lady asked Benjamin Franklin what they had created. His reply: "A Republic, if you can keep it."

At the beginning of the third century of life under the Constitution of the United States, it is appropriate to ask: Can we? And how?

In the broad sense, the answer comes from the prophets of the Book of Mormon, who warned that this nation will remain free only as long as its people serve the God of the land, which is Jesus Christ. So the first bulwark to preserve the Republic is the righteousness of the people.

But there's a more specific obligation on citizens in preserving a government of the people. It is the obligation to participate fully and intelligently in the election process.

The exciting uniqueness of the Constitution created by those men at Philadelphia is that it is a grant of power by the people to a government which they—the people—had created. It is the people's government. The people have responsibility for it. There is profound wisdom in Franklin's response, that we'll have a Republic if you—the people, not the leaders—can keep it.

Throughout America, in the privacy and freedom of the voting booth, the people direct the government they have created. They elect the senators and representatives who determine the character of Congress for the next two years. They elect the governors and the legislators who will make the laws in all fifty states. They elect the officials who will govern every county in the nation, and the school boards that will shape the country's educational system. In short, the voters determine the kind of country we will have.

Modern scripture leaves no doubt about the responsibility of citizens to cast not a blind but an informed vote in elections at every level of government. Section 104 of the Doctrine and Covenants clearly states our obligations. It has been accepted by the Church as scripture, and is as binding as any other scripture. It states:

God holds men accountable for making laws and administering them for the good of society.

The people should seek out and uphold civil officers and magistrates who will administer the law in equity and justice.

All men are bound to sustain and uphold the government as long as it upholds their inherent and inalienable rights.

How does one sustain and uphold our government? By loving it and valuing it as a priceless gift of God through inspired men. By holding fast to the principles on which it was founded. But more than that. To really sustain government, one must be actively involved in it, raising one's voice and casting one's vote to correct its faults, to choose able and righteous representatives, and to direct their actions.

All that is necessary for the triumph of evil, it has been wisely said, is for good men to do nothing. If good men and women do little or nothing to influence the electoral process, evil will certainly triumph in this nation.

The Latter-day Saint who fails to become informed on issues and candidates during the election season and fails to cast an informed vote fails not only the responsibilities of citizenship but also the responsibilities of membership in God's kingdom.
