William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

FOR THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.

With those words and the remarkable document that followed, a nation was born. But the Declaration of Independence was more than the birth pronouncement of a nation. It was a bold affirmation of concepts inborn in man from the beginning. It was a clarion signal that concepts smothered or ignored during most of mankind's time on earth were now, at last, to be the guiding principles of a new society.

They were—and are—more than a justification of America's struggle for independence. They were—and are—a message of hope for mankind everywhere.

The truths that men are born equal, that they possess certain unalienable rights, that governments exist by the consent of the governed were of ancient origin. But they had never before been tried in actual practice. It was the boldest of experiments the fifty-six signers of the Declaration of Independence were undertaking.

They were not irresponsible radicals, those fifty-six. Twenty-four were lawyers and jurists. Eleven were merchants. Nine were farmers and large plantation owners. They were men of means, educated, secure. They well understood the consequences of their act, and many of them suffered grievous consequences. Their homes and properties were looted and destroyed, businesses lost, families scattered. Many died in poverty, broken in body if not in spirit.

Why? What would light such fires in the bellies of such men? They were a disparate lot. They were English, Irish, Scottish, and Welsh. They were Germans, Dutch, Swedes, French. They or their ancestors had come to this land for many reasons—some to escape religious persecution, some for adventure, some for economic opportunity, some simply to get out of prison.

But they had a common bond. They worshipped a Savior who was born to bring truth into the world and had taught that with truth comes freedom. They shared an Old Testament whose prophets proclaimed liberty. They knew that God created man to be free.

Knowledge like that gives men courage to do incredible things.

Around the Fourth of July, we speak much of liberty. But there were two other unalienable rights emphasized in the Declaration of Independence—life and the pursuit of happiness. The right to life is fundamental, of course—though, tragically, it has all too often been ignored by the terrorists of the world, today as well as anciently.

What of the right to the pursuit of happiness? No political document had ever before expressed that as an explicit right for its citizens. But it was a commonplace concept of the eighteenth century that God and natural law intended that men should be happy. Rousseau wrote that happiness is "the first desire impressed on us by nature, and the only one that never leaves us." Voltaire declared that "Happiness is the object, the duty, and the goal of all sensible men." Adam Smith taught that "the purpose of governments is to promote the happiness of those who live under them."

Book of Mormon scripture is more all-encompassing and more explicit. "Men are, that they might have joy," Lehi simply and directly taught his son Jacob in that remarkable sermon on the plan of salvation.

So they were right on target, those men who pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor in signing that declaration. Their message speaks not only to Americans but to all people. Life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness are—or should be—universal rights.

Universal, too, is the prescription for preserving those rights, regardless of where a man lives or the political system under which he is governed. The Lord has made it explicitly clear as far as America is concerned: Liberty, security, prosperity can be ours only as long as we serve the God of the land, Jesus Christ. Certainly other nations can hope for these blessings only on the same terms.

As for happiness, Joseph Smith summarized what the Lord has told us through the centuries: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence and will be the end thereof if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God."
