William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

THE WISDOM OF THE MASS

In all the rich legacy of gospel scholarship and teaching left by President Marion G. Romney in his lifetime of service, a statement he made in general conference several years ago rings with special meaning and authority:

"The truth I desire to emphasize today is that mortals are in very deed the literal offspring of God. If men understood, believed, and accepted this truth, our sick and dying society would be reformed and redeemed.

"Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accept this concept as a basic doctrine of their theology. The lives of those who have given it thought enough to realize its implications are controlled by it; it gives meaning and direction to all their thoughts and deeds.

"The aspirations, desires, and motivations of one who accepts, believes, and by the power of the Holy Spirit obtains a witness to the truth that he is a begotten son or daughter unto God differs from the aspirations of him who believes otherwise, as the growing vine differs from the severed branch." (Conference Report, April 1973.)

That conviction has been the source of much of the progress of mankind. From it stems the belief that man is perfectible, that he is capable of governing himself, that, indeed, he was endowed by his Creator with certain unalienable rights, including life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

That is the underlying belief that led such men as Thomas Jefferson and James Madison to build a solid foundation for America's inspired system of self-government, drawing on the work of men like John Locke and Thomas Hobbes and on a gradually developing political philosophy reaching clear back to the Magna Carta.

But even that wasn't the beginning. More than two thousand years ago, another remarkable political philosopher laid out for his people a system of government based on the same principles. His name was Mosiah, the latest in a long succession of kings—some righteous, many not—that had ruled in the land we now call the Americas:

The time for kings was past, he argued. "Behold, I say unto you, the sins of many people have been caused by the iniquities of their kings; therefore their iniquities are answered upon the heads of their kings. And now I desire that this inequality should be no more in this land, especially among this my people; but I desire that this land be a land of liberty, and every man may enjoy his rights and privileges alike. . . . " (Mosiah 29:31-32.)

To accomplish it, he established a government in which the "burden should come upon all the people, that every man might bear his part." (Mosiah 29:34.) Judges were to be elected by the voice of the people. The people were to be free, but they were also to be responsible.

That kind of government rests on faith in man's basic nature. In establishing the first known system of self-government on the American continent, Mosiah expressed that faith: "Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law—to do your business by the voice of the people." (Mosiah 29:26.)

Two thousand years later, another inspired political philosopher, President J. Reuben Clark, expressed the same conviction in similarly strong terms: "I have complete confidence in the aggregate wisdom of the . . . people, if they are given and made to understand the facts.

"The wisdom of the mass is always greater than the wisdom of the individual or of the group. The few may be more subtle, more agile-minded, more resourceful; they may for a time push to the front and scamper ahead in the march; they may on occasion and for a time entice us down the wrong highway at the crossroads.

"But the great slow-moving deliberate-thinking mass plods along over the years down the Divinely appointed way. Led astray, they slowly, cumberously swing back to the right road, no matter what the toil or the sacrifice may be, and when they start the return, they crush whatever lies in their path. So has humanity come up through the ages." (Cited in Book of Mormon [Religion 121-122] student manual, pp. 209-10.)

The aggregate wisdom of the people can be trusted because the people have within them the seeds of Godhood. They can follow wrong paths for long periods of time, even, as the Nephites did, to destruction. But no one who believes President Romney's testimony of the divine origin of man can doubt his capacity to govern himself as God intended.
