William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

WE OWE IT TO OUR COMMUNITY

It was swearing-in day for the new town council. After a spirited campaign, a new mayor had been elected and two new councilmen—or, in this case, councilwomen. One was a Latter-day Saint, the first elected to office in years in this resort town where Church influence had been remarkably small. A mother of four, Primary worker, piano teacher, author, Cub Scout leader, and local school volunteer, she certainly needed nothing more to do, but had yielded to pleas that "One of us ought to get into this race; why not you?"

The oaths were taken. The new mayor popped a bottle of champagne and filled glasses of council members for a toast to the town. When he came to the new councilwoman's glass, he stopped, turned to the crowd, and good-naturedly announced: "One abstention."

There had been no flaunting of Church membership during the campaign, nor is there likely to be during coming years of service on the council. Only quiet holding to principles, genuine friendship and respect for people of all beliefs, a commitment to work together to make the town a better place to live. Enormous influence for good can come from that kind of effective involvement in community affairs.

It's not always easy for active Church members to involve themselves in community service. Pressures on time and energy are already great. Family commitments take precedence—and should. Church activities and the circle of Church associates can so satisfy social needs that there is little incentive or stimulus to be involved elsewhere.

But Church leaders don't encourage insularity. They have always urged constructive, helpful involvement in community affairs. One of the reasons given for the consolidated meeting schedule was to free more time for community service.

Why is such service important? For at least three reasons: First, it is something we ought to do. Service, someone has said, is the rent we pay for the space we occupy on earth. That space isn't confined to the ward house. It includes the communities that guard our lives and property, that clean our streets and carry away our garbage and mow our parks. It includes the schools our children attend. It includes dozens of volunteer organizations that serve the needy or improve public health or provide cultural or recreational opportunities that enrich our lives.

These organizations don't go by themselves. People make them go. Isn't making them go part, at least, of what the Lord intended when He told us: "Men [and women] should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness"? (D&C 58:27.)

Second, this is a time when the involvement and influence of straight-thinking, morally sound people is needed in public affairs as perhaps never before. Standards and morality are under siege at all levels of society. Church members need to remember the truth of Edmund Burke's statement: "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing."

Third, we can only influence those lives that we touch. Touching lives means getting involved with them, and there is no better way than working together for a common good. Community service is an excellent way to achieve what Edwin Markham described so memorably in his poem, "Outwitted":

He drew a circle that shut me out— Heretic, rebel, a thing to flout. But Love and I had the wit to win: We drew a circle that took him in.

Of course, it's important to keep priorities straight. Family and church come first. Personal lives need to be kept in balance. Community service must not be allowed to come between husband and wife, parent and child. Nor must it be allowed to interfere with fundamentals like scripture study, temple attendance, individual compassionate service.

But with planning and organization, with cooperative participation by the entire family, with willingness to give up a few nonessentials—a few television shows a week, for example—most of us can find the time to enrich ourselves, improve our moral, physical, and social environment, and fulfill our citizenship obligations through community service.
