William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

OUR ELECTION-YEAR CHALLENGES

Once the noise and posturing of the two national party conventions are out of the way, Americans settle in to the serious task of electing their national, as well as state and local, leaders.

It can be a confusing task. Television makes personality and image more important than character or issues. In their zeal to be elected, candidates don't always stick to the truth or to the highest ethical standards. The candidate's past life comes under the magnifying glass. Personal attacks, exaggerated if not manufactured, are seized upon and blown up by sensation-seeking media. Given the nature of our election process, it's a wonder that good men and women can still be found to seek elective office.

In the heat and confusion of election time, it is important to keep certain principles in mind.

One is the Church's political impartiality. The First Presidency has repeatedly emphasized that it endorses no party or candidate. With that emphasis comes the caution, also, that no Church facility or meeting should be used for political purposes.

Another principle is that Latter-day Saints have a special responsibility to cut through the demagoguery of the election campaign to the real issues. They have been taught that God holds men accountable both for making laws and administering them, for the good and safety of society. (See D&C 134:1.) That surely means we are responsible to learn the issues and to make every effort to identify and elect the candidates with the right stands on those issues.

Finally, the Lord expects us to cast our votes on the basis of character rather than television glibness or catchy billboards. He exhorted us that officials who "will administer the law in equity and justice should be sought for and upheld by the voice of the people." (D&C 134:3.)

Sought for. That's an active verb that requires active participation in the political process. It takes effort. It allows no tolerance for the passivity that sends so many voters to the polls—if they go at all—ignorant and unprepared.

The perils of passivity are nowhere more dramatically illustrated than among the Book of Mormon peoples at the time of Nephi, the son of Helaman. Evil men had taken over the republic Mosiah had established, "having usurped the power and authority of the land; laying aside the commandments of God . . . doing no justice unto the children of men; condemning the righteous because of their righteousness; letting the guilty and the wicked go unpunished because of their money. . . . " (Hel. 7:4-5.)

Men like that have, from time to time, infiltrated government in our day. But not many, nor have they stayed long in office. America's tradition of responsible government is strong, and in the main its office-holders have been, and are, honorable men and women. That is one of this country's greatest blessings, and the strongest surety of its freedom.

But, as Book of Mormon prophets as well as latter-day statesmen have emphasized, there's nothing automatic about keeping that blessing. Two hundred years ago, the patriot John Philpot Curran sounded a warning as appropriate today as it was in 1790: "It is the common fate of the indolent to see their rights become a prey to the active. The condition upon which God hath given liberty to man is eternal vigilance."

Someone has traced the rise and fall of nations in eight steps:

From bondage to spiritual faith.

From spiritual faith to courage.

From courage to freedom.

From freedom to abundance.

From abundance to selfishness.

From selfishness to complacency.

From complacency to apathy.

From apathy back again into bondage.

On that continuum, America stands somewhere between selfishness and complacency, or maybe a bit beyond. Will we continue on to the next step, and the next? Heaven forbid; but can we muster the political energy and vigilance to prevent it?
