William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

WILL WE FLINCH AT THE WORK?

Four days after the Mormon pioneers arrived in Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young stood near the right fork of City Creek, planted his cane, and declared: "Here we will build the Temple of our God." That was before the new city was laid out, before planting was completed, before homes were begun. President Young left no doubt where his priorities lay.

The struggle to secure a foothold in the new desert valley home was so demanding it took six years before work started on the temple. But start it did. While the builders were still living in log cabins and fighting crickets, they set out to build the most massive, lasting, inspiring edifice they could conceive. They did it with little money and with the nearest supply of metal and tools a thousand miles away.

As the work began, April 6, 1853, President Young spoke: "I do not like to prophesy much. . . . But I will venture to guess that this day, and the work we have performed on it, will be long remembered by this people, and be sounded as with a trumpet's voice throughout the world." Brave words from a people still struggling for survival in a remote desert valley.

The foundation required a trench twenty feet deep, sixteen feet wide. Digging it took nine thousand man-days of labor. Some must have grumbled that, "We don't need a temple this big." But they kept digging.

The foundation was hardly finished when a federal army threatened invasion to put down a supposed Mormon revolt. President Young made plans to evacuate the city, burn it to the ground if necessary. He ordered the temple excavation filled in, the foundation covered, the land leveled to appear as a newly plowed field.

When the threat of war passed, they dug it out again and started on the walls. They could have used sandstone; there was plenty nearby and it was easy to work with. But this structure was to last forever. So they went twenty miles away to Little Cottonwood Canyon to cut massive blocks of granite.

At first, with great labor, they dug a canal to float the blocks to the temple site. But this didn't work well, so all during the 1860s and 1870s, four- and six-oxen teams could be seen dragging the huge granite blocks those twenty miles.

Each stone had be cut to a precise size and shape. Sharpening the chisels was a never-ending job. Even with immense labor, it took nearly three years to cut and lay the six hundred stones needed for just one level.

Twenty years after the work began, the walls were barely visible above ground. But the prophet encouraged: "The Temple will be built as soon as we are prepared to use it." Meanwhile, so inspired was his vision and strong his faith that he began the building of temples in St. George, Manti, and Logan—all of them finished before the Salt Lake Temple was completed.

"Can you accomplish the work, you Latter-day Saints?" President Young challenged. "Have you the necessary faith; have you sufficient of the Spirit of God in your hearts to say, yes, by the help of God our Father we will erect these buildings to his name?"

The answer was unequivocal. They did, and forty long, hard years after it began, the work was finished. As he laid the capstone, April 6, 1892, President Wilford Woodruff declared: "If there is any scene on the face of this earth that will attract the attention of the God of Heaven and the heavenly host, it is the one before us today—the assembling of this people, the shout of 'Hosanna,' the laying of the topstone of this temple in honor to our God."

But at that point, great and heroic as their work had been, the labor of temple-building was only well begun. In the ninety-five years since that stirring event, thirty-six temples have been built and dedicated. Several more are under construction. Soon, the work of eternal salvation will be going forward within the walls of forty-one temples in twenty-three different lands.

Building temples in places so far from Temple Square gives real meaning to the concept of a worldwide Church. It means people can stay and build up the Church where they live, and enjoy the fullest blessings of the gospel. It means newly called missionaries can go to missionary training centers near their homes; twelve such centers have been established in areas where temples exist.

So the work goes on, at an accelerating pace, nearly a century after the great temple in Salt Lake City was completed. Few are called to sacrifice as its builders did, but the call is the same—to qualify ourselves for eternal life through the temple ordinances and to seek out and qualify our ancestors in the same way.

The builders of the Salt Lake Temple, and so many others, never flinched in the face of their awesome task. Will we?
