William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

WHY PIONEERS SUCCEED

Most Church members know that on a hot July day in 1847, the Mormon pioneers first entered Salt Lake Valley. Most pause on or around July 24 to honor their faith and courage. But few know just how the pioneers entered the valley. Even fewer realize that the manner of their entering illustrates the difference between successful pioneering and failure.

The Mormons weren't the first pioneers in Salt Lake Valley. A year earlier came the ill-starred Donner party. Beguiled into taking an untried new shortcut to California, the party had left the known trail at Fort Bridger in what is now Wyoming. They struggled and bickered their way down Echo Canyon, over Big and Little Mountains, down Emigration Canyon almost to its mouth—and stopped. The canyon narrowed and deepened at that point. Choked with brush and boulders, it seemed impassable.

Characteristically, they didn't try. Three times before, facing what they knew would be a difficult passage, they had turned aside into the easier-seeming unknown. Each time got them into deeper trouble. Here, they did it again. Instead of hacking their way through the narrow gorge, they chose to climb a hill that rose so steeply from the canyon floor they had to hitch almost every yoke of oxen to each of their twenty-three wagons.

Twenty-three times those beasts climbed Donner Hill that day before the party finally entered Salt Lake Valley. Worn out, the animals needed rest. But there was no time; the season was far too late. On the party pushed, into the waterless wastes of the west Utah salt flats. Played out, the oxen couldn't make it. Unhitched and driven ahead to find water, many stampeded and were lost. Precious days were spent looking for them. Disorganized now and dangerously late, the party straggled on to the Sierra Nevada mountains where early snowstorms caught them just short of the summit. Only forty-seven of the eighty-two emigrants survived the dreadful winter that followed.

A year later, Brigham Young's Mormon pioneer company, following the Donner tracks, reached the gorge below Donner Hill. They, too, acted characteristically. Two men were sent to explore up the hill, down the other side, then back through the brushy gorge. They reported, as William Clayton's journal records, that: "A good road can soon be made down the canyon by digging a little and cutting through the bushes some ten or fifteen rods."

That was all they needed to know. Clayton's journal continues: "A number of men went to work immediately to make the road. . . . After spending four hours' labor the brethren succeeded in cutting a pretty good road along the creek and the wagons proceeded on. . . ."

The beauty and prosperity of Salt Lake Valley today, the strength and worldwide outreach of the Church that has grown from what they brought to the valley that July day, testify that the men driving those wagons were men committed to success.

But what makes success? What does Donner Hill tell of the difference between successful pioneering and failure? Success requires leaders with the wisdom and foresight to find out what lies ahead. It demands the faith and discipline to follow such leaders. It takes willing, effective cooperation; there's profound meaning in Clayton's words, "A number of men went to work immediately to make the road. . . . "

And it takes a sense of mission; those men knew why they had traveled a thousand miles of wilderness and why they were making that road. They were establishing Zion. They were building the kingdom of God.

But that work is not finished. Carrying it forward from that day in 1847 to the Church's present strength and scope has taken the same pioneering qualities, in many lands and times. We see them reflected in the dedication of temples in Europe, Asia, Latin America, and elsewhere. We see them in the calling and labor of over 30,000 missionaries in the field. We see them in the faithful, selfless service of men and women at all levels of Church leadership and teaching.

And with all that, the greatest challenges still lie ahead. The higher the Church's profile becomes, the greater its size and strength, the more intense will be the opposition. Moving steadily forward in the face of that opposition will require the same qualities that took the pioneers around Donner Hill.
