William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

YOKE SACRIFICE WITH WISDOM

Sacrifice, the Latter-day Saint hymn tells us, brings forth the blessings of heaven. It is, moreover, the lifeblood of the Church, now as from the beginning. Without leaders and members who willingly give of themselves, there is no progress.

But to be effective in building the kingdom, sacrifice needs direction. Given in wisdom and in harmony with counsel, it can accomplish wonders. Given otherwise, it can bring tragedy. For example:

Winter came early and with bitter fury on the high plains of Wyoming in 1856. It caught more than one thousand faithful, struggling, sacrificing Latter-day Saints unprepared. In the next few weeks, starvation and cold snuffed out the lives of some 210 of them, with many others to die later of exposure. These were members of the Willie and Martin handcart companies, whose ordeal is one of the most tragic, heroic events in the history of western pioneering.

Almost from the arrival of the Mormon pioneers in Salt Lake Valley in 1847, Church leaders had appealed to members to gather to build the new land. To assist those unable to meet the costs of emigration, Brigham Young established a revolving fund, loans from which were to be repaid after roots were established in the new land. The flood of emigrants grew and reached a peak in 1855—just as a drought and plague of grasshoppers left Zion in economic distress.

With the Perpetual Emigration Fund depleted and thousands seeking to come, Brigham Young proposed a solution: "We cannot purchase wagons and teams as in years past," he wrote. "I am consequently thrown back on my old plan—to make handcarts and let the emigration foot it. . . . They can come just as quick, if not quicker, and much cheaper—can start earlier and escape the prevailing sickness which annually lays so many of our brethren in the dust."

With characteristic Mormon efficiency, the program was launched. Church agents in England arranged ship passage. Others in Iowa City, Iowa, arranged to build the handcarts and organize and outfit the emigrants. Three handcart companies with a total of 815 men, women, and children left Iowa City by mid-June, 1856, and reached the valley in good shape by October 2.

Ironically, and tragically, the two largest handcart companies were the ones struck by disaster. Delayed in sailing and again in outfitting, the company led by returning missionary James G. Willie did not leave Iowa City until July 15. The Edward Martin Company left thirteen days later. Both companies were warned that the season was far too late and they faced grave risks. But enthusiasm for the gathering was high; the vote was taken to proceed, with faith that the weather would be tempered.

It wasn't. The first winter storm, much earlier than usual, hit on October 19, just as the Martin Company had become thoroughly soaked in the last crossing of the Platte River near present-day Casper, Wyoming. Deaths started almost immediately and mounted daily in both companies as blizzards swept the plains, and temperatures plummeted far below zero. Starving and exhausted, the two companies could only huddle in their bitter camps, praying for rescue.

The rescue effort was prompt and efficient. On October 4 Brigham Young learned the handcart companies were still on the Wyoming plains. The next day in October conference, his sermon was brief and to the point.

"Many of our brethren and sisters are on the plains with handcarts and we must send assistance to them. . . . That is my religion; that is the dictation of the Holy Ghost that I possess. It is to save the people. . . . I will tell you all that your faith, religion, and profession of religion, will never save one soul of you in the Celestial Kingdom of God, unless you carry out just such principles as I am now teaching you. Go and bring in those people now on the plains."

In two days the first sixteen four-mule teams were on the way; by the end of October, 250 relief wagons. By early November the rescuers had the survivors moving again, but the ordeal was not ended. At the Sweetwater River, for example, three eighteen-year-old boys in the rescue company carried nearly every member of the Martin company across, suffering such exposure that all three soon died.

The tragedy of the Willie and Martin companies has branded the entire handcart program a failure. It wasn't. Eight other companies crossed the plains between 1856 and 1860, bringing 1,886 persons ranging from infants to aged men and women. In those companies, forty to forty-five persons died en route, a remarkably small number given the hardships of the journey.

Those who made it—and those who did not—live in memory as inspiring examples of courage, dedication, and sacrifice. It's a memory, as well as a lesson, that should never die.
