William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

A DAY FOR REMEMBERING

"This 30th of May, 1868, is designated for the purpose of "strewing with flowers, or otherwise decorating the graves of comrades who died in defense of their country during the late rebellion,—and whose bodies now lie in almost every city, village and hamlet churchyard in the land.

"We should guard their graves with sacred vigilance. All that the consecrated wealth and taste of the nation can add to their adornment and security is but a fitting tribute to the memory of her slain defenders. . . . Let no neglect, no ravage of time, testify to the present or to the coming generations that we have forgotten as a people the cost of a free and undivided republic.

"If other eyes grow dull and other hands slack, and other hearts cold in the solemn trust, ours shall keep it well and long as the light and warmth of life remain in us."

With those words of Major General John A. Logan, Memorial Day became part of American life. In the years since then it has evolved into much more than a remembrance of Civil War dead. It is a time to remember and honor those who in all wars, declared and undeclared, have given the ultimate sacrifice in defense of country. Nor is such honor due only from and for Americans; people of every nation owe a debt of gratitude for those who died fighting on their behalf.

Memorial Day is still more than this. It is a time also for remembering and strengthening family bonds. The act of placing flowers on the grave of a long-gone ancestor—or a departed companion or child or any family member—is an expression of gratitude for all that person has meant in our lives. It is also recognition that family ties are, or should be, eternal.

Decorating graves is an appropriate and beautiful way of keeping fresh and bright that sense of the eternal, that sense of connection of the present to the past and to the future. An even better way is to live, here and now, for the eternal—keeping strong the ties of the living family, living worthy of the hopes and prayers of those who have gone before, teaching saving principles to those who will come after.

For Latter-day Saints, the day can and should be yet more. As we honor those heroes who died in uniform to build or preserve earthly kingdoms, should we not honor as well those heroes who gave so much to build the Kingdom of God?

Who are they? The Prophet Joseph, of course, and that small group of courageous men and women who faced ridicule and mobbings and death to give life to the infant kingdom. And, of course, the pioneers who made that historic trek to reestablish it in the Western wilderness.

But more than these. Pioneering did not end with Brigham Young. Should we not remember and honor on this day those countless other pioneers, those who went on beyond the valley of the Great Salt Lake, answering calls to settle isolated mountain valleys and arid deserts, facing floods and droughts, hunger and despair, to extend the stakes of the Church?

And what of all the others, through the many years, who have built the kingdom and made our lives what they are today? The missionaries who gave years of their lives to bring the gospel to us or our ancestors. The bishops whose devotion and love were so unfailing. The teachers. The quorum leaders. The Relief Society sisters. So many people have done so much.

Memorial Day is for remembering—and for giving thanks. How much we owe of both.
