William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

MESSAGES OF LOVE

TOUCHING THE LEPER

And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean. And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed. (Mark 1:40-42.)

That event seems simple, even commonplace, compared to such dramatic miracles as raising the dead. But it reflects as well, perhaps, as anything He did the central message of the Savior's ministry.

It is hard for us today to imagine the awful condition of the leper in New Testament times. He was considered legally dead. But, worse, he was considered morally unclean. Forbidden to enter any walled city—lashed thirty-nine times if he did—he wandered, muffled to the eyes, crying "Unclean!"

Under Jewish law, no one could greet him. Under the law, no one could approach within six feet of the leper—one hundred feet if the wind came from his direction. Any building he entered was considered defiled and had to be purified. The common practice was to throw stones at or run and hide from any leper who approached.

Such was the man who came to Jesus. What compassion and greatness he must have sensed in the Master to break the law in this manner. And what was the response? Against all law and tradition, Jesus reached out and touched the leper and by His touch cleansed him of his filthiness. By His touch, to save His brother, Jesus descended lower than any man—exactly as He did, later, to save each of us.

We are that leper, each of us unclean in his own way, each of us crying, "If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean." Each of us trusts that because of His infinite love, we will receive His touch.

And what does He ask in return? These words sum it up: Love one another even as I have loved you.

How can we? We have no divine power to redeem as He did. But what we can do is touch each other. There are lepers among us. They may be the people next door in the throes of a devastating divorce, or the teenager down the block trapped by drugs. It may be a friend's daughter facing forced marriage, or the fellow-quorum member who has lost his testimony. It may be the bleary-eyed man huddled outside the transient shelter waiting for the soup kitchen to open. It may be any unhappy, despondent, guilt-ridden human being who feels physically or morally unclean.

If we love as the Savior loved, we will reach out and touch—and heal. It really happens. In a prosperous LDS ward, the son of one of the most respected members got caught up in the drug culture. It led him into sin and eventually into crime.

Visiting him in jail, his bishop found him in despair, deeply penitent, longing to come back. "But Bishop, how can I?" he cried. "I have disgraced my parents and betrayed everyone who loved me. I can't associate with decent people again."

With a silent prayer, the bishop responded: "You come back to the ward. Don't dwell on what you have done. Forget it and let everyone else forget it. I promise you the people of the ward will put their arms around you and love you so you will never get away again."

The challenge was accepted, and the ward members justified the bishop's faith in them. They reached out and touched him. And, miraculous as it seems, the healing was complete.

The Lord has showered us with blessings beyond counting—life on this glorious earth, the loved ones with whom He has surrounded us, the peace and plenty we enjoy, the redeeming sacrifice that gives these and all other blessings eternal meaning. He asks so little in return. But the one thing He asks more urgently and repeatedly than any other is simple and unmistakable: That we love one another.

We can give nothing greater in gratitude for His greatest of all gifts to us than to follow Him in touching the leper.
