William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

SEEK THE LIVING WATER

Headlines in the daily press tell a woeful story of suffering caused by the barriers of race, religion, nationalism, and political philosophy men have erected against each other.

Terrorists kidnap and hijack and bomb, to the point tourists fear to travel in many parts of the world. In the Mideast, and spilling over into bloodshed elsewhere, it's Jew against Muslim, Muslim against Christian, Sunni Muslim against Shiite Muslim, moderate against fundamentalist. In Ireland, it's Catholic against Protestant, Irish against British. In South Africa, it's white against black, black radical against black moderate. In India, it's Sikh against Brahmin. In Nicaragua, it's Communist against Contra, mirroring the struggle raging in so many other parts of the world. And, brooding over it all, it's superpower against superpower, each with nuclear capacity to destroy the world as we know it.

Is there no remedy, no way men can live in security, free of fear? Is there no way to bridge the chasms of suspicion and fear and hatred?

There is a way. At a well in a much-scorned part of Palestine, He whose example we are invited to follow showed the way. Worn and thirsting after a long walk from Judea, Jesus came to the well in Samaria dug by Jacob centuries earlier. Of a Samaritan woman come to draw water he asked for a drink.

In a land where water is life, such a request was never refused. But her answer came with obvious surprise: "How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans." (John 4:9.)

How natural it would have been for others to turn from such a one in disgust. She was a woman; Jews of that age had no more conversation with women than necessary. She was a sinner, a woman who, having had five husbands, was now living with a man not her husband; Levitical law makes deadly clear how Jewish society regarded that.

Most damning, she was a Samaritan. Today, it's hard to comprehend what that meant. Alfred Edersheim, the nineteenth century Jewish/Christian scholar, in his excellent book Life and Times of Jesus, describes the Samaritan condition:

Samaria, the area between Judea and Galilee, was inhabited by foreigners after Israel was taken captive. When the Jews returned from captivity in Babylon, they refused to have anything to do with the idolatrous racial mixture in Samaria. Centuries of bitterness followed.

The Samaritans built a rival temple, repudiating all connection with Israel and dedicating their temple to Jupiter. While the Jews agonized under the Roman heel, the Samaritans prospered, even selling many Jews into slavery and waylaying and killing Jewish pilgrims on their way to Jerusalem.

The Jews retaliated, Edersheim recounts, by treating the Samaritans with every mark of contempt, accusing them of falsehood and irreligion, disowning them as to race or religion. To the Jews, Shechem, the Samaritan capital, was "the city of fools, derided by all men." To partake of Samaritan bread was like eating the flesh of swine.

Heir to this bitter history, Jesus faced the woman who had scorned Him. Forgetting His thirst, ignoring centuries of hatred and mistrust, He taught and loved.

He did not temporize: "Ye worship ye know not what," He told her. "We know what we worship: for salvation is of the Jews." (John 4:22.)

But who was right, or wrong, was to Him far less important than to teach that wherever God is worshipped, He is to be worshipped in spirit and truth.

So to this common, ignorant, sinful Samaritan woman, of all people, He for the first time revealed Himself, in plainness, to be the promised Messiah. With her and her people he spent two days, seeking to give to them the living water that springs up into eternal life. And many of these despised people believed and recorded their plain and simple testimony that this was the Christ, the Savior of the world.

Can nations and races and individuals not learn from that divine example: That while we properly hold to convictions of who and what is right, there is a higher truth. It is that we are all brothers, that God loves us all. We are more alike in our longing for peace and safety and dignity than we are different.

Jesus' treatment of the despised Samaritans with love and compassion opened the way for a rich harvest of souls who joined His followers in brotherhood in later years. Can we not follow Him?
