William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

WHOSE NEIGHBOR AM I?

As was so often the case during His ministry, it was a sticky situation Jesus faced. His teachings of a new gospel had deeply disturbed tradition-bound Jewish leaders. Enemies surrounded Him. Some had tried to kill Him. Again and again, others had tried to trap Him with His own words.

Now, as recorded in the tenth chapter of Luke, here was this lawyer testing Him, publicly asking the most fundamental of all questions: "What shall I do to inherit eternal life?"

The answer should have been obvious to any Jewish student of the scriptures, and it was to the scriptures that Jesus referred the lawyer to answer his own question: Love of God with heart, soul, strength, and mind is demanded throughout the Old Testament. Leviticus (19:18) had specifically added the injunction to love one's neighbor as oneself.

So that was the ready answer, and Jesus acknowledged its correctness. But then came the hard question: "And who is my neighbor?"

What a question for that time and place! The Jews to whom Jesus was trying to bring His gospel prided themselves as God's chosen people and despised those not so chosen. Separated by God through selection and covenant, they had separated themselves by self-righteousness and pride. Well might such a people ask, "Who is my brother?"

How should He answer? He who had cautioned about the folly of casting pearls before swine knew well that His listeners were not ready for a sermon on the universality of the gospel and the brotherhood of man. Yet the teaching moment was here and must not be lost.

With His genius for taking people where they were, talking in terms of their everyday experience, the Master Teacher gave, as He so frequently did, a parable, one of the greatest of His ministry. Of His forty or so recorded parables, none surpasses that of the Good Samaritan for the power of its unmistakable message.

"A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves. . . ." His listeners must have nodded; they knew well that road through the barren Judean hills, only twenty miles long but dropping three thousand feet in elevation as it wound through the narrow canyons. They called it "the bloody way" for the robber bands infesting the limestone caves there.

In simple, unadorned words Jesus told the story; the traveler robbed, wounded, and left for dead, ignored by the priest and the Levite who passed that way, saved at considerable risk and inconvenience by a "certain Samaritan."

Then came the searching question: "Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?"

And the answer, unarguable even to those prideful people who so despised the Samaritans: "He that shewed mercy on him."

What profundity lies in this simple parable! In those few words, Jesus condemned the narrowness that afflicted Judaism and afflicts so much of the world today. He condemned the discrimination implied in the question, "Who is my neighbor?" He taught service through love, not duty. He turned the question, "Who is my neighbor?" to the far more pointed, meaningful one, "Whose neighbor am I?"

Would you know who is your neighbor? Become a neighbor to all through the service of love. Let there be no more separation of man. That is what Christ's parable taught. That is the heart of the Christian message. How timeless and universal is that message. It speaks—or should—to us whenever we cross the street to avoid the vagrant slumped against the wall, whenever we hurry away from an accident scene rather than get involved as a witness, whenever we despise or shun or fear others because they are not of our race or nationality or political persuasion.

To Latter-day Saints the parable of the Good Samaritan should strike home with particular force. We count ourselves as a "peculiar" people, peculiar in the sense of being chosen, covenanted, warned to be in the world but not of the world, much as God called and separated ancient Israel.

Jesus condemned the folly and evil of separating ourselves in pride and self-righteousness. He taught that where much is given much is required, and that what He most earnestly expects is that we love and serve without discrimination.

To us of all people comes the searching question: "Whose neighbor am I?"
