William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

WHOM DO WE SEND AWAY?

It was in one of those Sunday evening "study groups." Half a dozen couples, good friends, comfortable with each other, had been meeting together for years. This night the talk turned to the question of neighborliness; how could the Church change the perception many people have that Mormons tend to be clannish and shut others out?

One man cut to the heart of the question. "How many of us," he asked, "belong to any kind of small, intimate group that includes non-Mormons as well as Mormons?" The silence was uncomfortable as it became clear where the problem lay.

"Now my brethren, we see that God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, he numbereth his people, and his bowels of mercy are over all the earth. . . . " (Alma 26:37.)

That testimony of God's concern for all people came with conviction from a man who knew what he was talking about. Ammon and his three brothers, sons of Mosiah, had just risked their lives on a mission among the Lamanites. Even survival among those wild and warlike people was questionable; what hope could they have for conversions?

But God is mindful of all people. He touched Lamanite hearts. So complete was the conversion of thousands of them that they vowed to kill no more, buried their weapons of war, prostrated themselves before their enemies, and "praised God even in the very act of perishing under the sword." Such love of their fellow men had not been seen before; not even, Ammon noted, among his own people, the Nephites.

That challenging observation speaks to us today. Members of Christ's church ought to be second to no one in living the principle He taught so earnestly—that we love our neighbor.

God has given us so much. He only asks that we share our abundance. Alma spoke of such sharing: "And now, because of the steadiness of the church they began to be exceedingly rich, having abundance of all things whatsoever they stood in need—an abundance of flocks and herds, and fatlings of every kind, and also abundance of grain, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious things. . . . " (Alma 1:29.)

We, too, have an abundance of things like that. But "because of the steadiness of the Church" we have abundance of even more precious things. In our wards, we have an abundance of friendship. We have an abundance of sociability. We have an abundance of brotherhood, of caring, of bearing each other's burdens and sharing each other's joys. We have an abundance of neighborliness.

With that abundance, can we follow the example of Alma's people: "And thus, in their prosperous circumstances, they did not send away any who were naked, or that were hungry, or that were athirst, or that were sick, or that had not been nourished . . . they were liberal to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, whether out of the church or in the church, having no respect to persons as to those who stood in need." (Alma 1:30.)

There are among us those who are hungry for neighborliness. There are naked among us: people hit by tragedy or adversity and without the support system of home and visiting teachers, bishops, priesthood quorums and the Relief Society. There are those who thirst, who may be sick, who need the nourishment of love and caring that we as good neighbors can bring.

Happy in the comfortable sufficiency of our ward families and preoccupied with family and Church responsibilities, do we unknowingly or unthinkingly "send away" people like that?
