William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

FOR THE SERVICE OF LOVE

How slow they were to learn, these twelve men who called themselves disciples. For three years they had sat at Jesus' feet, listened to His gospel of love and service, watched as He ministered to the poor, the despised, the leprous.

They had heard Him say, plainly, "Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant." (Matt. 20:27.) He had taught them specifically, when invited to a feast, to take a lower place, for "whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." (Luke 14:11.)

Now here they were at the sacred Passover, the last they would share with Him, and they were wrangling over who should be greatest among them. Jesus made no comment. What He did was far more eloquent: "He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.

"After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded." (John 13:4-5.)

This was the role of a slave, the girded towel the badge of slavedom. How more impressively could He have demonstrated the central message of His ministry?

Our finite minds cannot comprehend the agony in Gethsemane when Christ took upon Himself our sins. We can only faintly imagine the agony of flesh pierced by driven nails, of a body hung on a cross to die. The glory and mystery of the Resurrection are far beyond our present understanding.

The washing of the feet, though, we can understand. We recognize it as a profound object lesson in humility and service. We cannot mistake His injunction to follow His example.

That seems clear enough. But do we understand, really? Did the disciples? To Peter he said, "What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter." (John 13:7.) And to all, after he had finished the ritual and sat down, He asked, "Know ye what I have done to you?" (John 13:12.)

Why such questions? What was there not to understand? Was there something more here than the unmistakable lesson to humble oneself in the service of others?

"If I wash thee not," He warned the protesting Peter, "thou hast no part with me." (John 13:8.)

What Peter did not understand, nor did the others, was that sharing in this ordinance of foot washing meant sharing in the Savior's mission, His service of love to mankind.

But he would learn. Later, on the shore of Galilee, this disciple who three times that awful night had denied his Lord, would hear the Resurrected Christ ask three times, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?" Three times he would answer, "Yea Lord, thou knowest I love thee." Three times he would hear the plea: "Feed my sheep," and finally begin to understand what it was Jesus had asked—that we wash and clean our feet for the service of love. (John 21:15-17.)

As they came to that last supper, the disciples had been washed. Earlier they had been baptized. With one exception, they were, Jesus assured them, clean. What He was doing in washing their feet was not forgiving their sins; that had been done. What He was asking was the one thing yet needed—the consecration of their lives to His ministry. As Elder James E. Talmage taught in his book Jesus the Christ, "The washing of feet was an ordinance pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, the full import of which they had yet to learn."

That they did learn, finally, through the gift of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, is clear from the dedication and courage with which they filled their missions.

Today's apostles carry the same charge, with the same grant of authority. May they have the sustaining prayers of Church members everywhere in their awesome responsibilities.
