William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

DARE TO EXCEL

In a peaceful Dearborn, Michigan, suburb stands the palatial home of Henry Ford, now a museum of his life and times. Wandering through it some years ago a visitor opened a desk drawer and discovered an envelope, on the back of which, in Mrs. Ford's handwriting, were the words:

Bite off more than you can chew, and chew it, Dare to do more than you can do, and do it. Hitch your wagon to a star, Keep your seat, And there you are.

Those lines summarize about as well as any the philosophy on which Henry Ford became one of the world's great industrialists, a man whose mass production of an inexpensive car changed American lives forever.

They also reflect the spirit on which was based an organization that was founded and grew to maturity during the same years Henry Ford was building his industrial empire—the Boy Scouts of America.

The Boy Scouts of America was established February 8, 1910. As The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints observes February as Scout Month three-quarters of a century later, 300,000 Mormon boys are enrolled in Scouting—122,000 as Cub Scouts, 114,000 as Boy Scouts, 37,000 as Varsity Scouts, and 27,000 as Explorers.

Much has changed in Scouting as the organization has tried to keep pace with a changing society. But the fundamentals remain.

"On my honor" . . . duty to God and country . . . helping other people . . . keeping physically strong, mentally awake, morally straight. These are principles that have been central to Scouting from its beginning. They are central today, and—with family breakup and moral breakdown endemic in our society—never have they been more important.

Equally important is the concept on which Scouting thrives: That boys become men—real men—by daring to bite off more than they can chew, and then chewing it. Making that concept a reality takes leaders with the same kind of daring.

It's boldness is almost beyond belief, when you think about it, to imagine a leader can take a group of squirming, chattering eight- to eleven-year-olds and focus their energies and attention through the disciplines of the Cub Scout program. Or give Boy Scout-age youngsters the desire, perseverance, and leadership needed to complete the long, challenging path to Eagle. Or keep mid-teenage boys out of beer halls and the back seats of cars and united in the wholesome, challenging programs of Varsity and Explorer Scouting.

There are so many distractions, so many forces pulling youngsters off in directions that lead anywhere but where they ought to go. How can a leader succeed against such competition?

The wonder is that so many do. Like Ralph Degn of River Heights 34th Ward, Providence Utah Stake. With his calling as Varsity Scout team coach came twenty boys ages thirteen to seventeen whose Church attendance ranged from regular to nonexistent but who were pretty well agreed they wanted nothing more to do with Scouting. Also with the call came a challenge from the stake president: Eagle badges for at least ten of those boys.

He wrestled with that problem and prayed about it, Degn recalled, and an idea came. He cleared it with the bishopric and stake presidency, then met with the group and made them a proposition: a high-level program of activities and trips for those who met the standards.

The requirements were stiff: fill all Eagle requirements, attend seventy-five percent of Church meetings, enroll in seminary each quarter, give two talks in sacrament meeting, earn all money needed for the program.

Eighteen of the twenty made it. River Heights is a different place now. The Eagle service projects included painting all the town's fire hydrants, painting the bleachers and pavilion at the ball park, refurbishing the welcome sign at the edge of town.

"Scouting has become the thing to do in our community, where two years ago it wasn't," one official reported. "Some of these boys were in trouble in the community two years ago; now they have a real sense of community pride."

And from one of the Scouts: "Before the goal was set, no one wanted anything to do with Scouting. Now the whole group has become good friends and they feel they have accomplished something impossible by setting and achieving a long-range goal."

"Bite off more than you can chew. . . . "
