William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

RICH TOWARD GOD

It was the beginning of ward conference. To set a tone of brotherhood and spirituality, the week began with a dinner, followed by a temple session.

After the session, the high priest group leader approached the bishop, expressing gratitude for the experience of enjoying the temple in the company of some seventy fellow ward members. Then, lowering his voice and thinking no one else could hear, he added: "And, bishop, don't worry about the ward budget. If this stretches it, I'd like to take care of it."

A small incident, but in character. This man, a lawyer, had performed countless acts of quiet generosity, giving his means, his time, and his professional skills to those in need. He knew well, and practiced, the principle of stewardship.

How earnestly and persistently the Savior tried to teach that principle. It is estimated that nearly half of His teachings relate to the proper use of wealth.

There was the time (see Luke 12), for example, when Jesus was speaking to a multitude so dense they stepped on each other's toes. He spoke of the love and concern of the Father for every human being. He taught them to be guided by the Holy Ghost.

As though he had heard not a word of that divine message, a young man spoke up: "Master, speak to my brother that he divide the inheritance with me."

The Savior must have grieved over the thoughtlessness of that rude interruption. But He gave no sign. With His genius for seizing the teaching moment, He abruptly changed His discourse: "Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of things which he possesseth." (Luke 12:15.)

The parable of the rich fool followed. It has been called an American parable, and with good reason; it condemns directly the covetousness reflected in the bumper sticker seen on American luxury cars: "He who gets the most toys wins." Well might it also be called the retirement parable.

Jesus spoke of the rich man whose lands bore so abundantly he had no room to store his crops. "And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.

"And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

"But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall these things be, which thou hast provided?" (Luke 12:18-20.)

Why such harsh condemnation? Was this not a provident man who had worked hard all his life, saved his money and invested wisely, and now deserved to retire in comfort? Isn't that the American ideal? Where had he failed?

He had failed to recognize the principle of stewardship. In his eyes, they were his barns, his fruits, his goods. He had forgotten, if he ever knew, that the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof, that every material thing we possess is by His sufferance and only temporarily.

Having forgotten that, it was only natural that his use of his wealth was so self-centered. All of it was to go into his enlarged barn for his ease. There was no thought of sharing, no concern for the poor, no awareness of brotherhood.

No wonder that He whose entire ministry was centered around sharing and brotherhood should condemn such selfishness and then, to all of us, warn: "So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God." (Luke 12:21.)

There is a stewardship, too, of time and energy and talents—all of them also gifts from God. He condemns selfish use of them as well, particularly their use to take our ease.

The Savior's attitude toward retirement from service to God and mankind is unmistakable. "Woe to them that are at ease in Zion," he warns. (Amos 6:1; 2 Ne. 28:24.) His appeals to endure to the end are almost beyond counting.

Instead of building bigger barns, what if the rich man gave his surplus wealth to charity? What if he endowed a missionary fund? What if instead of taking his ease, he and his wife accepted a mission call? What if they became temple workers or name extractors or dedicated themselves to any of the countless other opportunities for doing good?

The happiness reflected in the faces of those so engaged, by contrast with those who try to fill their retirement with recreation and self-gratifying pursuits, is obvious here and now. Hereafter what a difference there must be between those who lay up treasure for themselves and those who are rich toward God.
