William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

INQUIRING FOR OURSELVES

Illustrating his priesthood lesson, the teacher recalled the day, many years ago, when his father came home from quorum meeting, chuckling and wiping moist eyes.

"Father had taught the High Priests for thirty-five years. On this day he said to me, 'Son, don't ever underestimate the strength of the gospel.' And then he told what had happened that day."

He was in the middle of the lesson, he said, when an elderly man raised his hand. He was a humble man, a man of the soil, who usually sat quietly listening. On this day his voice rang with conviction: "I have studied this lesson. I have thought a great deal about it. I have read everything I can find in the scriptures on the subject. I've prayed about it.

"And, brethren, I have decided the Lord was right."

In some cultures, in some churches, that would sound like blasphemy. What arrogance that such a man should presume to decide whether or not the Lord was right.

But the teacher—and his father—saw it differently: "What power, what majesty, there is in a church that expects its people to decide for themselves."

What majesty, yes. And what responsibility.

Joseph Smith spoke of that responsibility: "All men have the privilege of thinking for themselves upon all matters related to conscience. . . . We are not disposed . . . to deprive anyone of exercising that free independence of mind which heaven has bestowed upon the human family as one of its choicest gifts."

So did Brigham Young: "I am more afraid that this people have so much confidence in their leaders that they will not inquire for themselves of God whether they are led by Him. I am fearful that they settle down in a state of blind self-security, trusting their eternal destiny in the hands of their leaders with a reckless confidence that in itself would thwart the purposes of God in their salvation. . . . Let every man and woman know, by the whispering of the Spirit of God to themselves, whether their leaders are walking in the path the Lord dictates, or not. . . . " (Journal of Discourses 9:150.)

Where there is such privilege, such responsibility, there is also risk. The risk is that independence of thought and inquiry can become reliance on one's own knowledge, one's own wisdom.

The Lord's judgment is heavy on those who "put down the power and miracles of God, and preach up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning." (2 Ne. 26:20.) "Wo be unto him that hearkeneth unto the precepts of men, and denieth the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost! Yea, wo be unto him that saith: We have received, and we need no more!" (2 Ne. 28:25-26.)

So how do we avoid that trap? How can we safely know the line between the independent inquiry the Lord urges upon us and the prideful self-reliance He condemns?

That humble farmer in the priesthood quorum knew the line. He knew that the confirmation he was seeking did not lie within his own powers, but in study of the word of God and in asking God directly for an answer.

The Lord has promised us, speaking of His servants, that "Whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.)

That is clear and powerful and assuring. But it raises a question: How can we know for ourselves when they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost?

Brigham Young said: "Were your faith concentrated upon the proper object, your confidence unshaken, your lives pure and holy, every one fulfilling the duties of his or her calling according to the Priesthood and capacity bestowed upon you, you would be filled with the Holy Ghost, and it would be impossible for any man to deceive you." (Journal of Discourses 7:227.)

That is the power and majesty—and responsibility—bestowed upon us by the gospel of Jesus Christ.
