William B. Smart, Messages for a Happier Life ( 1989)

WHICH WAY THE SHORE?

Some years ago, the news wires carried from Falls River, Massachusetts, the account of a river tragedy.

A group of girls sunning themselves on the bank heard a call: "Which way the shore?" They looked, saw a young man swimming in the river, and chuckled at his way of fooling around. Again came the call: "Which way the shore?" They looked and wondered, briefly, then went back to their suntan lotion and girl talk. Again, urgently: "Which way the shore?" Recognizing, at last, the desperation in his voice, they called to him, and one went for help.

It was too late. While they watched, the boy sank and drowned. When his body was recovered, they found he was blind.

Those girls didn't deliberately abandon him to die. They would have saved him had they realized he was in trouble, had they been really listening, had their self-absorption not deafened the inner ear.

How many of us are like them, so absorbed in the minutiae of daily living, so self-oriented we cannot hear with the inner ear? And how many of our fellow men are like him? How many are silently calling for help?

"Neglect not the gift that is in thee, . . . given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery," Paul exhorted us. (1 Tim. 4:14.) One of those gifts of the Spirit is that of discernment. At no time is it more nobly exercised than in hearing—and heeding—the unspoken cry of one in need.

The Savior, as always, set the perfect example: ". . . as he went the people thronged him. And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any, came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and immediately her issue of blood stanched.

"And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they that were with him said, Master, the multitude throng thee and press thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?" (Luke 8:42-45.)

The multitude throng and press us as well. The world with all its challenges and distractions is very much with us. While we cannot respond to a touch with the immediacy and finality of the Savior, we can, if we listen with the heart, discern in the cacophony of daily living the silent call for help.

We all know people who exercise that special gift, and whom the Savior must love in a special way. There is a sister down the block with a handicapped child of her own who always seems to be there to help carry the handicaps of others. It is she who sees in the face of a young mother struggling with three or four preschool children the need for a few hours of relief and takes over. It is she who senses in a slumped shoulder or a dejected posture that something is wrong at home, and is there the next day with warm bread and warm words, ready to weep together or laugh together or kneel in prayer together as the listening heart decrees.

There is the business executive, the shop foreman, the high school teacher whose listening heart hears the call, "Which way the shore?" and sets aside the daily routine to take up the infinitely more important task of ministering to a human soul.

There are those who have what we call the "missionary spirit," which is nothing more than the listening heart ever alert to the silent cry of one seeking the safety of a spiritual shore. The cry can come at any time, from the new neighbor, the airliner seatmate, the lady at the checkout counter, the classmate at school. The listening heart, sensing spiritual need, responds: "This way. Here is safety. Here is the gospel of Jesus Christ."

Upon those safely on the shore lies a sacred responsibility. Alma described it, speaking of those who: " . . . are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places. . . ." (Mosiah 18:8-9.)

Such as these are qualified to listen, to hear, and to confidently cry, "Here is the shore!"
