Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 1

THE PRINCIPLE OF MORAL AGENCY

The Genesis of Man. With the exception of a few of the smaller denominations, the idea prevails quite generally throughout the Christian world that man is a creature composed of a mortal body and an eternal spirit, or soul. Among some Christians the thought goes even further, for they believe that man is of triple nature, body, spirit and soul. With these views Latter-day Saints can find no particular complaint. The strange feature about it lies not in the fact that there is this belief in the immortal spirit, but in the fact that these good people believe that this immortal spirit is created at the time of the creation of the mortal body, and after the physical death, the spirit leaves the body and continues on its way in an eternal duration.

The Bible teaches us that man existed in the spirit creation before he appeared on this earth with his physical body, but this doctrine in the Bible is only discerned through a mist or fog. This fog is created, as recorded by Nephi, because many plain and precious things have been taken out of the Bible, which fact causes an exceeding great many to stumble, insomuch that "Satan hath great power over them." In the restoration of these plain and precious parts which have been given to the Church in our present dispensation, the doctrine of man's preexistence in the spirit creation is clearly and forcefully taught. For instance in the Book of Moses we find the following:

And now, behold, I say unto you, that these are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth;

And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth.

Abraham declares:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. [^1]

Intelligence Not Created. The Latter-day Saints believe that man is a spirit clothed with a tabernacle of flesh and bones, the intelligent part of which was never created or made, but existed eternally. This belief is based upon a revelation given to the Church, May 6, 1833, at Kirtland, Ohio. In this revelation the Lord declared:

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. * * For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

Some of our writers have endeavored to explain what an intelligence is, but to do so is futile, for we have never been given any insight into this matter beyond what the Lord has fragmentarily revealed. We know, however, that there is something called intelligence which always existed. It is the real eternal part of man, which was not created or made. This intelligence combined with the spirit constitutes a spiritual identity or individual.

Man The Offspring of God. The spirit of man, then, is a combination of the intelligence and the spirit which is an entity begotten of God. When the Savior commissioned Mary at the empty tomb immediately after his resurrection, he said unto her: "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." This was not intended in the sense in which the world receives the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man, but literally, according to the meaning of the words. Jesus is in very deed our elder Brother, the Firstborn in the spirit and the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh; and God is in very deed our Father, according to the plain declaration of the Scriptures, both ancient and modern. It is because of this simple teaching that Eliza R. Snow wrote her beautiful hymn—"O My Father."

The following is an excerpt taken from an epistle issued by the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles, June 30, 1916.

Father, as Literal Parent. Scriptures embodying the ordinary signification—literally that of Parent—are too numerous and specific to require citation. The purport of these scriptures is to the effect that God the Eternal Father, whom we designate by the exalted name-title "Elohim" is the literal Parent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and of the spirits of the human race. Elohim is the Father in every sense in which Jesus Christ is so designated, and distinctively He is the Father of spirits. Thus we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews: "Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?" (Heb. 12:9). In view of this fact we are taught by Jesus Christ to pray: "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name."—Era, 19:934.

Since these chapters are written for Latter-day Saints, who accept this doctrine, it is needless to go into further detail or cite further references to establish the fact that God is literally our Father.

Man Created In The Likeness of God. It is recorded in Genesis that God said unto His Only Begotten Son:

Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

The Book of Moses, revealed in our day, is even more explicit in its account of creation:

In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

In the image of his own body, male and female, created he them.—Moses 6:8-9.

At the time of the organization of the Church, this doctrine was again declared, wherein the Lord said:

By these things (i.e. the revelations and opening of the heavens) we know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them;

And that he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them.

The statement being so plainly declared, and frequently repeated so that we might be impressed with its importance, it seems very strange that the world insists that this scripture does not mean what it says, but rather that man is created in some other image. In other words, they would have us believe the image of God after which man was created is not in form of body and feature, but rather "to a similarity of congruence in mental and spiritual nature." (Sir Ambrose Fleming.) Or, as expressed by another learned man: "If we are made in the image of God, that image is in reason, not in body." (William Hays Ward.)

It is certainly a very grave twisting of a simple, plainly stated meaning, to interpret the word of the Lord in such a fantastic way.

The fallacy of such reasoning is plainly manifest when we give to these interpretations a little thought. If we were created in the image of God merely in reason, or mentally, it was not many years after the creation when men ceased very definitely to be in the image of God, and from that day to this, with very few exceptions, have never regained that likeness. Moreover, the Lord declared:

Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.

For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.—Isaiah 55:7-9.

Man's Free Agency. Since man is in very deed the offspring of God, and therefore created in His image, he must be endowed with certain characteristics inherited from his Father. He is ordained, by virtue of his birthright, to become an intelligent, independent being within his sphere. That this might be brought about, the great gift of free agency is granted. There could be no progression, no real existence, without this great gift. When the plan of salvation was presented to the spirits in the pre-mortal estate, each individual spirit had the privilege of receiving or rejecting that plan, for this power was inherent within him. It is an eternal principle. Lucifer sought to destroy it, and proposed to take away from man the right and power to act as a free agent, and substitute in the stead thereof the law of compulsion.

In the Book of Moses it is written:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down.

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice.—Moses 4:1-5.

President Brigham Young has very correctly said:

What is the foundation of the rights of man? The Lord Almighty has organized man for the express purpose of becoming an independent being like unto Himself, and has given him his individual agency. Man is made in the likeness of his Creator, the great archetype of the human species, who bestowed upon him the principle of eternity, planting immortality within him, and leaving him at liberty to act in the way that seemeth good unto him—to choose or refuse for himself, to be a Latter-day Saint or a Wesleyan Methodist, to belong to the Church of England, the oldest daughter of the Mother Church, to the old Mother herself, to her sister the Greek Church, or to be an infidel and belong to no church. When the kingdom of God is fully set up and established on the face of the earth, and takes the pre-eminence over all other nations and kingdoms, it will protect the people in the enjoyment of all their rights, no matter what they believe, what they profess, or what they worship.—Millennial Star 20:43.

Alma has stated it in these words:

I ought not to harrow up in my desires, the firm decree of a just God, for I know that he granteth unto men according to their desire, whether it be unto death or unto life; yea, I know that he allotteth unto men according to their wills, whether they be unto salvation or unto destruction.

Yea, and I know that good and evil have come before all men; he that knoweth not good from evil is blameless; but he that knoweth good and evil, to him it is given according to his desires, whether he desireth good or evil, life or death, joy or remorse of conscience.—Alma 29:4-5.

While this free gift, inherent through our birth-right as the children of God, will be the means by which many will fail to obtain the reward of exaltation, yet it is plain to see that exaltation could not be granted to any soul without the exercise of this great gift which makes of him a free agent. Through this power, and obedience to the principles of eternal truth, he will eventually become an independent being exercising the fulness of authority and power in the kingdom of God.

A Little Lower Than Angels. The Psalmist has written under the spirit of revelation:

When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with thy glory and honor.

Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet;

All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field;

The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth.—Psalms 8.

This prophet-poet, when he wrote those beautiful sentiments, was thinking of man in his mortal environment. It is true, that man was made to have dominion over all the works of the Almighty upon the earth, for he is the crowning glory of all creation. Moreover, while man in this mortal world with its changing scenes is made a little lower than the angels, yet the power is in him to rise far above the angels through the exercise of his agency. He may become like God, his Father, who planted in his being the divine spark in the creation, which spark is developed to its fulness through the glorious mission on the earth of our Redeemer, Jesus Christ.

In mortality man is created a little lower than the angels, but he is also created far above the animal creations upon the earth, over which he has always held dominion. In these modern times, as Paul predicted, God has permitted to come among men "strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." Through this delusion Satan has gained great power over the souls of men. He has instilled into their minds the doctrine that they are not the offspring of God—"begotten sons and daughters unto him"—but that they are the sons and daughters of lower forms of life. Satan has made many believe that such a thought is "beautiful," and that they have reached their present stage of development through long processes of change called "organic evolution," and by these processes have outdistanced their less fortunate "ancestors" and "cousins" among the animal and vegetable creations. How much more beautiful, noble and inspiring, is the doctrine revealed from God!

Man a Sentient Being. Of all the animate creatures on the earth, man stands out alone as a sentient being endowed with the faculty of perception and the power to gain knowledge and wisdom through his senses. His mind is active and when not submerged in the depths of evil, is progressive. He reasons, calculates, and creates. He is by nature a creator, for this gift he has inherited from God his Father. Paul said "that in him we live, and move, and have our being; * * for we are also his offspring."

Man possesses the faculty to increase in knowledge, wisdom and power.

He has subdued the earth and rides upon the air and on the seas.

He has harnessed the lightnings and the cataracts and made them serve him.

His inventive genius has brought the forces of nature to obey him.

He has discovered hidden secrets of the universe.

He builds great structures reaching into the heavens, and improves and beautifies his surroundings.

He has taken advantage of the knowledge of past ages and by his observation and adaptation has increased his knowledge and power.

He has developed to a high degree the gift of reason.

He has inherited the gift of speech and conveys his thoughts to his fellow man, in a complex language, both written and oral.

He has learned to send his thoughts out upon the ethereal waves almost instantly to all parts of the earth.

Neither land nor sea stands in the way of his communications.

In his higher civilization he possesses an esthetic nature. He loves the beautiful and appreciates things lovely and artistic. By these qualities he is able to touch the hearts of his fellow men and sway them in their emotions. All of these powers are increased as he draws nearer to his Creator and Father. When he forgets the source of all these qualifications and turns from his God, then are these blessings impaired and he sinks in ignorance and sin. Without the guidance of the Divine Presence, whence he comes, he becomes a slave to savagery and debased ignorance, for it is the Spirit of Truth which enlightens and sustains.

Sir Ambrose Fleming in his excellent work, "Evolution or Creation," has aptly said:

Without aspiring to supply any definition in detail, we can note at once certain qualities in the human species not the smallest trace of which appear in the animal species. Thus no animal has ever made any weapon or tool to help its bodily endowments. It fights with teeth and claws, horns, tusks, or hoofs, but it makes no military weapon of any kind. Nor has any animal made a tool—spade, rake, knife, hatchet, axe or saw. No animal makes itself any artificial dress, hat or coat, shoes or ornament, to improve its appearance, nor does it dress or arrange the hair on its head. But all the very earliest true human beings do these things. No animal has discovered how to produce fire, or even to maintain it.

The explorer, Du Chaillu, says he has seen monkeys sitting around a dying fire left by a hunter in a forest and warming their paws, but they have not sufficient intelligence to put sticks on the fire to keep it alive.

The animal mind or intellect is static or limited. It never progresses beyond a certain point. Domestic animals which have been in contact with man for thousands of years are no further forward intellectually than at the beginning.

On the other hand the human mind is extremely progressive, self-educative, and assimilative. Uncultured races of men brought in contact with more advanced races adopt quickly their achievements, customs, modes of thought, and habits, and unfortunately also their vices. Animals undoubtedly can communicate with each other, conveying information, but they have not developed the power of speech or rational thought to anything even remotely approaching that in the case of man.—pp. 72-73.

Man a Religious Being. The Prophet Joseph Smith has shown in the "Lectures on Faith" which were delivered before the "School of the Elders," that the knowledge of God has come down from Adam who dwelt in his presence, and that all nations, kindreds and tongues, have carried this knowledge in their traditions from the revelations and teachings of the earliest times. We know that the true plan of salvation was made known in the beginning and when men turned away from the worship of God to man-made forms of worship, they nevertheless carried with them in a perverted form in their traditions and customs many of the religious teachings and beliefs which came originally from the prophets of God. Moreover, it is also true that the spirit of worship is inherent in man because of his antecedents as the child of God in the spirit world.

It is natural for men to worship, no matter where they live, or when. No matter how depraved or ignorant they become, within their soul is the feeling of worship. It may become very dim and apparently disappear entirely through yielding to sin, yet it is doubtful if that spark is ever entirely destroyed. How could it be destroyed when man's eternal spirit once lived in the presence of God? This religious worship leads men to believe in the future life. It leads them to have faith in powers that are unseen. It is this inherent quality which teaches men, even in their most brutal nature and savage state, to reverence their dead and lay them away in the earth.

Dr. W. Schmidt, in "The Origin and Growth of Religion," has said that among the least civilized of mankind, and underlying their belief in polytheism, is the belief in one "First Father" or Great God, who is the Supreme Being. This belief is found among the pygmies of Africa, the debased natives of Tierra del Fuego—the lowest, perhaps of all the descendants of Lehi—and other Indian tribes, the aborigines of Australia, the Hottentots, and among the inhabitants of every place upon the face of the globe. This idea is not a development of recent times, but comes down among the peoples of all nations from the most ancient times. He concludes that monotheism, and not polytheism, is the original faith of mankind. (See pp. 61-72.)

In another chapter is discussed the doctrine that man in the beginning walked by sight in the presence of God and from him obtained commandments and the true form of worship.

Man a Moral Agent. The fact that men have inherited from the Father the feeling of worship and reverence, and that the idea of God is one received from our first human parents who taught their children in meekness and truth all things in relation to their duty and obligations unto God, makes men moral agents. They are possessed of spiritual endowment, and hence are responsible to the Higher Powers.

Dr. Harold C. Morton has said that the "Moral Imperative, that sense of obligation, that allegiance to Eternal Right, is the essential feature of human life." He further says:

I believe it can be maintained that the great moral laws—Truth, Justice, Honesty, Industry, Kindness and so forth—are, and have been, universally known in normal human life; and that any ignorance is to be attributed to the debasement of human nature, false training, and the sway of evil ideals. Conscience, which perceives the Law, hears the voice, feels the obligation, may become "seared as with a hot iron." Even if, with what is called the "New Intuitionism," we had to admit that knowledge of detailed laws is not universal, we still should affirm the universal sense of Moral Obligation to follow after whatever is allowed to be "the Good." In some form or other the moral fact is always there, and generally as we know it today.—"The Supposed Evolutionary Origin of the Moral Imperative."—Journal of Transactions, Victoria Institute, Vol. 65, p. 151.

Guided by the Spirit of Truth. This doctrine coincides with the revelation of the Lord, already noted, that every man born into the world is enlightened by the Spirit of Truth, and with such guidance becomes a moral agent before the throne of God. His conscience is the monitor, or guide, which comes from this eternal Spirit given to every man to lead him in the path of right and truth. If he will continue to hearken to the voice of the Spirit of Truth, or Spirit of Christ, it will lead him eventually to the fulness of the light—the Gospel of Jesus Christ. "For whoso cometh not unto me," the Lord has said, "is under the bondage of sin. And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of me. And by this you may know the righteous from the wicked, and that the whole world groaneth under sin and darkness even now." (D. and C. 84:45-53.)

It is for this reason that the prophet of old declared to all mankind: "For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad."—2 Cor. 5:10.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Compare Jer. 1:5, Isaiah 49:1, 5, Job. 38:4-7.
