Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 2

AUTHORITY AN ETERNAL PRINCIPLE

Authority an Eternal Principle. All mankind, both in this world and in the worlds to come, must be subject to law and regulation. The Lord has declared that "all kingdoms have a law given; and there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified." This is just as true of the kingdom—or government—of man as it is of any other kingdom.

Government is instituted for the benefit of man. Where there is no government anarchy and chaos inevitably rule. A despotic government is better than no government at all, although it is verily true, that when the wicked rule the people mourn. Man has never learned to live without some form of government with authority delegated to representatives to enforce the law. Nor will such a condition ever come. There must be laws, and officers to enforce them, to secure to mankind any semblance of peace and safety, even where the most unsatisfactory governments prevail.

The Universe Governed by Law. The entire universe is governed by law. Divine authority is manifest in the heavens. The perfect order by which the stars move in their times and seasons proclaims the majesty and power of the Almighty. Speaking of the heavenly bodies as they give their light and move in their orbits, the Lord has said:

Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms that ye may understand?

Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.—D. and C. 88:46-47.

And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons;

And their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth, which comprehend the earth and all the planets.

And they give light to each other in their times and in their seasons, in their minutes, in their hours, in their days, in their weeks, in their months, in their years—all these are one year with God, but not with man.

The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun giveth his light by day, and the moon giveth her light by night, and the stars also give their light, as they roll upon their wings in their glory, in the midst of the power of God.

Divine authority is manifest in all the laws by which this earth is governed. We are wont to speak of this authority as that of the "laws of nature." The laws of nature are simply the laws of God. These laws are immutable because they are divine. It is impossible for a man to escape the observance of divine law. He may rebel against the keeping of one law, but in the violation of it he comes face to face with some other law which he is forced to obey. Thus he discovers that in the violation of law he is not justified.

The Rebelliousness of Man. Of all our Father's creations man stands out practically alone as rebellious against divine authority and commandment. For this reason an ancient prophet declared:

O how great is the nothingness of the children of men; yea, even they are less than the dust of the earth.

For behold, the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither, to the dividing asunder, at the command of our great and everlasting God.—Helaman 12:7-8.

The thought expressed here is that man is less than the dust of the earth in the matter of obedience to the will of God. The same prophet continues:

O how foolish, and how vain, and how evil, and devilish, and how quick to do iniquity, and how slow to do good, are the children of men; yea, how quick to hearken unto the words of the evil one, and to set their hearts upon the vain things of the world!

Yea, how quick to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to boast, and do all manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow are they to remember the Lord their God, and to give ear unto his counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom's paths!

Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their God, who hath created them, should rule and reign over them; notwithstanding his great goodness and his mercy towards them, they do set at naught his counsels, and they will not that he should be their guide.—Helaman 12:4-6.

Men Are That They Might Have Joy. Notwithstanding the rebellious nature of most men, it is the purpose of the Lord to make them as happy as he can in accordance with divine law. There have come to us in the revelations from the Lord two very important truths concerning the purpose of existence. The Lord said to Moses:

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

From this revelation to Moses we have learned that the great work of the Lord is to populate many earths with his children. All men will, of course, be rewarded according to their works, and hence it is necessary that various kinds of earths be provided as the permanent and immortal dwelling places of the offspring of God. There are and will be created telestial, terrestrial and celestial spheres, and the children of men will be assigned to these according to the nature of the law which they have been willing to obey. The inhabitants of this earth will be segregated and assigned to these three kingdoms according to their works.

The second great truth was proclaimed by Lehi to his son Jacob, wherein he said:

But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy.

And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall.—2 Nephi 2:24-26.

President John Taylor, speaking of the final destiny of the inhabitants of this earth has said that in order to obtain the celestial kingdom a man must abide in the fulness of the celestial law; others will have to go elsewhere. Following are some of his words:

As eternal beings we all have to stand before him to be judged; and he has provided different degrees of glory—the celestial, the terrestrial, and the telestial glories—which are provided according to certain unchangeable laws which cannot be controverted.

For those who are ready to listen to him and be brought under the influence of the Spirit of God and be led by the principles of revelation and the light of heaven, and who are willing to yield obedience to his commands at all times and carry out his purposes upon the earth, and who are willing to abide a celestial law, he has prepared for them a celestial glory, that they may be with him for ever and ever.

And what about the others? They are not prepared to go there any more than lead is prepared to stand the same test as gold or silver; and there they cannot go. And there is a great gulf between them. But he will do with them just as well as he can. A great many of these people in the world, thousands and hundreds of millions of them, will be a great deal better off through the interpositions of the Almighty than they have any idea of. But they cannot enter into the celestial kingdom of God; where God and Christ are they cannot come.

Immortality and Eternal Life. In keeping with the great work and glory of the Father, he will bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Moreover, since the purpose of life is that man may have joy, the Father will give to all just as many blessings as it is possible for him to give according to their works. Only the righteous who are willing to abide in the covenants of the celestial kingdom will inherit the celestial glory and have the privilege of dwelling in the presence of God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. Yet it is the purpose of the Father to bless all the rest of his children and after they have paid the price in suffering for their transgressions, he will make them as happy as it is possible for them to be according to the law which they were willing to obey. There will be law and order in each of the kingdoms, telestial, terrestrial and celestial. Government will prevail even in the telestial, and it will be the government of God. By the time men have paid the price of their transgressions through the things which they will suffer, and have received the resurrection, they will perhaps have advanced far enough in the scale of intelligence to comprehend the importance of obedience to law. We may expect that the laws of God will be enforced, notwithstanding men have their agency, and it is reasonable to believe that they will have learned the lesson of obedience even in the lower kingdoms which are provided for them by the time they are assigned to their immortal and permanent stations.

Man is a Social Being. Man cannot live alone, isolated from all other human beings. It was decreed from the preexistence that men should live in social relationships upon this earth. We lived that way in the spirit world. We will live in communities, cities, states and kingdoms after the resurrection from the dead. The family is the unit of the social order. Just how the inhabitants in the terrestrial and telestial kingdoms will be organized and governed we do not fully know. The family organization with its power of increase is a blessing reserved for those who enter the celestial kingdom. In fact the crowning glory of exaltation is the blessing of the family organization and the continuation of the seeds forever. This is confined by the decree of the Almighty to the highest degree of the celestial order which is composed of those who "overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true." Nevertheless, there will be organization and government and obedience to law, and the enforcement of law, in all other kingdoms.

All Races of People of One Blood. All those who accept the scriptural story of creation understand that the peopling of this earth commenced after Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden after their fall. The Bible does not give us any adequate account of the fulfilment of the commandment given to our first parents to multiply. It mentions only three children born to this first couple, and all three of these were sons. The incomplete story of how Cain killed his brother Abel, and then journeyed to the land of Nod where he took a wife, has led many to believe that there were human beings upon the earth other than the descendants of Adam and Eve. Such a thought is in conflict with the thread of genealogical descent as it is portrayed in all ages of holy writ. In the Book of Moses, in the Pearl of Great Price, these matters are made perfectly clear. Adam and Eve were the parents of many sons and daughters, most of whom rebelled against the teachings of their righteous parents. Cain married his brother's daughter, and there were many who followed him. When Satan came among the children of Adam and told them to reject the teachings of Adam they hearkened to his teachings and rejected the word of the Lord. The record says that "they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual and devilish." However from this first family have come all the families of the earth, notwithstanding the great differences in race and color. These variations in color and race have come because of transgression and because the Almighty has placed marks upon certain tribes and peoples.

The First Government of Divine Origin. The Lord instituted the first government when he commissioned Adam and Eve and gave them dominion over all the earth. They were instructed by revelation and the appearance of heavenly messengers. Celestial law was given them and they were commanded to teach it to their children. We have seen how their children refused to hearken, and through their rebellion the divine theocracy, or government of God, was replaced by the governments of men. This condition has prevailed in all the history of the world, with few exceptions, since that time.

Man cannot live separate and apart from his fellow men. Such a thing is unnatural. The hermit and the recluse are looked upon with misgivings and contempt by the rest of mankind. Human society is composed of groups of individuals living in communities. These groups by mutual agreement share common interests. They are interdependent and assist each other. These groups have found it expedient to have some among their number appointed to preside and to enforce their laws and regulations. Aristotle has said: "Justice is the bond of men in states, and the administration of justice, which is the determination of what is just, is the principle of order in political government."

Free Agency Divinely Given. In ancient times when the government was centered in the hands of one ruling monarch whose powers were absolute, the rights and freedom of the people too frequently suffered. Their free agency was taken from them and their freedom was placed at the whim or fancy of the one who ruled. People submitted to such a condition because they knew no better. It took ages to develop in the human mind, through all the wickedness prevalent in this world, that there were rights and privileges which were theirs by divine decree and which could not justly be taken from them. The Savior came to the earth to redeem it and all life upon it, while respecting the eternal law of free agency. Lucifer was willing to redeem the earth and all upon it by the destruction of free agency. He has been working on that principle among men ever since the fall.

We have learned in modern times—which truth would have been understood and practiced always if men had not rebelled against the authority of God—that all men are entitled to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." These inalienable rights are for all men, unless they are forfeited by transgression. True freedom respects the rights of all men. It is the law of heaven. In the kingdom of God, when it is fully established, there will be a government similar to the government in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Nominations for place and authority will come from the head, but the people will have the privilege of expressing themselves by a vote to sustain or reject all nominees. We may be sure that when that perfect day does come, there will be little need for any opposition vote. All bickerings, contentions, strivings and wicked charges, which today fill the air with their unrighteous and hideous calls, will be done away. There will be no campaign conducted as now under our present imperfect system where men seek for the honors of office and when that end is achieved, dictate to rather than serve their fellow beings.

The Purpose of These Lessons. A purpose of these chapters is to impress the reader with a few of the high lights in the government of this world from the beginning to the end of time. The great objective is to show that it is the right of Jesus Christ, the Creator of the earth, to rule and reign upon it, despite the fact that rebellious men have, under the dictation of the adversary of all righteousness, usurped authority. Satan for six thousand years has ruled and reigned upon the greater part of this earth. This rule has been, of course, through the hearts of those willing to serve him. Nevertheless the Lord has not relinquished all dominion to Lucifer's control. The hand of the Almighty has been over all nations to limit them in their exercise of power, to turn them as he willed to bring to pass his everlasting purposes. When nations have become so corrupt that they could no longer endure, the Lord has caused their destruction, and they have passed away to make place for other nations. Abraham was not permitted to take possession of the land of Canaan at the time the Lord gave it to him for an everlasting inheritance, because the Lord said, "the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full." When that iniquity was full then the Amorites, like the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, were removed. For this cause many nations have gone down to destruction; and the course many are taking today indicates that the time is not far distant when they also shall be removed.

We have been taught to pray: "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." That day is near at hand. The earth will be redeemed from all its unrighteousness and the government will be placed upon the shoulders of the Rightful Ruler who will have dominion over all the earth as Lord of lords, and King of kings, in a dominion which shall endure forever.
