Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 6

SATAN'S USURPATION OF AUTHORITY

Preparation for Earth Life. We read in the Book of Abraham that the Lord showed unto Abraham the intelligences (spirits) that were organized before the world was and that among them there were many noble and great ones. Writing this vision and the words of the Lord to him, Abraham says:

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him.—Abraham 3:23-28.

From the foregoing account we are given a clear understanding of the preparation in the world of spirits for this earth-life. We are informed that in that world there was a condition seemingly as varied as we find it here. Some of the spirits of men were more intelligent, more obedient and faithful, than others. It is very reasonable to believe that they manifested certain characteristics and talents there as we see them made manifest among mankind upon the earth.

Christ Chosen as Our Redeemer. By long and careful observation our Father was able to judge a righteous and unerring judgment in relation to his children. Because of this perfect judgment in that far distant day before the earth on which we now live was formed, the Father chose men according to their ability and talents to be rulers on the earth. Christ, who is the firstborn in the Spirit of the children of God, was elevated to Godhood, and in the vision Abraham saw he describes him as being like unto God. He was chosen, as our scriptures say, as the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the earth. When the plan of salvation and the mortal existence were discussed, he was chosen to be the Only Begotten Son of God on the earth. This was his divine right by birth and appointment of the Father. Lucifer, who had great ambition and who because of his agency aspired to become like God, also volunteered to come to the earth as its redeemer. His plan, however, was not a just one, and had in it the element of selfishness, which was very greatly out of place among those spirits in the presence of God. We have another account of the choosing of our Redeemer and the part Lucifer played in that council in the Book of Moses which is as follows:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice.—Moses 4:1-4.

The Rebellion of Lucifer. From what is written in the Book of Moses and in the Book of Abraham we are taught that not only did men have their agency in the world of spirits but they were of varying degrees of intelligence and faithfulness. It appears from what is here written that they were to some extent possessed of the characteristics which we see manifest among the children of men on the earth. Lucifer, at least, possessed the spirit of selfishness and ambition for power. Isaiah says of him:

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! How art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven.

I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation in the sides of the north:

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High.

Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;

That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?—Isaiah 14:12-18.

With his influence Lucifer prevailed upon one-third of the spirits to support his contention. The fact that they supported him, notwithstanding they were in the presence of God, and had been granted all the privileges and blessings that were granted to the rest of the spirits, for there could have been no discrimination or respecting of persons, would lead us to the conclusion that there were influences and desires at work in opposition to principles of righteousness. There men followed their inclinations, and at times these inclinations did not lead to the establishment of peace and happiness. It is plain to see that since these spirits walked by sight and were in a position to be taught by direct contact with the Father and his faithful servants that when they rebelled against the constituted authority they did so fully knowing the consequences of their evil actions. These spirits kept not their first estate and with full understanding of the consequences, they became sons of Perdition.

Appointment of Lineage. No doubt in the world of Spirits there were many grades of faithfulness and unfaithfulness just as we find it today on the earth. Moreover, it would seem that in the appointment of spirits with their times and seasons for habitation on this earth, their attitude towards righteous principles and the observance of divine law had much to do with the time of their selection.

We are led to believe that certain spirits were selected to come through Abraham's lineage, and to be numbered among those of the house of Israel, from what is written by Moses, which is as follows:

Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations; ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.

When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.

For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.—Deuteronomy 32:7-9.

The understanding conveyed by this narrative is that before the days when there was such a people as Israel, even in the beginning, the Lord numbered the spirits and assigned them their place of habitation and their nation according to the number of the children of Israel, who were reserved to be his portion through Jacob, the grandson of Abraham. The same thought is expressed by Paul on Mars' hill:

And hath made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth; and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation.—Acts 17:26.

It was appointed, then, in the spirit world what the bounds of the peoples of the earth should be according to the number of the children of Israel. The Lord has always kept his hand over the earth and has regulated affairs, notwithstanding the evils and rebellions which have arisen from age to age among the people.

Lucifer's Warfare Continued. The warfare which was waged in the spirit world against authorized and rightful government was continued almost as soon as man was placed upon this earth. In the world of spirits the Savior said: "And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." Man, then, is on this earth for the purpose of being proved, and to see if he will be faithful in all things, and thus entitled to have glory added upon his head for ever and ever, or to see if he will fall short and receive a lesser reward according to his individual works, based on his free agency. For the purpose of proving him, the Lord permitted the rebellious Lucifer and his host of spirit followers to come to the earth where they tempt man and do all in their power to lead him astray and into forbidden paths. On the other hand, there is the persuading influence of the Spirit of the Lord, or light of Christ, which has been given to every man born into this world (D. and C. 84:46-48) and which will lead each soul to the fulness of the Gospel, if its teachings and directing influence are obeyed. Lehi, in his instructions to his son, has very truthfully and positively declared that in this mortal life, in order to bring to pass the eternal purposes of God in relation to man, it is necessary that there be opposition in all things; the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life, evil in opposition to good, pain and suffering in opposition to peace and happiness. Yet through it all man has been given every opportunity to follow the right and know the will of the Lord in his behalf.

The Gospel Taught in the Beginning. The Gospel has been taught from the beginning. Angels were sent to Adam to proclaim it. Every principle of truth essential to man's welfare on this earth as well as in eternity was made known. All precautions and warnings necessary to guard him against temptation and evil were given so that he could, if he desired, know and walk in the truth. The Gospel was received, as we have shown, by Adam and Eve, with gladness, and they taught these principles earnestly and constantly to their children. Yet most of them rebelled. The Lord said to Joseph Smith when the Church was organized:

And that he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them;

And gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worship.

But by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man.

Christ Sent to Atone for Transgression. Because of this the Almighty gave his Only Begotten Son, to come into the world, as it was decided in the heavens, to atone for this fallen nature and rescue man from death and give him immortality and eternal life. All these things Adam and Eve tried to impress upon their sons and daughters. Many who profess to believe in the Bible seem to think that Adam and Eve had three children only, Cain, Abel and Seth, because no other children are mentioned. We know however that they had many sons and daughters, and the Lord said to Moses:

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters.

And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish.—Moses 5:12-13.

The Beginning of Man-made Governments. We are led to believe that very few of the children of Adam, and very few of the children of their children, hearkened to their teachings. It appears that the great majority, even from the beginning, turned away from the rightful government established by the Almighty through Adam, and which was based upon divine authority and revelation. As men began to multiply and scatter over the face of the earth, they took the attitude expressed by Cain: "Who is the Lord, that I should know him?" In this spirit men organized themselves into their own political governments. They carried with them, nevertheless, many of the traditions and teachings, (but in a corrupted form,) which had been given by divine revelation. As wickedness increased these divine teachings given to Adam were bound to be corrupted and changed as rebellion and wickedness were able to pervert them. As men spread over the face of the earth and established governments of their own construction, eventually the worship of the true and living God was replaced by other worship, and divinely revealed principles were changed and replaced by the ideas and traditions of men. In this way political kingdoms came into existence nourished and built upon rebellion against the established government of God first given unto man.
